Hair Loss Disorders
 Domestic Animals
in
Lars Mecklenburg, Monika Linek,
and Desmond J. Tobin
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Hair Loss Disorders in
Domestic Animals
Edited by
Lars Mecklenburg
Monika Linek
Desmond J. Tobin
With contributions by
Rosario Cerundolo
Linda Frank
Wilfried Meyer
Manon Paradis
Monika Welle
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A Johm Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Publication
Edition frst published 2009
@ 2009 Wiley-Blackwell
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwells publishing program has been merged with Wiley's
global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
EditorialOfce
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offces, for customer services, and for information about how to apply for permisson to reuse the
copyright material in this book, please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specifc clients, is granted by Blackwell
 su auapmasau auuday ap ped sa sqay i pd us
those oranizations thathavebeen granted a phtocopylicensebyCCC,aeparate systemof payments hasbeen aranged.hefee codes for
users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1082-9/2009.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in
this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated
with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in
regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If
professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library ofCongress Cataloguing-in-PublicationData
 Hair loss disorders in domestic animals / edited by Lars Mecklenburg,
Monika Linek, Desmond J. Tobin ; with contributions by Rosario
Cerundolo. . . [et al.].
P. cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1082-9 (alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-8138-1082-5 (alk. paper)
1. Scabies. 2. Domestic animals—Diseases. I. Mecklenburg, Lars.
II. Linek, Monika. IIl. Tobin, Desmond John, 1965-
RL764.S28H35 2009
636.089'6546—dc22
2008049842
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.s. Library of Congress.
Set in 10/12pt Minion by Aptara Inc., New Delhi, India
Printed in Singapore
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientifc research, understanding, and discussion only and are not intended and
shouldnotbe relied upon as recommendingorpromoting aspecifcmethod,diagnosis, or treatmentby practitioners forany partiular
patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of
this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of ftness for a particular purpose. In
view of ongoing research, equipment modifcations, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to
the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or
instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for
added warnings and precautions. Readers shoudconsult with aspecialist where appropriate Thefact that anorganization or Webiteis
referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher
endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that
Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. No
warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for
any damages arising herefrom.
12009
Contents
Foreword
V
Preface
vii
Contributors
ix
PART 1 HAIR FOLLICLE BIOLOGY
1.1
Ontogeny of the hair follicle
3
Desmond J. Tobin
1.2
 Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle
17
Desmond J. Tobin
1.3
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with comparison to laboratory
animals and humans
43
Wilfried Meyer
2.1
Clinical aspects
65
Monika Linek
2.2
Histopathological aspects
77
Lars Mecklenburg
PART 3 NON-INFLAMMATORY ALOPECIAS
3.1
Congenital alopecia
93
Lars Mecklenburg
3.2
Trichomalacia
115
Lars Mecklenburg
iv  Contents
3.3
Disorders of hair follicle cycling
119
3.3.1
 Hypothyroidism
119
Monika Linek
3.3.2
Hyperadrenocorticism
132
Rosario Cerundolo
3.3.3
Canine hyperestrogenism
142
Lars Mecklenburg
3.3.4
Canine alopecia X
148
Linda Frank
3.3.5
Canine recurrent flank alopecia
155
Manon Paradis
3.3.6
 Telogen effluvium
161
Rosario Cerundolo
3.3.7
 Canine postclipping alopecia
163
Rosario Cerundolo
3.3.8
 Canine pattern alopecia
164
Manon Paradis
3.3.9
 Breed-specific canine hair cycle abnormalities
169
Rosario Cerundolo,Manon Paradis,and Lars Mecklenburg
3.4
Hair follicle dystrophy and atrophy
177
Rosario Cerundolo and Lars Mecklenburg
3.5
 Traumatic alopecia
185
Monika Linek
3.6
Scarring alopecia
189
Lars Mecklenburg
PART 4 INFLAMMATORY ALOPECIAS
4.1
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms
193
Monika Linek
4.2
 Eosinophilic folliculitis
215
Monika Linek
4.3
 Pustular folliculitis
221
Monika Welle
4.4
 Lymphocytic mural folliculitis 
227
Monika Welle
4.5
Histiocytic or granulomatous mural folliculitis
243
Monika Welle and Lars Mecklenburg
4.6
Necrotizing mural folliculitis
249
Monika Linek and Lars Mecklenburg
4.7
Alopecia areata
253
Desmond J. Tobin
4.8
 Sebaceous adenitis
269
Monika Linek
Index
273
Foreword
 It is with greatest pleasure and enthusiasm that I am
Mirroring the often merely historical and com-
writing these introductory lines to what has turned out
monly descriptive rather than pathobiologically
to be a much-needed, authoritative, and most infor-
founded classification of human alopecias, the even
 mative new monograph on hair growth disorders in
less studied animal alopecias are notoriously difficult
domestic animals—one of the major topics of clinical
to classify. The editors and chapter authors have done a
dermatology, not only in human but also in veterinary
marvellous job in providing pragmatic guidance and a
medicine.
reasonable working classification that generally avoids
The editors have done an admirable job in chart-
to fallinto the trap of drawing unadvisedly close par-
ing a difficult territory marred by the unavailability of
allels to suspected “analogous" human forms of alope-
sufficient analytical research, by confusion about key
cia, whose pathogenesis may well be distinct from what
underlying biological principles, by often rather vague
 is conceived as a counterpart in domestic animals.
pathogenesis concepts, and by contradictory, mislead.
poipaid o laudoid e aq oi aaeu jou saop auo snu
ing, or ill-advised terminology. Together with an ex-
that this unique new monograph—a most welcome
cellent, international team of expert contributors, the
enrichment ofthe veterinary dermatology literature
editors are offering solid guidance and a fresh perspec-
will soon also be consulted by many investigators
tive on how to approach alopecias in domestic animals
 across a wide range of the life sciences, who are in-
from the vantage point of modern skin and hair biol-
terested in the principles that drive hair loss disorders
 ogy in a very systematic manner, and thus convincingly
-s  ho aie om  sds ue 
fill a void in the available veterinary literature.
tive animal models of specific alopecias, beyond what
As a clinical dermatologist with a special interest
mice and rats have long offered in this respect.
e I ooed neq ueu pue konoiq ey siseq u
May this exquisite new book enjoy the exceptionally
fully aware of the importance and instructiveness of
long “anagen” phase it deserves!
alopecia in domestic animals for dissecting the princi-
 ples that control hair follicle cycling, and for studying
how cycling disorders can lead to hair loss. I also real-
Ralf Paus, MD
 ize the major, as yet insuffciently exploited potential
Professor of Dermatology
of domestic animals as excellent models for the study
Head, Experimental Dermatology
of human hair disease. Therefore, the editors are to be
University of Libeck, Germany
congratulated for calling our attention to the multi
ple, but often neglected parallels between human and
Professor of Cutaneous Medicine
animal hair loss, and for the highly methodical, well-
School of Translational Medicine
structured approach they are taking in presenting the
University of Manchester, UK
topic at hand.
May 2008
Preface
With the loss of its relevance as a thermal regulator in 
tities are described. Our system of classification signifi
mammalian survival, the psychosocial significance of
cantly extends that of previous literature on veterinary
hair for humans has continuously increased. There-
alopecia, and reflects this increasing complexity. We
fore, it is not surprising that domestic animals with
consider that histopathologic and clinical features of
alopecia are increasingly presented by their owners to
disease are the most relevant parameters for classifica-
veterinarians for treatment. As with physicians, the
tion and aim to be as descriptive and precise as possible
veterinary clinician is confronted with a diffcult task,
 in our system. This classification however remains in
since the pathogenesis of alopecia can be very complex
a state of flux, and will no doubt be further improved
and therapeutic possibilities very limited. The aim of
over the next decades. As was so well expressed by
this book is to help with the understanding and diag-
H.E.M. Kay ( The Lancet 1974;11:586) when address-
 nosis of alopecia and to demonstrate what therapeu-
u su s s,   
tic options are available to both the veterinarian and
claim to be comprehensive or even comprehensible,
client. As the diagnosis of alopecia frequently relies
so there may well be scope for other classifications of
 on a histopathological evaluation of the hair-bearing
classifications and ultimately, one hopes a classifica-
skin, this book is aimed not solely at practicing vet-
tion of classifications of classifications. At that point
erinarians, but also veterinary pathologists who work
we shall need a conference in the Caribbean."
with skin biopsies from alopecic patients.
Finally, we would like to thank all those who have
Above all, the diagnosis and treatment of alopecia
enabled us to compile this book. Among many oth-
should be grounded on a thorough understanding of
ers, these are: Zeineb Alhaidari, Ellen Baumeister, Luc
 hair folicle anatomy and physiology, and particularly
Beco, Kerstin Bergvall, Jan Declercq, Claude Favrot,
on how this may differ between species. To this end,
 Raffaella Finocchiaro, Marion Gahle, Szymon Godyn-
our book begins with a detailed introduction into the
icki, Thelma Lee Gross, Renate Hammerling, Rubert
basics of hair follicle biology. Moreover, it provides an
Judd, Miguel Angel Toro Ibanez, Markus Maget, Kevin
insight into the variety of spontaneous alopecic dis-
McElwee, Claudia Nett, Thierry Olivry, Ralf Paus, Eva
eases in domestic animals. This will hopefully stim-
M.J. Peters, Sylvia Ruefenacht, Neil Sargison, Rudolf
ulate new thinking on the etiology and pathogenesis
Schwarz, David Steffen, Gudrun Wirth, Pat White,
of alopecia, and aid researchers in their search and
Stephen White, Yulie Yager, and the team from the
development of new therapeutics for alopecia.
Section of Clinical Dermatology and the Institute of
 As Hopwood claimed in 1957, "the urge to classify is 
Veterinary Pathology of the Vetsuisse Faculty, Univer-
a fundamental human instinct like a predisposition to
sity of Berne.
sin, it accompanies us into the world at birth and stays
with us to the end" (Hopwood AT. Proceedings of the
Lars Mecklenburg
Linnean Society of London 1957;171:230). As is true for
Monika Linek
other diseases, the classification of alopecias continues
Desmond J. Tobin
to become more and more complex as new disease en
May 2008
Contributors
Lars Mecklenburg Dr med vet, PhD,
Linda Frank MS, DVM, Dipl ACVD,
Fachtierarzt fur Pathologie, Consultant in
 Professor of Dermatology, Department of Small
Veterinary Dermatopathology, Hamburg.
Animal Clinical Sciences, University of Tennessee,
Germany
Knoxville, TN, USA
Monika Linek Dr med vet, Dipl ECVD,
Wilfried Meyer Dr rer nat,
 Professor of Anatomy, Anatomical Institute,
Hamburg, Hamburg. Germany
Veterinary School of Hannover, Hannover,
Germany
Desmond J. Tobin PhD, FRCPath, FIBiol,
Professor of Cell Biology, Center for Skin Sciences,
Manon Paradis DMV, MVSc, Dipl ACVD,
School of Life Sciences, University of Bradford,
Professor of Dermatology, Department of Clinical
Bradford, West Yorkshire, Great Britain
Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Montreal, St-Hyacinthe, Quebec, Canada
Rosario Cerundolo DVM, Cert VD, Dipl ECVD,
MRCVS,
Monika Welle Dr med vet, Dipl ECVP.
Associate Professor of Veterinary Dermatology.
Fachtierarztin fur Pathologie, Professor of
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pathology, Institute of Animal Pathology, Vetsuisse
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Faculty, University of Berne, Berne, Switzerland
Part 1
Hair Follicle Biology
Ontogeny of the hair follicle
3
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with
comparison to laboratory animals and
 Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle
17
humans
43
Ontogeny of the hair follicle
Desmond J. Tobin 
Both humans and domestic animals communicate sig
traviolet radiation sensing, and endocrine function,
nificantly via their physical appearance, and the hair
among others. These participate in the homeostasis of
fiber-producing mini organ called the hair follicle ac-
the mammalian body. Not surprisingly, therefore, the
counts for much of the variation in domestic mammal
skin contains several reservoirs of stem cells located in
phenotype. Although commonly dismissed as being
the epidermis, the hair follicle, and perhaps also the
of superficial importance, the hair follicle is truly one
sebaceous gland.
of the nature's most fascinating structures (Chuong
The hair follicle is formed from a bewilder
1998). Hair growth, one of the only two uniquely
ingly complex set of interactions involving ectoder-
mammalian traits (the other is the mammary gland),
 mal, mesodermal, and neuroectodermal components,
serves several important functions. These include ther-
which go to elaborate five or six concentric cylin-
mal insulation, camouflage, social and sexual commu-
ders in humans of at least 15 distinct interacting cell
nication, sensory perception, and protection against
subpopulations. These together provide a truly ex-
trauma, noxious insults, insects, and so on. These fea-
ceptional tissue that rivals the vertebrate limb bud
 tures have clearly facilitated evolutionary success in
as a model for studies of the genetic regulation of
animals.
development. Much of the research on the regula-
The hair follicle or, as it is known in humans, the
tion of hair follicle development or morphogenesis
“pilosebaceous unit" encapsulates all the important
has been carried out in murine models, especially the
physiologic processes found in mammalia, including
mouse (Schmidt-Ullrich and Paus 2005). While some
controlled cell growth and death, interactions between 
 species-specific (and even intraspecies) differences are
cells of different histologic type, cell differentiation
expected (Drogemiller et al. 2007), it is considered
and migration, and hormone responsitivity. Thus, the
likely that broadly similar pathways and moleculan
value of the hair follicle as a model for biological scien-
regulators will operate in all mammals. Thus, the dis-
tific research goes way beyond its scope for cutaneous
cussion below will largely refer to data that continues
biology or dermatology alone. Indeed, the recent and
to emerge from studies in mice, given the ready avail-
dramatic upturn in interest in hair follicle biology has
 ability of powerful mouse genetics.
focused principally on the pursuit of two of biology's
The mysteries of the “creation" of the hair follicle
holy grails: post-embryonic morphogenesis and con-
in mammalian skin have only just recently begun to
trol of cyclical tissue activity.
be unraveled. As with any highly complex multicel-
 If one first considers the role of the skin, arguably
lular structure that has experienced enormous evo-
 our body's largest organ, as the mammal's sensor at
lutionary selective pressure, nature's master builder
the periphery (a veritable “brain on the outside"), one
has designed the hair follicle with multiple levels of
 can begin to appreciate some of the contributions its
redundancy: with backup systems and with backup
principal appendage, the hair follicle, can make. The
systems for these backup systems. A plethora of excel
skin incorporates all major support systems found in
 lent reviews have appeared over the last 10 years that
the body: blood, muscle, and innervation as well as
describe the exquisitely complex molecular mecha-
its role in immunocompetence, psycho-emotion, ul-
 nisms active during hair folicle development (Fuchs
 4  Hair follicle biology
et al. 2001; Millar 2002; Botchkarev and Paus 2003;
and on the degree of their redundancy. Of particular
 Schmidt-Ulrich and Paus 2005). It is attempted here
interest has been the nature of the first signals that
to provide a comprehensive overview of some of the
determine where along the overlying epidermis a hair
latest developments in this fascinating process This is
follicle is likely to be produced (so-called patterning').
a rapidly developing field however, and new molecular
 As an aid to conceptualizing the impact of these
regulators are being added to these pathways continu-
molecular signaling events, it may be useful to as-
ally.
sociate them directly with morphologically distinct
stages in hair follicle development, as significant mor-
phologic change is required to form a fully developed
1.1.1 Skin development
hair follicle. These changes can be broadly separated
The development of the forerunner of skin epithe-
into the following phases: (a) induction/initiation,
lium, the neuroectoderm, occurs after gastrulation in
(b) organ downgrowth, and (c) cellular differentia-
the embryo. Whether this neuroectodermal tissue de-
tion. A useful guide to aid recognition of these distinct
velops into skin epithelium or continues to develop as
e ia sed) a g io paiedaid uaq seu sis
neuronal tissue is determined by signaling via the Wnt
1999). Therein, the preplacode stage of hair follicle de-
pathway, which renders some of the ectoderm nonres-
velopment is assigned as Stage 0, while the clustering
ponsive to fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). In the ab-
of keratinocytes in the basal layer of the epidermis that
sence of FGFs the cells of the developing ectoderm
lengthen and assume an altered “north-south" polar-
can instead respond to another class of morphogens
ity to form the hair follicle placode stage is referred to
called bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), which
as Stage 1 (Fig. 1.1.1).
help direct the ectodermal cells to form a layer of mul-
tipotential skin epithelium (cf. Botchkarev and Sharov
1.1.2 Hair follicle placode formation
2004). The Wnt gene (named from the Drosophila
(, anou aqaa i pue sam, sus
It is now considered most likely that the first signal(s)
was first identified in Drosophila melanogaster to func-
that trigger(s) the formation of the regularly spaced
tion in embryogenesis and adult limb formation. Wnt
epithelial thickenings called hair follicle “placodes"
is now known to represent a major class of secreted
emerge(s) from the mesenchyme (Olivera-Martinez
morphogens that are critical for the establishment of
et al. 2004). This is derived from the evidence of rather
 pattern development in all multicellular organisms.
uniform β-catenin accumulation in dermal cells under
The skin epithelium lies above a dermatome-
the control of Wnt, effective only at short distances.
derived mesenchymal or embryonic connective tis-
Subsequently, βB-catenin translocates to the nuclei of
 sue primarily consisting of collagen-producing fibro-
some of these dermal cells, where it can form complex
with lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) family members
of dermis fibroblasts (Atit et al. 2006). A third ma-
for DNA binding and subsequent gene activation (No-
 jor component of the developing skin is the neu-
ramly et al. 1999). It is of note that while LEF expres-
 ral crest-derived melanocyte, a cell that produces
sion is required in the mesenchyme before initiation
 melanins. Primitive melanocytes (sometimes referred
of vibrissae development is posible (Kratochwil et al.
 to as melanoblasts) migrate from the neural crest,
1996),loss ofLEF in pelage skin results in onlya partial
 through the dermis, and populate the basal layer of
reduction in hair follicle development overall, suggest-
 the epidermis.
 ing the existence of hair follicle type-specific controls
Hair follicle formation in the developing skin
and also a degree of functional redundancy. In a sim-
 requires communication between specialized mes-
ilar way it has been suggested that BMP-associated
 enchymal cells of the dermis and epithelial cels of the
inhibition may operate in several different ways, to
 epithelium above. This interaction is very complex and
 specify the development of hair folicles of different
types, and thereafter may additionally affect hair folli-
 for both the epithelial (keratinocytes) and dermal cells 
cle density (Fuchs 2007). The BMPs, a subfamily with
(fibroblasts). Much debate in the literature remains
 over 16 distinct secreted signaling protein members
centered on the hierarchy of the increasing numbers
belong to the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-
of factors implicated in hair follicle morphogenesis,
β) superfamily of proteins.
Ontogeny of the hair follicle 5
KC
800
QX
DC
cO
Stage 0
Stage 1
Stage 2
FDF
SG
IRS
BG
FDP
FDP
IRS
Stage 3
MEL
Stage 4
Stage 5
FDP
HS
SG-
SG
BG
SG
BG
BG
-IRS
IRS
HS
MEL
HS
IRS
FDP
MEL
Stage 6
FDP
LWEL
Stage 7
FDP
Stage 8
Fig. 1.1.1 Cartoon of hair follicle morphogenesis. Stages 0-8 according to Paus et al. 1999. KC, keratinocytes; FDP, follicular dermal
papilla; DC, dermal mesenchymal cels; SG, sebaceous gland; BG, bulge; IRS, inner root sheath; HS, hair shaft; MEL, melanin.
(Modified from Tobin (2005).)
 Readers should also be aware that for any given
the control ofplacode initiation to form any ofthe four
species, and even within the same species, the skin can
different types of hair fiber involves different regula-
 produce hair follicles of several different types that
tory controls. For example, ectodysplasin signaling is
generate different types of hair fiber ( Maderson 2003).
 required for guard hair development, while the devel-
The molecular regulation underlying this diversity is of
 opment of secondary hairs (i.e., “awl” and “auchene"
significant interest. There is evidence in the mouse that
hairs  in mice) involves ectodysplasin-independent
 6  Hair follicle biology
signaling. The latter, however, is instead depen-
and Overbeek 1999). Consequently, in the absence
dent on the Wnt/β-catenin and Noggin/LEF pathway
 of EDAR, neither Shh nor BMP4 is expressed (Barsh
(Schmidt-Ullrich and Paus 2005). NFxB signaling is
1999).
required in early hair follicle induction downstream
 It is important to note that the Wnt pathway is active
of ectodysplasin (Schmidt-Ullrich et al. 2001). NFxB
in both the epithelial and mesenchymal components of
transmits the ectodysplasin signal that activates sonic
developing hair follicles (DasGupta and Fuchs 1999).
hedgehog (Shh) and cyclin D1 expression, responsible
Activation of the Wnt signaling pathway is sufficient
for postinitiation hair placode downgrowth (Schmidt-
for induction of hair follicle development. Similarly,
Ullrich et al. 2006).
if β-catenin (i.e., the mediator of Wnt signals) is lost 
 As a consequence of the initial dermal signal, the
from murine epidermis, no hair follicles will develop
epithelium is induced to initiate the expression of
(Huelsken et al. 2001), and if β-catenin signaling is ex-
 molecules that act as either promoters or repressors
cessively stimulated, excess hair follicles will develop
of placode formation. Molecular participants in this
(Gat et al. 1998; Lo Celso et al. 2004). Moreover, BMP
 initial signaling to Wnt-responsive epithelial cells in
(i.e., BMP2, -4, and -7) as well as Shh expression (but
mice include the FGFs (e.g., FGF10, FGF7), inhibitors
not ectodysplasin) are dependent on β-catenin, sug-
of BMPs (e.g., noggin), and inhibitors of Wnt (e.g.
 gesting that expression of ectodysplasin lies upstream
Dickkopf) (Jung et al. 1998; Botchkarev et al. 1999;
of Wnt activation in the epithelium (Huelsken et al.
Sick et al. 2006). Indeed, hair follicle density is reduced
2001).
where there is either an excess BMP production, a fail-
 The reaction and diffusion model for biological pat-
ure to inhibit BMP (e.g., via an absence of noggin),
terning proposed originally by Alan Turning in the
 or via lack of FGF receptor (Petiot et al. 2003; Mou
1950s and recently demonstrated experimentally for
et al. 2006). Thus, hair follicle formation at a particu-
Wnt and its antagonist “Dickkopf" in murine skin
lar site in the epidermis results from a highly orches-
(Sick et al. 2006) permits an understanding of hair
trated interaction of mesenchyme with epithelium.
formation based on the control of these molecules by
This process responds to dynamic reaction-diffusion
positive and negative regulators expressed either in
type gradients of stimulating/inhibiting signals gener-
the developing hair follicle itself or in the surround-
ated from secreted factors and their cognate receptors.
ing tissues. Examples of negative regulators for hair
Also implicated in this complex process are transcrip-
follicle development include the BMPs and activinoA.
tion factors (proteins that work with other proteins to
These inhibitors can in turn be inhibited by noggin
either promote or suppress the transcription of genes)
and follistatin, respectively. Mice lacking noggin have
 and cel adhesion molecules.
slower hair follicle development and also fewer total
The activation of the Wnt signaling pathway is
hair follicles formed (Botchkarev et al. 1999). More-
 an absolute requirement for the initiation of Stage 1
over, these mice also exhibit a reduced expression of
of hair follicle morphogenesis. Currently 19 distinct
LEF and this may suggest that its expression is also
members of the Wnt family of ligands (and over
 - n  on redde s   po
aq a (az, pu sdana ps o
licle initiation. Several other secreted molecules are
identified in humans and mice, and it is not yet clear
expressed in developing hair follicles where they can
which of these are involved in Stage 1 initiation. It
inhibit BMP activity. These include follistatin, an in-
has recently been shown that Wntl0b promotes the
hibitor of activinaA. TGF-β2 (which belongs to the
development of hair follicles in a mouse embryonic
 same family as activinoA) is expressed in the placode
skin tissue model (Ouji et al. 2006). While Wnt10b
epithelium and, when administered to mesenchyme
is uniformly expressed in embryonic mouse skin, this
in the absence of overlying epithelium, can induce the
molecule becomes strikingly upregulated in the hair
formation of follicular papila (Foitzik et al. 1999).
follicle placode (St-Jacques et al. 1998; Reddy et al.
 In contrast, mice lacking the TGF-β2 gene exhibit re-
2001). Indeed, the expression of Wnt10b is abolished
 tarded hair follicle morphogenesis and have fewer hair
in ectodysplasin-mutant mice that exhibit a hypoplas-
follicles.
tic hair formation. Moreover, a mutation in the gene
Several other potential players that can either
for the ectodysplasin receptor (EDAR) (named “down-
stimulate or inhibit hair follicle development have
less? in mice) results in a similar phenotype (Headon
been suggested from recent research including the
 Ontogeny of the hair follicle 7
transcription factors Msx1 and Msx2 (Satokata et al.
naling through the platelet-derived growth factor A
2000); signaling via the epidermal growth factor re-
(PDGF-A) expressed in the epithelial placode and its
ceptor (Kashiwagi et al. 1997); extracellular matrix
cognate receptor PDGF-R in the dermal condensate
proteins including laminin-10 (Li et al. 2003); and
( Karlsson et al. 1999). This is suggested by the observa-
neurotrophins and their receptors (Botchkarev and
 tion that mice deficient in PDGF generate hypoplastic
Paus 2003). Recently, a role for the chromatin remod-
hair fibers, characterized by dermal papilla of reduced
eler Mi-2beta in hair folicle morphogenesis has been
size. Presumably these cells reduce secretion of hair
reported (Kashiwagi et al. 2007). This study showed
 growth inducing morphogens and mitogens. Recent
that depletion of Mi-2beta blocked the induction of
work suggests that BMP6 may have a dermal papilla-
hair follicles in mice. While Mi-2beta appears to be
associated regulatory control in the hair follicle ( Rendl
dispensable for the maintenance of established repop-
et al. 2008).
ulating epidermal stem cells, this transcription factor
 Another early gene involved in the organizing of
appears to be essential for reprogramming basal cells
the mesenchyme to form a dermal papilla is Shh (St-
of the developing epidermis into follicular and, subse-
Jacques et al. 1998; Oro and Higgins 2003; Levy et al.
quently, hair matrix fates (Kashiwagi et al. 2007).
 2005). Mice lacking Shh still exhibit placode initiation
 Exciting new research has demonstrated that hair
and formation of the dermal condensate (Iseki et al.
 follicle neogenesis may occur in adult wounded skin,
1996). Although these data indicate that Shh signaling
if the wound site is of sufficient size and the wound is
lies downstream of Wnt/β-catenin signaling, Wnt5a
allowed to repair physiologically (Ito et al. 2007). This
is expressed in the developing dermal condensate of
example of reported neofolliculogenesis occurred via
wild-type but not Shh- /— embryos, suggesting that
an upregulation of Wnt expression, and was shown
    e s  s
-a jm i h ra a a
sis. Thus, while Shh is not critical for the first epithelial
sion or by inhibiting its expression to reduce the hair
signal, nor perhaps even for the initial gathering of the
follicle number (Ito et al. 2007). This study may be the
presumptive dermal papilla fibroblasts, it is required
first formal demonstration that hair follicle numbers
for subsequent hair follicle downgrowth and for subse-
may not be preset at the embryogenesis state but can
quent papilla formation. Evidence for the latter can be
 be increased as a function of wound healing in the
gleaned from the coexpression in the forming papilla
adult animal. There may be room, however, for con-
of Shh pathway-related molecules including Patched1
tribution from stem cells from hair follicles located at
(i.e., the Shh receptor) and Gli1 (i.e., a Shh transcrip
the edge of the wound after migration into the wound
tion factor) (Oro and Higgins 2003). Recent data from
center.
Gli1 knockout mice, however, suggest that some hair
types can still develop in the absence of Gli1 Mill et al.
2003). This finding suggests that different hair types
1.1.3 Formation of the hair
have different requirements for Gli1 signaling. By con-
 trast, the loss of smoothened (an obligate component
follicle mesenchyme
of all Shh signaling) results in severely affected hair
While formation of the hair follicle placode is being
follicle morphogenesis (Gritli-Linde et al. 2007). The
initiated, increasing organization of dermal cells un-
increasing inductive capacity ofthe developing dermal
derlying this epithelium structure becomes evident.
 papilla may be indicated by upregulation of hepato-
A signal from the placode is thought to determine
cyte growth factor and versican at this stage (Kaplan 
and direct the clustering of the dermal fibroblasts to
and Holbrook 1994).
form the “dermal papila" The dermal condensate
fails to develop in the absence of β-catenin expres-
1.1.4 Hair follicle downgrowth
sion (Huelsken et al. 2001), indicating a crucial role
for Wnt signaling in the development of the early der-
"Second" signals from the developing dermal papilla
mal papilla (DasGupta and Fuchs 1999). Moreover,
induce proliferation in the follicular epithelium to
efficient development of the dermal papilla appears
drive the initial downgrowth of the epidermal pla-
to be influenced by cross talk between the epidermal
code to form the Stage 2 hair follicle. These initial
placode and the developing dermal papilla via sig-
hair follicle “commitment? events presage subsequent
8  Hair follicle biology
active epithelial-mesenchymal cross talk that drives
fication of the pathway activated by the Shh signal in
cytodifferentiation to determine which cells will go
this process remains unknown. Activino A and hepato-
on to form keratinocytes of the hair fiber and follic-
cyte growth factor (HGF) may be possible candidates.
ular sheaths, and which fibroblasts form the growth-
ActivinoA not only is a secreted signaling molecule
inducing follicular papilla versus the dermal sheaths.
expressed by the early dermal papilla cells, but is also
The cell fate-determining “signals" are mediated by in-
inhibited by follistatin (also a BMP inhibitor). Con-
tercellular signaling molecules secreted from specific
sequently, mice lacking either activino A or follistatin
subpopulations of skin cels and that have multiple
produce defective vibrissa follicles (Millar 2002). On
receptors/targets to transduce their effects.
the other hand, mice that overexpress HGF not only
 Of note here is the exquisite specificity of the sig-
exhibit accelerated hair follicle development, but also
naling events occurring between different cell subpop-
produce more hair follicles (Lindner et al. 2000). It
ulations. For example, recombination experiments
is also likely that adhesion molecules and extracellu-
have shown that dermis taken from one body region
lar proteins are also important contributors to these
when combined with epidermis from another body
 developmental processes.
site (even in another individual) will direct the forma-
Hair follicle morphogenesis (Fig. 1.1.3) is morpho-
tion of hair follicles that are characteristic ofthe dermis
logically appreciable only at Stage 3 when the fore-
donor site. A test ofthis in humans was recently carried
runner of a hair follicle “bulb" becomes evident—-a
out whereby male follicular dermal tissue taken from
process reflecting the activation/induction of multi-
the scalp directed the formation ofterminal hairs when
 ple keratinocyte differentiation pathways that lead to
recombined with female arm epidermis (Reynolds et
considerable structural change within the tissue (Fig.
al. 1999).
1.1.3d). At Stage 3 the developing hair follicle appears
 One of the enigmas of hair follicle development is
as a “peg" of tissue consisting of an elongated col-
 how a relatively undifferentiated cluster of epithelial
umn of concentrically layered keratinocytes—at least
and mesenchymal cells can give rise to such a large
 seven different layers of epithelium can be appreci-
number of distinct cell lineages with variable differ-
ated at this stage. A little later at Stage 4 (Fig. 1.1.3e)
ent differentiated products (Fig. 1.1.2). It is clear from
the mesenchymal component of the hair follicle, that
knockout mice that downgrowth will only occur in the
is, the follicular dermal papilla, is now located within
 presence of Shh (Chiang et al. 1999). Although Shh
the cavity of the developing epithelial bulb. The hair
engages in highly significant signaling events between
 peg continues to elongate into the dermis of the skin
hair follicle epithelium and mesenchyme, the identi-
 during this stage and there is evidence now of the for-
 mation of the inner root sheath (IRS), as it assumes a
cone-shaped structure. The follicular papilla becomes
 progressively invaginated by the enlarging epithelial
hair bulb.
ORS
1.1.5 Formation of the hair follicle inner
IRS-Huxley
IRS
root sheath
HS-Cu
HS
The emergence of such an impressive differentiation
programming in the hair follicle epithelium at Stages
CL
3-5 (Fig. 1.1.3d-f) is of course dependent on the
spatiotemporal expression of relevant cell fate genes.
Moreover, it is during this stage of hair follicle devel-
 opment that the additional processes that see the hair
Fig. 1.1.2 High-resolution light microscopy image of a trans-
follicle's polarity and shape occur (see below). One of
verse section of a human hair follicle cut at the level where
the first and most striking events of cytodifferentiation
maximum cell lineage commitment occurs (suprabulbar level).
IRS, inner root sheath; ORS, outer root sheath; HS, hair shaft;
within the developing hair follicle is the emergence
Cu, cuticle; CL, companion layer.
of the IRS layer of the hair follicle wall during late
Ontogeny of the hair follicle
6
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage3
(a)
b]
DC
Stage 3/4
Stage4
Stage5
[d)
[e)
R8
Ko
Stage 8
(i)
Stage 6
Stage 7
(h)
RS
IRS
Bu
DC
DC
Hg. 1.1.3 High resolution light microscopy images of hair follicle development in mouse skin. Stages 0-8 according to Paus et al
1999. KC, keratinocytes; FDP, follicular dermal papilla; DC, dermal mesenchymal cells; IRS, inner root sheath; HS, hair shaft; MC,
melanocytes; BV, blood vessel. (Modified from Tobin (2005).)
10  Hair fllicle biology
Stage 3. Signaling via the BMP receptor is also impor-
the fourth and most external layer of the IRS (Ellis et
tant for the determination of matrix keratinocyte dif-
al. 2001; Gu and Coulombe 2007). The transcription
ferentiation into both IRS and hair shaft keratinocytes
of Shh- and IRS-specific genes is deregulated in Cutl 1
(Ming Kwan et al. 2004). Indeed, if the BMP receptor
mutant hair follicles, suggesting that the progenitors
R1A is lacking, matrix keratinocytes fail to differenti-
and cell lineages of the IRS specifically express Cutl1
ate and instead matrix cell tumors occur.
(Ellis et al. 2001). By contrast, it appears that progen-
 The cells of the hair bulb matrix that go on to de-
itors of the nonkeratinizing outer root sheath are not
velop into IRS and hair shaft begin to express genes
derived from the differentiating matrix keratinocytes
encoding for Notch1. At this stage this membrane-
(as in the IRS and hair shaf lineages), but rather may
derive from laterally migrating cells from the bulge
Jagged-1 and Jagged-2 (Favier et al. 2000), which is
(Panteleyev et al. 2001).
then cleaved by secretase to yield a nuclear intracellu-
The expression of the winged-helix/forkhead tran-
lar cofactor. Interestingly, in hair follicles deficient in
scription factor FOXN1 in the IRS and hair shaft is
secretase, IRS cells fail to retain their IRS fate and the
thought to function in the differentiation of these cell
affected hair follicles appear to undergo a reversion
types ( Lee et al. 1999). Moreover, mice overexpressing
to epidermal differentiation fate with resultant cyst
FOXN1 in the IRS exhibit disruptions of hair shaft for-
formation (Blanpain et al. 2006). Transgenic mice ex-
mation (Prowse et al. 1999), whereas a spontaneous
pressing a constitutive activated form of Notch1 under
mutation in FOXN1 is associated with hair, nail, and
the control of the involucrin promoter were reported
immune defects (Frank et al. 1999; Mecklenburg et al.
to develop both skin and hair abnormalities. Here,
2005).
hair follicle IRS differentiation is significantly delayed,
resulting in a “Mohawk"-like alopecia associated with
1.1.6 Formation of the hair shaft
the anagen phase of the hair cycle (Uyttendaele et al.
2004). Furthermore, when overexpression of Notch1
One of the main ways to distinguish each of the dif-
was directed to precortical keratinocytes, the differen-
ferent cell layers of the developing hair follicle is by
tiation of hair shaft medullary cells was disrupted and
analyzing the expression of particular keratin genes
yielded a wavy hair phenotype (Lin et al. 2000).
(Schweizer et al. 2007). Indeed, some of these keratin
Cells that differentiate into IRS keratinocytes be-
genes are reported targets of the Wnt gene (Merrill
gin to express components of the cornified envelope
et al. 2001). For example, Wnt/β-catenin/LEF signal-
(e.g-, loricrin, involucrin, and transglutaminases) that
ing is considered to be very important for differen-
make them similar to suprabasal keratinocytes. How-
tiation of matrix keratinocytes into precortical ker-
ever, they also begin to express trichohyalin protein,
atinocytes. Not only do the promoters of some hair
a cross-linker of keratin filaments, in this layer. Tri-
keratin genes contain LEF binding sites and precor-
chohyalin is also found in cells forming the medulla
tical keratinocytes express LEF, but also hair follicle
(Alibardi 2004). Signaling via the epidermal growth
development ceases before the formation of the hair
factor receptor (EGFR) can cause defects in the ker-
shaft (i.e., Stage 5/6) (Fig. 1.1.3f and g) in LEF knock-
atinization of the IRS, loss of cohesion with the hair
out mice (DasGupta and Fuchs 1999). This indicates
shaft within, and may also result in the production of
that this stage of hair folicle development is in part
wavy hair fibers (Luetteke et al. 1993; Hansen et al.
regulated by Wnt signaling. As mentioned above, tran-
1997).
scription regulators of hair shaff genes also include
 Another control of IRS cell fate is the transcrip-
FOXN1 and HOXC13, which are expressed in hair
tional regulator “CCAAT displacement protein" (CDP,
shaft differentiation cell lineages. Mutating HOXC13
Cutl1), that is, a transcription factor involved in the
can result in brittle hair alopecia (Godwin and Capec-
regulation of cell growth and differentiation. Mice
chi 1998), while FOXN1 is mutated in the nude mouse
with a null mutation in Cutl1 develop an abnormal
(Mecklenburg et al. 2005) where it results in alopecia
pelage due to disrupted hair follicle morphogenesis
and in the absence of keratin K33 in truncal hair folli-
with reduced IRS formation. The recent observation
cles (Meier et al. 1999).
of Cutll expression in cells of the so-called compan-
The interrelated nature of signaling pathways in
ion layer suggests that this mysterious layer is really
hair follicle development is further evidenced by the
Ontogeny of the hair follicle11
finding that the expression of both HOXC13 and
cialized lipid-forming epithelial cells that will form
FOXN1 can be regulated by BMP signaling ( Kulessa et
the holocrine sebaceous gland. Sebum flow from this
al. 2000). Cells in the hair bulb matrix that are destined
gland coats and lubricates the hair shaft surface, and
to become hair shaft cortical keratinocytes also express
 may also have antimicrobial function. Differentiation
BMP4. The expression of Noggin (i.e., the inhibitor of
of imma ture keratinocytes to sebocytes is thought to be
BMP4) can disrupt the differentiation of the cortical
 regulated in part by the product ofthe proto-oncogene
keratinocytes needed for hair shaft formation.
c-Myc, as this occurs independently of the other cell
It has long been suspected that the IRS plays a signif-
lineages of the hair follicle. It is thought that c-Myc
icant role in modulating the phenotype of the initially
stimulates some epithelial cells to leave the stem cell
pliant hair shaft within the lower hair follicle. Thus
 compartment and differentiate into sebocytes rather
defects in IRS development (e.g-, caused by mutations
than hair follicle lineages (Arnold and Watt 2001). The
in Gata-3) are likely to result in the impairment of the
transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated
hair fiber phenotype (Kaufman et al. 2003). The con-
 receptor-y (PPARy) is a second transcription factor
ditional knockout of the Gata-3 gene from the hair fol-
that specifically regulates the differentiation of sebo-
licle results in mice with a range of phenotypes. These
cytes (Rosen et al. 1999).
include abnormal and delayed postnatal growth and
development, aberrant hair folicle tissue organiza-
tion, and irregular hair pigmentation. When the tran-
1.1.7 Development of the hair follicle
scriptome of these mice was analyzed, the affected hair
 follicles exhibited upregulation of Notch, Wnt, and
 pigmentary unit
BMP signaling pathways (Kurek et al. 2007). Similarly,
The developing hair follicle contains—in addi-
mice with a conditional knockout ofthe transcription
tion to epithelial keratinocytes and mesenchymal
factor gene Runxl also display a hair shaft structural
fibroblasts—cells of neuroectodermal origin, the
deformation in zigzag hairs (Raveh et al. 2006).
 melanocytes. Cutaneous melanocytes of both the epi-
Finally, a role for the transmembrane desmosomal
dermis and pilosebaceous unit originate from pluripo-
cadherin, desmoglein 4, in the development ofthe hair
 tent cells that commit to the melanocyte lineage while
shaft has been suggested recently. This is supported by
in the embryonic neural crest. To reach the skin, so
 observations that mutations in this gene can cause
called melanoblasts leave the neural tube and migrate
hypotrichosis in humans, mice, and rats. In human
dorsolaterally and differentiate along stereotypical
hair follicles desmoglein 4 is expressed specifically in
routes from the closing neural tube, migrate between
the hair cortex and in the cuticle of the IRS and hair
 the dermamyotome of the somites and the overlying
shaft, suggesting that this molecule is very important
ectoderm, until they enter the dermis (Rawles 1947).
for trichocyte adhesion of the hair shaft (Bazzi et al.
Melanoblasts migrate under the control of specific
2006).
growth factors (e.g., endothelin-1, stem cel factor/
The events underlying Stage O to Stage 5 ofhair folli-
c-kit) through the dermis and subsequently to the
cle morphogenesis (Fig. 1.1.3a-f) is a rapidly growing
epidermis, and distribute within the developing hair
field, and it islikely that we are only at the beginning of
follicle. Disruption of the stem cell factor/c-Kit signal-
elucidating the full range of molecular players involved
 ing pathway interferes with not only the survival and
 in hair folicle differentiation.
migration of these early melanocytes, but also their
 Significant additional morphologic features are ap-
differentiation during this stage of hair follicle mor-
        
phogenesis.
1.1.3f). Not only does the IRS continue to develop and
Much of our knowledge of the events involved in
extend upward within the hair folicle, but several ep-
the development of melanocyte compartments within
 a suore readde osie saq no suurd p
the skin and hair follicle derives from the analysis of
external wall of the developing hair follicle or outer
gene mutations in mice that affect differentiation, pro-
root sheath (Fig. 1.1.1). One of these “bulges" will
liferation, and migration of melanocyte precursors
 generate the future repository of the hair follicle stem
(Jackson 1994). There are over 100 genes shown so
cells (e.g-, for both epithelial cells and melanocytes).
far to affect hair color in the mouse (Nakamura et al.
A second more distal bulge will become a site of spe-
 2002), and equivalents of many of these continue to be
12  Hair follicle biology
described in other mammals, where mutations range
tical keratinocytes. The final two stages of hair follicle
from total loss of all-over pigmentation (e.g, types of
 development are characterized by the growth of the
albinism) to loss of pigment from specific body sites
hair shaft through the IRS and hair canal until the
(e.g-, piebaldism) (Fleischman et al. 1996). Recently,
tip of the fiber emerges from the surface of the skin
a role for the Notch signaling pathway in the mainte-
(Figs. 1.1.1 and 1.1.3h). In addition, the aspect of the
nance of melanoblasts and melanocyte stem cells was
sebaceous gland changes relative to the hair follicle
proposed, where severe coat color dilution resulted
horizontal axis at this stage. Finally, the hair follicle at-
when the Notch pathway was disrupted. Loss of hair
tains its maximal length and bulk during Stage 8 when
 pigment was also seen when Notch1 and/or Notch2
the distal hair shaft is positioned well, free of the skin
 receptors were ablated in melanocytes (Schouwey et
surface (Figs. 1.1.1 and 1.1.3i).
al. 2007)
 The anatomy of the fully developed Stage 8 hair
 Even before the onset of hair bulb melanogenesis,
follicle is very similar to the anatomy of the grow-
that is, around morphogenesis Stage 4 (Fig. 1.1.3f and
ing/cycling anagen hair follicle in the adult (see Sec-
g), strongly c-Kit and S100 positive cells are visible
tion 1.2.1). Epithelial and mesenchymal cells of the
in selected cells of the hair folicle placode and plug.
developing hair follicle therefore contrive to produce
Later these cells become increasingly dendritic and in-
the mature hair follicle via massive cell proliferation
vade the hair bulb (Peters et al. 2002). There, they ap-
and cell differentiation. However, considerable tissue
pear to distribute as either *dihydroxy-phenylalanine
sculpting is also required. Such sculpting events also
(DOPA)-positive" or “DOPA-negative” melanocytes
require intermittent and highly localized programmed
(Chase et al. 1951), where DOPA positivity refers
cell death (Magerl et al. 2001). Only in this way can this
to their ability to produce the rate-limiting enzyme
hair follicle assume its full hair shaf-forming status.
for melanin formation called tyrosinase or whether
Cessation of hair fiber production (i.e., hair shaft
it can oxidize DOPA and produce the melanin pre-
 growth) during Stage 8 of hair follicle development
cursor dopaquinone. As hair follicle morphogenesis
signals entry into the “hair growth cycle, from which
 progresses to the stage of synthesizing a hair fiber,
the hair follicle usually does not escape during the life
DOPA-positive melanocytes cluster around the apex
of the individual (see Section 1.2.1).
of the dermal papilla in the hair bulb. Other ame
In summary, the development or morphogenesis
lanotic DOPA-negative melanocytes occupy positions
of the hair follicle provides an exquisite example and
in the outer root sheath (Fig. 1.1.1). The first melanin
model system to study the earliest communications
granules are evident in precortical keratinocytes at this
 involved in organ development. It is likely that this
stage.
system will reveal much about how cells communicate
to aid the development of treatments for developmen-
tal abnormalities in general and those affecting the
hair follile (eg., congenital hyper/hypo/a/-trichosis)
1.1.8 Final stages of hair follicle
morphogenesis
in particular.
The forming fiber now starts to pass through the hair
follicle core in order to exit the skin surface. Its pas-
References
sage through intact follicular epithelium is facilitated
Alibardi L. 2004. Fine structure of marsupial hairs, with emphasis
by the formation of a “hair canal" (Robins and Breath-
on trichohyalin and the structure of the inner root sheath. Journa?
nach 1970), which is constructed via focal cell death
of Morphofogy 261(3):390-402.
or apoptosis. The developing hair follicle continues to
Arnold I, Watt FM. 2001. c-Myc activation in transgenic mouse
epidermis results in mobilization of stem cells and differentiation
extend deeper and deeper into the skin until its prox-
of their progeny. Caurrent Biology 11(8):558-568.
imal bulbar end is situated within the adipocyte-rich
Atit R, Sgaier SK, Mohamed OA, Taketo MM, Dufort D, Joyner
AL, Niswander L, Conlon RA. 2006. Beta-catenin activation is
subcutis. Anatomic features characteristic of Stage 6
necessary and sufficient to specify the dorsal dermal fate in the
hair follicles include an increasing complexity of the
mouse. Developmental Biology 296(1):164-176.
now multilayered IRS (Fig. 1.1.3e-h). Furthermore,
Barsh G. 1999. Of ancient tales and hairless tails. Nature Genetics
the hair shaft can now be visualized within the hair
22(4):315-316.
Bazzi H, Getz A, Mahoney MG, Ishida-Yamamoto A, Langbein L,
canal and melanin granules can be seen within its cor-
Wahl JK II, Christiano AM. 2006. Desmoglein 4 is expressed
 Ontogeny of the hair follicle  13
in highly differentiated keratinocytes and trichocytes in human 
Gu LH, Coulombe PA. 2007. Keratin expression provides novel in-
epidermis and hair follicle. Differentiation 74(2-3):129-140.
sightinto the morphogenesis and functionofthecompanionlayer
Blanpain C, Lowry WE, Pasolli HA, Fuchs E. 2006. Canonical notch
in hair follicles. Journai of Investigative Dermatology 127(5):1061-
 signaling functions as a commitment switch in the epidermal
1073.
lineage.Genes and Development 20(21):3022-3035.
Hansen LA, Alexander N, Hogan ME, Sundberg JP, Dlugosz A,
Botchkarev VA, Botchkareva NV, Roth W, Nakamura M, Chen LH,
Threadgill DW, Magnuson T, Yuspa SH. 1997. Genetically null
Herzog W, Lindner G, McMahon JA, Peters C, Lauster R, McMa-
mice reveal a central role for epidermal growth factor receptor in
hon AP, Paus R. 1999. Noggin is a mesenchymally derived stimu-
the differentiation of the hair follicle and normal hair develop-
lator of hair-follicle induction. Nature Celf Biofogy 1(3):158-164.
ment. American Journal of Pathology 150(6):1959-1975.
Botchkarev VA, Paus R. 2003. Molecular biology of hair morpho-
Headon DJ, Overbeek PA. 1999. Involvement of a novel TNF re-
genesis:development and cycling.Journalof Experimental Zootogy
ceptor homologue in hair follicle induction. Nature Genetics
Part B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution 298(1):164-180.
22(4):370-374.
Botchkarev VA, Sharov AA. 2004. BMP signaling in the control of
Huelsken J, Vogel R, Erdmann B, Cotsarelis G, Birchmeier W. 2001.
skin development and hair follicle growth. Differentuation 72(9-
 Beta-catenin controls hair follicle morphogenesis and stem cell
10):512-526.
differentiation in the skin. Celf 105(4):533-545.
Chase HB, Rauch R, Smith VW. 1951. Critical stages of hair devel-
Iseki S, Araga A, Ohuchi H, Nohno T, Yoshioka H, Hayashi F, Noji S.
opment and pigmentation in the mouse. Physiology and Zoology
 1996. Sonic hedgehog is expressed in epithelial cells during devel-
24(1):1-8.
opment of whisker, hair, and tooth. Biochemical and Biophysical
Chiang C, Swan RZ, Grachtchouk M, Bolinger M, Litingtung Y,
Research Communications 218(3):688-693.
Robertson EK, Cooper MK, Gaffeld W, Westphal H, Beachy PA,
Ito M, Yang Z, Andl T, Cui C, Kim N, Millar SE, Cotsarelis G. 2007.
Dlugosz AA. 1999. Essential role for sonic hedgehog during hair
Wnt-dependent de novo hair follicle regeneration in adult mouse
follicle morphogenesis. Developmental Biology 205(1):1-9.
skin after wounding. Nature 447(7142):316-320.
Chuong C-M. 1998. Motecular Basis of Epithelial Appendage Mor-
 Jackson IJ. 1994. Molecular and developmental genetics of mouse
phogenesis. Austin, Texas: RG Landes.
coat color. Anrual Reviews in Genetics 28:189-217.
DasGupta R, Fuchs E. 1999. Multiple roles for activated LEF/TCF
Jung HS, Francis-West PH, Widelitz RB, Jiang TX, Ting-Berreth S,
transcription complexes during hair follicle development and
Tickle C, Wolpert L, Chuong CM. 1998. Local inhibitory action
differentiation. Development 126(20):4557-4568.
of BMPs and their relationships with activators in feather forma-
Drogemiller C, Rifenacht S, Wichert B, Leeb T. 2007. Mutations
tion: implications for periodic patterning. Developmental Biology
within the FGFS gene are associated with hair length in cats.
196(1):11-23.
Animal Genetics 38(3):218-221.
Kaplan ED, Holbrook KA. 1994. Dynamic expression patterns
Ellis T, Gambardella L, Horcher M, Tschanz S, Capol J, Bertram P
of tenascin, proteoglycans, and cell adhesion molecules dur-
 Jochum W, Barrandon Y, Busslinger M. 2001. The transcriptional
ing human hair follicle morphogenesis. Developmental Dynamics
repressor CDP(Cutll) is essential for epithelial celldifferentia-
199(2):141-155.
tion of the lung and the hair follicle. Genes and Development
Karlsson L, Bondjers C, Betsholtz C. 1999. Roles for PDGF-A and
15(17):2307-2319.
sonic hedgehog in development of mesenchymal components of
Favier B, Fliniaux I, Thélu J, Viallet JP, Demarchez M, Jahoda
the hair follicle. Development 126(12):261l-2621.
CA, Dhouailly D. 2000. Localisation of members of the notch
Kashiwagi M, Kuroki T, Huh N. 1997. Specific inhibition of hair
system and the differentiation of vibrissa hair follicles:recep-
follicle formation by epidermal growth factor in an organ cul-
tors, ligands, and fringe modulators. Developmental Dynamics
ture of developing mouse skin. Developmental Biology 189(1):
218(3):426-437.
22-32.
Fleischman RA, Gallardo T, Mi X. 1996. Mutations in the ligand-
Kashiwagi M, Morgan BA, Georgopoulos K. 2007. The chromatin
 binding domain of the kit receptor: an uncommon site in human
remodeler Mi-2beta is required for establishment of the basal
piebaldism. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 107(5):703-706.
epidermis and normal differentiationofits progeny. Development
Foitzik K, Paus R, Doetschman T, Dotto GP. 1999. The TGF-beta2
34(8):1571-1582.
 isoform is both a required and suffcient inducer of murine hair
Kaufman CK, Zhou P, Pasolli HA, Rendl M, Bolotin D, Lim KC,
follicle morphogenesis. Developmental Biology 212(2):278-289.
Dai X, Alegre ML, Fuchs E. 2003. GATA-3: an unexpected regula-
Frank J, Pignata C, Panteleyev AA, Prowse DM, Baden H, Weiner L,
tor of cellineage determination in skin. Genes and Development
Gaetaniello L, Ahmad W, Pozzi N, Cserhalmi-Friedman PB,
17(17):2108-2122.
Aita VM, Uyttendaele H, Gordon D, Ott J, Brissette JL, Chris-
Kratochwil K, Dull M, Farinas I, Galceran J, Grosschedl R. 1996.
tiano AM. 1999. Exposing the human nude phenotype. Nature
Lefl expression is activated by BMP-4 and regulates inductive
398(6727):473-474.
tissue interactions in tooth and hair development. Genes and
Fuchs E. 2007. Scratching the surface of skin development. Nature
Development 10(11):1382-94.
445(7130):834-842.
Kulessa H, Turk G, Hogan BL. 2000. Inhibition of BMP signaling af-
Fuchs E, Merrill BJ, Jamora C, DasGupta R. 2001. At the roots of a
fects growth and differentiation in the anagen hair follicle. EMBO
never-ending cycle. Developmental Cel 1(1):13-25.
Journal 19(24):6664-6674.
Gat U, DasGupta R, Degenstein L, Fuchs E. 1998. De novo hair folli-
 Kurek D, Garinis GA, van Doorninck JH, Van Der Wees J, Grosveld
cle morphogenesis and hairtumors in miceexpressing a truncated
 FG. 2007. Transcriptome and phenotypic analysis reveals Gata3-
beta-catenin in skin. Cell 95(5):605-614.
dependent signalling pathways in murine hair follicles. Develop-
Godwin AR, Capecchi MR. 1998. Hoxc13 mutant mice lack external
ment 134(2):261-272.
hair. Genes and Development 12(1):ll-20.
 Lee D, Prowse DM, Brissette JL. 1999. Association between mouse
Gritli-Linde A, Hallberg K, Harfe BD, Reyahi A, Kannius-Janson M,
nude gene expression and the initiation of epithelial terminal
 Nilsson J, Cobourne MT, Sharpe PT, McMahon AP, Linde A. 2007.
differentiation. Developmental Biology 208(2):362-374.
Abnormal hair development and apparent follicular transforma-
Levy V, Lindon C, Harfe BD, Morgan BA. 2005. Distinct stem cell
tion to mammary gland in the absence of hedgehog signaling.
populations regenerate the follicle and interfollicular epidermis.
Developmental Celf 12(1):99-112.
Developmental Cell 9(6):855-861.
14  Hair follicle biology
Li J, Tzu J, Chen Y, Zhang YP, Nguyen NT, Gao J, Bradley M,
embryonic skin and in reconstituted skin. Biochemical and Bio-
Keene DR, Oro AE, Miner JH, Marinkovich MP. 2003. Laminin-
physicalResearchCormmunications345(2):581-587.
10 is crucial for hair morphogenesis. EMBO Journaf 22(10):2400-
Panteleyey AA, Jahoda CA, Christiano AM. 2001. Hair folli-
2410.
cle predetermination. Journal of Cell Science 114(Pt 19):3419-
Lin MH, Leimeister C, Gessler M, Kopan R. 2000. Activation of the
3431.
Notch pathway in the hair cortex leads to aberrant differentia-
 Paus R, Miller-Rover S, Van Der Veen C, Maurer M, Eichmiller S,
tion of the adjacent hair-shaft layers. Development 127(1l):2421-
Ling G, Hofmann U, Foitzik K, Mecklenburg L, Handjiski B.
2432.
1999. A comprehensive guide for the recognition and classifica-
Lindner G, Menrad A, Gherardi E, Merlino G, Welker P, Handjiski B,
tion of distinct stages of hair follicle morphogenesis. Journal of
 Roloff B, Paus R. 2000. Involvement of hepatocyte growth fac-
Investigative Dermatology 113(4):523-532.
tor/scatter factor and met receptor signaling in hair follicle mor-
 Peters EM, Tobin DJ, Botchkareva N, Maurer M, Paus R. 2002. Mi-
phogenesis and cycling. FASEB fournal 14(2):319-332.
gration of melanoblasts into the developing murine hair follicle
Lo Celso C, Prowse DM, Watt FM. 2004. Transient activation of
is accompanied by transient c-Kit expression. fournal of Histo-
beta-catenin signalling in adult mouse epidermis is suffcient to
chemistry and Cytochermistry 50(6):75i-766.
induce new hair follicles but continuous activation is required
 Petiot A, Conti FJ, Grose R, Revest JM, Hodivala-Dilke KM,
to maintain hair follicle tumours. Development 131(8):1787-
Dickson C. 2003. A crucial role for Fgfr2-IIIb signalling in epi-
1799.
dermal development and hair follicle patterning. Development
Luetteke NC, QiuTH, Peiffer RL, Oliver P, Smithies O, Lee DC. 1993.
130(22):5493-5501.
TGF alpha defciency results in hair follicle and eye abnormalities
 Prowse DM, Lee D, Weiner L, Jiang N, Magro CM, Baden HP,
 in targeted and waved-1 mice. Cell 73(2):263-278.
Brissette JL. 1999. Ectopic expression of the nude gene induces
Maderson PF. 2003. Mammalian skin evolution: a reevaluation.
hyperproliferationanddefectsindiffrentiation:mplicationsfor
Experimental Dermatology 12(3):233-236.
the self-renewal of cutaneous epithelia. Developmental Biology
Mager M, Tobin DI, Miller-Rover S, Hagen E, Lindner G, McKay
212(1):54-67.
IA, Paus R. 2001. Patterns of proliferation and apoptosis dur-
 Raveh E, Cohen S, Levanon D, Negreanu V, Groner Y, Gat U. 2006.
ing murine hair follicle morphogenesis Journal of fnvestigative
Dynamicexpression of Runxl in skin affects hair structure. Mech-
Dermatology 116(6):947-955.
anisms of Development 123(11):842-850.
Mecklenburg L, Tychsen B, Paus R. 2005. Learning from nudity:
 Rawles ME. 1947. Origin of pigment cells from the neural crest in
lessons from the nude phenotype. Experimental Dermatology
the mouse embryo. Physiology and Zoofogy 20:248-266.
14(11):797-810.
Reddy S, Andl T, Bagasra A, Lu MM, Epstein DJ, Morrisey EE, Millar
Meier N, Dear TN, Boehm T. 1999. Whn and mHa3 are components
SE.2001CharacterizationofWtgenexpressonndeveloping
of the genetic hierarchy controlling hair follicle differentiation.
and postnatal hairfolliclesandidentificationofWnt5aas atarget
Mechanisms of Development 89(1-2):215-221.
of sonic hedgehog in hair follicle morphogenesis. Mechanisms of
Merrill BJ, Gat U, DasGupta R, Fuchs E. 2001. Tef3 and Lefl regulate
Development 107(1-2):69-82.
lineage differentiation of multipotent stem cells in skin. Genes and
 Rendl M, Polak L, Fuchs E. 2008. BMP signaling in dermal papilla
Development 15(13):1688-1705.
 cells is required for their hair follicle-inductive properties. Genes
Mill P, Mo R, Fu H, Grachtchouk M, Kim PC, Dlugosz AA, Hui CC.
and Development 22(4):543-557.
2003. Sonic hedgehog-dependent activation of Gli2 is essential
Reynolds AJ, Lawrence C, Cserhalmi-Friedman PB, Christiano AM,
for embryonic hair follicle development. Genes and Development
JahodaCA.1999.Trans-genderinductionofhair folliles.Nature
17(2):282-294.
402(6757):33-34.
Millar SE. 2002. Molecular mechanisms regulating hair follicle
 Robins EJ, Breathnach AS. 1970. Fine structure of bulbar end of
development. Journal of Investigative Dermatofogy 118(2):216-
human foetal hair follicle at stage of differentiation of inner root
225.
sheath. Journal of Anatomy 107(Pt 1):131-146.
Ming Kwan K, Li AG, Wang XJ, Wurst W, Behringer RR. 2004.
Rosen ED, Sarraf P, Troy AE, Bradwin G, Moore K, Milstone DS,
Spiegelman BM, Mortensen RM. 1999. PPARy is required for the
growth of hair follicles and in skin tumorigenesis. Genesis 39(1):
differentiation of adipose tissue in vivo and in vitro. Molecular
10-25.
Cell 4(4):611-617.
Mou C, Jackson B, Schneider P, Overbeek PA, Headon DJ. 2006.
 Satokata I, Ma L, Ohshima H, Bei M, Woo I, Nishizawa K, Maeda T,
Generation of the primary hair follicle pattern. Proceedings of
Takano Y, Uchiyama M, Heaney S, Peters H, Tang Z, Maxson R,
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
Maas R. 2000. Msx2 deficiency in mice causes pleiotropic defects
103(24):9075-9080.
in bonegrowth and ectodermal organ formation. Nature Genetics
Nakamura M, Tobin DJ, Richards-Smith B, Sundberg IP, Paus R.
24(4):391-395.
2002. Mutant laboratory mice with abnormalities in pigmenta-
 Schmidt-Ullrich R, Aebischer T, Hilsken J, Birchmeier W, Klemm U,
tion: annotated tables. Journal of Dermatological Science 28(1):1-
 Scheidereit C. 2001. Requirement of NF-kappaB/Rel for the
33.
 development of hair follicles and other epidermal appendices.
Noramly S, Freeman A, Morgan BA. 1999. Beta-catenin sig-
Development 128(19):3843-3853.
naling can initiate feather bud development. Development
 Schmidt-Ullrich R, Paus R. 2005. Molecular principles ofhair follicle
126(16):3509-3521.
jnduction and morphogenesis. Bioessays 27(3):247-261.
 Olivera-Martinez I, Viallet JP, Michon F, Pearton DJ, Dhouailly
 Schmidt-Ullrich R, Tobin DJ, Lenhard D, Schneider P, Paus R, Schei-
 D. 2004. The different steps of skin formation in vertebrates.
 dereit C. 2006. NF-kappaB transmits Eda Al/EdaR signalling
International fournal ofDevelopmental Biofogy 48(2-3):107-115.
to activate Shh and cyclin Dl expression, and controls post-
Oro AE, Higgins K. 2003. Hair cycle regulation of hedgehog signal
initiation hair placode down growth. Development 133(6):1045-
reception. Developmental Biology 255(2):238-248.
1057.
 Ouji Y, Yoshikawa M, Shiroi A, Ishizaka S. 2006. Promotion of hair
 Schouwey K, Delmas V, Larue L, Zimber-Strobl U, Strobl LJ, Radtke
follicle development andtrichogenesisbyWnt-10bincultred
 F, Beermann F. 2007. Notchl and Notch2 receptors influence
 Ontogeny of the hair follicle 15
 progressive hair graying in a dose-dependent manner. Develop-
Danielian PS, McMahon JA, Lewis PM, Paus R, McMahon AP.
mental Dynamics 236(1):282-289.
1998. Sonic hedgehog signaling is essential for hair development.
Schweizer J, Langbein L, Rogers MA, Winter H. 2007. Hair follicle-
Qurrent Biology 8(19):1058-1068.
specifc keratins and their diseases. Experimental Ceff Research
Tobin DJ (ed). 2005. Hair in Toxicology: An Important Bio-monitor.
313(10):2010-2020.
London: Royal Society of Chemistry.
Sick S, Reinker S, Timmer J, Schlake T. 2006. WNT and DKK de-
Uyttendaele H, Panteleyev AA, de Berker D, Tobin DT, Christiano
 termine hair follicle spacing through a reaction-diffusion mech-
AM. 2004. Activation of Notchl in the hair follicle leads to
anism. Science 314(5804):1447-1450.
cell-fate switch and Mohawk alopecia. Diferentiation72(8):396-
St-Jacques B, Dassule HR, Karavanova I, Botchkarev VA, Li J,
409.
1.2
Anatomy and physiology of the
hair follicle
Desmond J. Tobin
The hair follicle is formed from a bewilderingly com-
hair cycle. Thereafter, the hair follicle continues with
plex set of interactions involving ectodermal, meso
lifelong cyclical activity (Fig. 1.2.1) until death of the
dermal, and neuroectodermal components, which go
individual (Fuchs et al. 2001; Stenn and Paus 2001).
to elaborate five or six concentric cellular cylinders
of at least 15 distinct interacting cell subpopula-
1.2.1.1 First anagen
tions (Philpott and Paus 1998; Botchkarev and Paus
2003).
This first anagen of the hair growth cycle morphologi-
Much, if not most, of current hair research is con-
cally resembles several aspects of hair follicle develop-
 ducted in murine models (after an extended period of
 ment in utero. In this way the lifelong cyclical activity
time when this was dominated by research on wool for
of the hair follicle recapitulates, at least in part, sev.
economic reasons), and particularly in black-haired
eral embryologic events involved in hair follicle mor-
mice strains like C57BL6 (Paus et al. 1990). While it
 phogenesis (Paus and Cotsarelis 1999; Botchkarev and
S        s
Paus 2003). Remarkably, several signaling pathways
 specific differences, the consensus is that the funda-
that drive and follow mesenchymal-epithelial inter-
mentals of hair growth will be broadly similar in all
mammals. Unlike many other mammals, humans have
during the hair growth cycle (cf. Chuong 1998). While
Aisous nq mo o e in ison inq 
hair growth cycle dynamics vary somewhat between
(i.e., as a wave). Instead, human hair grows in a mo-
different mammalian species (see Section 1.3.3), be-
saic pattern where significant autonomy for growth
tween different body sites, and even between different
 and pigmentation resides in individual hair follicle.
hair follicle subtypes in the same body site, there exists
an intrinsic rhythmic activity that can be modulated
 not only by systemic factors but more importantly also
1.2.1 The hair growth cycle
by the hair follicle's own locally directed activities.
As discussed earlier (see Section 1.1.8), the fully devel-
 oped Stage 8 hair follicles actively produce hair fbers.
1.2.1.2 Catagen
Each follicle will continue to do so until it is induced
to enter the frst hair growth cycle. Thus, hair cycling
-ied, e se sned Jiey Aq paqosap uaaq sey useie
paradoxically begins with a regression phase charac-
tial organ suicide” whereby the growing terminal hair
terized by a massive cell death via apoptosis to yield the
follicle is reduced by more than two-thirds of its grow-
first catagen. Upon completion of this catagen phase,
ing tissue mass (Figs 1.2.1 and 1.2.2). This massive cell
the hair follicle will have lost up to 70% of its original
death is both controlled and rapid (about 2-3 weeks on
Stage 8 tissue mass, as it enters a period of relative rest
human scalp and 3-5 days in mice) and involves sub-
during telogen. After some time the telogen follicle is
stantial remodeling not only of the hair follicle itself
reactivated to enter into the first anagen phase of the
(Lindner et al. 1997), but also the surrounding dermis.
18  Hair fllicle biology
Anagenic vs. telogenic hair growth
Human
Most dogs
 Angora rabbit
Horse
Mohair goat 
 Most cats
Poodle dogs
Hedgehogs
Maturationa! Molt: Continuous or episodic.
Annual: fox, rat, some rabbits, kangaroo.
Semi-annual: mink, some rabbits, mole.
Continuous: cats, sheep, human scalp.
· Retention of telogen hair concurrent with
new anagen, e.g., sheep, rat, and mouse.
ORS
· Hair increasingly telogenic with age.
-IRS
(a)
Mel
(q)
(c)
HM
FP
FP
Species-dependent variation
in each phase of cycle
Anagen
(t)
Telogen
EP
Catagen
(e)
Clu
(d)
APM
FP
(h)
BM
(g)
FP
Fig. 1.2.1 Schematic representation of the hair growth cycle with staging according to Muller-Rover et al. (2001). BM, basement
bulge; Mel, melanin; HM, hair matrix; APM, arrector pili muscle. (Modified from Tobin and Paus (2001).)
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle  19
The first morphologic clue that hair follicle regres-
sion is impending is the cessation of anagen-coupled
hair follicle melanogenesis ( Tobin et al. 1999). Interest-
Hairshaft
ingly, this too involves apoptosis ( Tobin et al. 1998), so
while keratinocyte proliferation slows down but con-
tinues for a short time, some of this latest hair shaft
Epidermis
production lacks incorporation of melanin. As a re-
sult, the most proximal end of shed hair fibers is usu-
ally pigment free. Thereafter, a massive apoptosis of
gland
selected keratinocyte lineages occurs in the lower hair
follicle, though there is evidence that some bulbar ker-
Stemcells
atinocytes may survive to form part of the secondary
 germ ofthe telogen hair follicle (Panteleyev et al. 2001)
(Figs 1.2.1 and 1.2.3).
While keratinocytes and melanocytes of the lower
 hair folicle are vulnerable to the catagen/apoptosis
Connective
tissue sheath
signal, fibroblasts of the folicular dermal papilla ap-
Outerrootsheath
pear by contrast to be remarkably resista nt ( Tobin et al.
Innerrootsheath
2003a,b). As the hair follicle epithelium shortens dra-
matically, the papilla is drawn upward toward the
epidermis by maintaining direct association with the
shrinking hair follicle epithelial strand until it comes
eratogeneouszone
to rest at the hair “bulge" (Fig. 1.2.1). Maintenance
 of close follicular dermal papilla/epithelium contact is
critical for continued cycling (Panteleyev et al. 2000),
Matrixkeratinocytes
without which hair growth and cycling willfail. Tissue
change associated with the transition from full growth
(anagen) to the relative resting stage (telogen) is con-
Folliculardermalpapilla
 ventionally divided into the characteristic morpholog-
Hg. 1.2.2 Cartoon of an anagen hair follicle showing all lin-
ically defined stages catagen I-VIlI (Miller- Rover et
eages of hair follicle cells.
al. 2001).
1.2.1.3 Telogen
The nature of the catagen trigger(s) remains elusive,
although interestingly it has recently been shown in
When hair follicle involution is complete at catagen
mice that psychosocial stress can also precipitate an-
VIII, the hair folicle enters a period of relative rest
agen hair follicles into catagen (Arck et al. 2003). In
called telogen. Indeed, for many mammalian species
addition, environmental factors including chemicals,
this may be the preferred holding position of the hair
trauma, and experimentally administered hormones
cycle. Keratinocytes of the epithelial sac surround-
(e.g-, epidermal growth factor, EGF) can induce cata-
ing the telogen hair are specialized to moor the hair
 gen. Entry into catagen may even be a default setting
club/hair shaft tightly in the hair follicle. Although
for most mammals, whereby the hair follicle is moved
 the telogen hair follicle may appear paltry by com-
from the much more labile anagen stage to a more sta-
parison to its former growing anagen state, it re-
ble or resting “setting"? in telogen during times of stress.
mains vascularized and innervated and contains all
Thus, it may be likely that catagen can be induced by
the cell types needed to produce the next fully de-
changes in levels of cytokines/hormones required for
veloped anagen hair folicle. Indeed, there is enor-
anagen (e.g., inhibition of the receptor for insulin-like
mous scientific interest in this region of the hair fol.
 growth factor and altered levels of neurotrophins can
licle, as it includes the so-called bulge that together
induce catagen) (Stenn and Paus 2001).
with parts of the upper outer root sheath (ORS)
20Hair follicle biology
AP
C
Club
 Regressing
Regressing
Bulge cells
epithelial
epithelial
 strand
 strand-
-AP
Regressing
AP
1288321262
epithelial
 strand 
Bulge
cells 
 Fg. 1.2.3 High-resolution light microscopy views of longitudinal semithin sections of the C57BL/6 murine hair growth cycle. (a)
+
Catagen I hair bulb showing earliest keratinocyte apoptosis (AP) in a pigmented hair follicle (Mc, melanocyte). (b,c) Advanced
catagenVll exhibiting massive apoptosisofkeratinocytes(APresulting in the generationof a regressing epithelia strand that draws
 Note the location of the bulge stem cells with characteristic pleomorphic nuclei. (Continues)
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle  21
[e)
Telogen
SG
SGerm
FDP
D
Jieu I uabeue Ae3 (t) (tal) ll/l uabeue Aea Aan pue (ub) jiy qnp uaboai e buimous uiys uaboal (a) panuuo e'z'l by
follicle with the FDP containing some melanin from the previous anagen. (g) Anagen ll showing early differentiation of the inner
root sheath (IRS, arrow). (h) Anagen IV showing commencement of hair bulb melanogenesis. (i) High-power view of anagen IV
hair bulb with initiation of melanogenesis in hair bulb melanocytes (Mc). Note also some melanin (Mel) from the previous anagen
amod-uen () uonpoud laa jiu pauaubid in ui pabebua apllof lieu i uabeuv ( (da) elded yenly aui u! paisodan
view of anagen IV hair bulb with clear FDP and highly melanogenic Mc. SG, sebaceous gland; SGerm, secondary germ. (Modified 
from Tobin (2005).)
 22  Hair follicle biology
contains a range of different stem cell populations, in-
et al. 1999), and extracellular matrix (Messenger 1991;
cluding stem cells for epithelial cells (Cotsarelis et al.
Westgate et al. 1991a, b) systems among others exhibit
1990), melanocytes/melanoblasts (Nishimura et al.
a remarkably tight coupling to the hair growth cycle.
2002), and likely also mesenchymal stem cells needed
We can at least speculate, however, on the likely na-
for replenishment of the follicular dermal papilla and
ture of these anagen growth-inducing cells. First, they
dermal sheath (Tobin et al. 2003a, b) (Figs 1.2.1d,e
must have stem cell-like characteristics, with the bio-
and 1.2.2).
logic capability to maintain a unique cellular rhythm
 The completion of the telogen phase has sometimes
 or periodicity of activity that is intrinsic to the indi-
 mistakenly been associated with the a priori shedding
vidual hair follicle itself. More importantly perhaps
of the old hair shaft in humans. Instead the process of
these cells must send and coordinate inductive signals
hair shedding, termed “exogen,” appears to constitute
to the surrounding epithelium and/or mesenchyme.
an independent and active event (Milner et al. 2002).
Morphologically, the telogen-to-anagen transition can
Unfortunately, this stage of the hair growth cycle has
be viewed as the reconstruction of a hair fiber factory
received little attention to date, perhaps surprisingly
so given that hair shedding is the major concern for
tissue to the so-called permanent/noncycling portion
both affected humans and for owners of affected ani-
of the hair follicle (Figs 1.2.2 and 1.2.3e-h).
mals. Importantly, exogen does not appear to be due
The new anagen hair bulb emerges from the so-
to any motive force exerted by the tip of the new an-
called secondary germ at the base of the telogen hair
agen hair shaft below (as is seen with the extrusion
follicle. Researchers are particularly interested in dis-
of deciduous teeth by adult permanent teeth). Rather,
secting the signals sent by the follicular dermal papilla
exogen usually occurs when the new growing hair fol-
to the epithelial stem cells located here (or vice versa),
licle has reached only anagen IV—before the stage of
which may lead to both the initiation and regulation
anagen that is associated with the emergence of the
of the massive proliferation of hair bulb keratinocytes.
hair fiber tip at the base of the telogen club hair. Thus,
There is stimulation also of proliferation of ORS
the disengagement of the telogen club may instead
keratinocytes and melanocytes. Together this highly
result from an active release phase associated with al-
proliferative region of the growing hair follicle also
tered protease/protease inhibitor levels/activity, per
exhibits a rare example of immune privilege, which
 haps also involving the lysosomal protease, cathepsin
exists during anagen only (Westgate et al. 1991b; Paus
L (Tobin et al. 2002).
1997; Paus et al. 2005).
1.2.1.4 Subsequent anagen
1.2.1.5 Molecular mechanisms of hair
follicle cycling
The hair follicle remains in the “resting? telogen phase
for a highly variable and often very long time. More-
As mentioned above, anagen development resembles
 over, the skin becomes increasingly telogenic with age,
 several of the morphologic changes observed during
perhaps related to depletion or loss of activity of the
hair follicle development. Thus, it is not surprising
stem cell population. However, under normal circum-
that many soluble growth factors associated with hair
stances telogen is eventually broken by some, as yet
unspecified, signal(s) that initiate(s) the new growth
 ing anagen development. However, this process is not
of hair. Several fundamental questions remain regard-
 an exact recapitulation of hair folicle morphogenic
ing the regulation of this critical transition point of
events; some factors associated with tissue develop-
the hair growth cycle. For example, it is not yet clear
 ment during hair follicle morphogenesis (e.g., NT-3
which cell type is responsible for initiating entry into
and TGF-β2) can actually induce tissue involution in
anagen or what this stimulus is, or how it influences
the cycling hair follicle (Botchkarev and Paus 2003).
its target cell pathway. Moreover, there are many other
 Levels of key regulatory molecules (e.g-, WNT family
biologic systems in the skin and the microenviron-
members, Shh, and BMPs) also fluctuate during the
ment of the hair follicle that are likely to influence the
hair growth cycle such that gradients/ratios of these
process. For example, the vascular (Mecklenburg et al.
 stimulators and inhibitors can drive cell proliferation,
2000), neural (Peters et al. 2001), pigmentary (Tobin
differentiation, or involution. While sonic hedgehog
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle  23
is not a requirement for anagen onset (and so is simi-
autonomy continues to reside in single hair follicles,
lar in this context to morphogenesis), it is needed for
and how cycling persists throughout adult life.
subsequent epithelial cell proliferation to drive anagen
hair follicle downgrowth into the dermis ( Wang et al.
1.2.2.1 Epithelial stem cells
2000).
 It is now known that the folicular dermal papilla
Of the hair cycle hypotheses, the “bulge-activation"
is the principal regulator of the hair cycle “clock"
hypothesis (Cotsarelis et al. 1990; Sun et al. 1991) is
(cf. Jahoda and Reynolds 1996). Convincing demon-
 currently favored. This theory supports the view that
stration of the papilla's critical role was done in early
the mesenchymal-epithelial interaction at the end of
tissue recombination and implantation studies (Oliver
telogen involves the stimulation of stem cells in the
1967). Surprisingly, the follicular dermal papilla ap-
"bulge" bythe papilla fibroblasts. This event isthen fol-
lowed by epithelial stem cell proliferation. The progeny
there is some debate regarding its intrinsic prolife-
cells are termed “transit amplifying" (TA) cells and
rative capacity (Tobin et al. 2003a, b), it now appears
function to re-form the lower *temporary” part of the
that follicular dermal papilla cell numbers do indeed
hair follicle in anagen (Cotsarelis et al. 1990). Unlike
 increase/decrease during normal cycling.
the stem cell, the TA cell has a limited mitotic po-
Although dermal papilla cell proliferation and cell
tential before undergoing differentiation. The bulge
death may be rare during the hair cycle, there are
activation hypothesis also suggests that the loss of pro-
significant changes in the amount and nature of as-
liferative potential by TA ces may be the cue for im-
sociated extracellular matrix (ECM) during the hair
 pending catagen. However, recent studies have shown
cycle. Specifically, ECM is markedly reduced at the
that catagen induction may originate elsewhere in the
end of hair growth; in fact, follicular dermal papilla
epithelium, for example, via the TGF-β family (Soma
ECM differs strikingly from that in the dermis ( West-
et al. 2002) in the follicular papilla itself, perhaps via
 gate et al. 1991b) and it is likely that one or more of the
molecules including FGF-5 (Suzuki et al. 1998). Un-
papilla-associated proteoglycans may playa role in the
derlining the main focus ofthis book, most hair follicle
control of the hair growth cycle. For example, chon-
 pathologies will have their origin in hair follicle cycle
droitin proteoglycan diminishes during catagen and
dysregulation, and thus some aspects of their pathol.
is absent in telogen. It has been suggested that during
 ogy may be explained by the bulge-activation hypoth-
anagen these ECM molecules may confer on the hair
 esis. A reappraisal of hair follicle stem cells may be
follicle a protective environment for maintenance and
advised on the basis of new data showing a popula-
 growth associated with maintaining immune privilege
tion of Lgr5+ actively dividing cells located in the hair
(Westgate et al. 1991a).
follicle bulge and secondary germ that have multipo-
tent stem cells characteristics, i.e., can give rise to new
hair follicles, maintain all hair follicle cell lineages, and
1.2.2 Hair follicle stem cells
retain stem cell traits (Jaks et al. 2008).
follicle tissue has prompted several researchers to sug-
1.2.2.2 Nonepithelial stem cells
gest that the hair follicle may be exploited as a repos
itory of primitive cell populations for replacement in
 In addition to the epithelium the hair follicle generates
 other tissues and organs. During catagen the folicular
 neuroectodermal melanocytes, as well as neural, vas-
d uuad, a pem dn pnd si ee
cular, and muscle components (i.e., arrector pili mus-
of the hair follicle and particularly to a region called
cle). Stem cells for melanocytes have also been located
the “bulge"——-part of the permanent epithelium at the 
in the bulge (Nishimura et al. 2002). It has been shown
base of the telogen hair follicle (Figs 1.2.2 and 1.2.3f,g).
(at least for mouse) that some of these are recruited
Despite much recent progress in dissecting the main
 to proliferate at early anagen and can also be recruited
 events driving the continual hair cycling that form the
 to empty niches (like damaged epidermis). Moreover,
basis of a fairly robust hypothesis, we still are some
immature cells also located in the bulge can be induced
way from explaining some critical aspects of the hair
to express neural cell markers (e.g-, nestin) and these
growth cycle including its intrinsic periodicity, how
 may even be able to transdifferentiate to Schwann cells
 24  Hair fllicle biology
among others (Amoh et al. 2005). Epithelial stem cells
a potent environmental responder and transducer of
ofthe hair follicle may also transdifferentiate into other
biologically relevant information. Perhaps we could
histologic cell types (e.g-, endothelial cells) and some
have expected this, given the enormous evolutionary
cells associated with the anatomic region of the follic-
selective pressure for furred mammals to maintain an
ular papilla may transform into hematopoietic cells,
adequate coat at all costs.
adipocytes, or osteoblasts ( Jahoda et al. 2003).
1.2.3.1 Sex hormones and hair growth
1.2.3 Systemic and intrinsic influences
All but the most casual observer of hair growth will
be aware of links with hormones. In some mammals
on hair growth
synchronicity of hair growth is observed as lifelong
While the autonomy of individual hair follicles is fre-
molt waves that are sensitive to environmental stim-
quently emphasized, they are still able to intercon-
uli (e.g-, photoperiod). It is here that the link be-
nect with multiple systemic regulatory networks of the
 tween hair growth and endocrine systemic effects is
body. Remarkably, the hair follicle can respond to most
especially clear (Ebling 1990). Hair growth is sensi-
hormones known to biomedicine. Even more surpris-
tive to the transduction of environmental signals that
ing is its capacity to produce a wide range of hormones
occur via the pineal gland. The level of circulating
via synthesis, conversions, and so on. Prominent ex-
prolactin is another factor important in the regulation
amples include sex hormones, proopiomelanocortin
of the molting response in mammals. Modulation of
(POMC) peptides, corticotropin-releasing factor, and
the hair molt can also be seen as the result of mul-
prolactin (cf. Slominski and Wortsman 2000). Neu-
tiple hormone effects peripherally. In rats, estradiol,
ropeptides, neurotransmitters, and neurohormones
testosterone, and adrenal steroids delay anagen onset,
are also increasingly been implicated in mediating hair
while thyroid hormones accelerate hair follicle activity
follicle events particularly those that may be stress re-
(Safer et al. 2001). However, it is apparent that these
lated (Paus et al. 1997; Arck et al. 2003).
hormones have different points of actions, for exam-
 Mass depilation of telogen hairs induces the rapid
ple, estradiol decreases anagen length, while tyroxine
onset of anagen in these hair follicles. This is an ex-
can have the opposite effect.
cellent example of the effect of local factors on the
The nature ofthe effect of androgens on hair growth
regulation of the hair growth cycle, and can be as-
in humans is very complex, and is further com-
 cribed to numerous causes including the reduction in
 pounded by their ability to undergo considerable con-
the level of local growth inhibitors (chalones) (Paus
versions once in the target tissue (Randall et al. 2000).
et al. 1990). Further, there is increasing support for
One such conversion that is highly significant for hair
the involvement of local autocrine and paracrine fac-
 growth in man is the metabolism of testosterone to the
tors, particularly cytokines, in the regulation of the
more potent 5α-dihydro-testosterone by the enzyme
hair growth cycle (Moore et al. 1991). Hair growth
50-reductase (type II). In the postpubertal human
in mice, for example, is associated with the sequential
male, a deficiency in this enzyme results in female-
expression of TGF-β and its receptors during the dif-
distributed hair growth, poor beard growth, and re-
ferent phases of the cycle. TGF- βBs are not only potent
tention of frontal hairline. Androgens can alter (both
growth inhibitors for most cell types, but also regu-
increase and decrease) hair follicle size and thus hair
late cell differentiation, migration, extracellular matrix
shaft caliber and pigment level. They also can mod-
production and modulate immune function. Interest-
ulate the hair growth cycle in some cases. This effect
ingly, the administration of large doses of EGF induces
can be observed during hair miniaturization in an-
a catagen-like state both in vivo (e.g., in sheep, where
drogenetic alopecia (ie., “male pattern baldness"). It
it was a failed strategy to provide a less labor-intensive
is likely that androgen-induced effects on hair growth
form of wool shearing) and in vitro. By contrast, the
 are mediated in part through other growth factors for
addition of insulin growth factor (IGF-I or IGF-II)
follicular epithelium (e.g-, via IGF-1) in a paracrine
maintains in vivo ana gen growth rates ex vivo, and the
fashion.
hair follicle can be precipitated into a premature cata-
 Pregnancy in humans is associated with a higher
gen in their absence. Thus, the hair follicle represents
 percentage of hair follicles in the anagen growth phase
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle  25
and this may be followed by the simultaneous entry
rare occurrence of folliculitis in the skin of nonim-
 postpartum of many hair follicles into telogen. Here,
 munocompromised individuals.
li jo uoezs rd e aq on sidde ana
follicle cycling stage due to increased estradiol levels
1.2.5 Aging of the hair follicle
 during pregnancy, follwed by hair loss possibly due
to a reduction in estradiol and thyroxine levels post-
All mammals are born with their full complement of
natally.
hair follicles, with the notable exception of the minute
antler “velvet" hair follicles. The latter are shed with
the old antlers and are reborn again with the emer-
1.2.4 Hair follicle immune privilege
gence of new antler buds in the subsequent season
(Randall et al. 2003). However, for all mammals there
The immune status of the growing hair follicle differs
is usually a striking difference, anatomically, between
dramatically from the skin immune system in that the
the skin coverage of the neonate and that of the fully
epithelium of the proximal anagen hair follicle lacks
 grown adult. Thus, the density of hair follicles per
classical MHC class I (i.e., HLA-A, B, C) antigen ex-
unit area of skin is greatly reduced during our journey
pression (Paus et al. 2005). All other nucleated cells
from neonate to mature adulthood (Giacometti 1965;
express MHC class I, with the rare exceptions of parts
Van Neste and Tobin 2004). There also appears to be a
of the testis, eye, and brain and fetotrophoblasts. It has
 progressive lossof hair follicles with age, atleast for hu-
been proposed that, like these other sites, the hair fol-
mans. Although a bald human scalp may appear fully
licle may enjoy immune privilege. Immune privilege
denuded, as many of 300 hair follicles/cm? can still be
found. Alas, these hair follicles produce cosmetically
of antigens that may result in the attack of cells pre-
unsatisfactory “vellus" hair fibers rather than robust
 senting these antigens in the context of MHC. This is
and pigment “terminal" hairs.
 important in preventing the induction of autoimmu-
Many animals, including humans, become increas-
nity if immunogenic autoantigens were to be exposed.
ingly telogenic with age. Indeed, telogen, with its non-
The proximal ORS, inner root sheath (IRS), and all
growing hair shaft retained in situ, may even be the
 hair bulb keratinocytes express no detectable MHC
 most energy-effcient hair follicle status for mammals
class I. Thus, for as long as they exist, the IRS and
as a group. This may appear a reasonable occurence,
the hair bulb matrix remain MHC class I negative.
given that telogen would be associated with a reduced
 By contrast, perifolicular dermal sheath fibroblasts
risk of malignant transformation in hair follicle cells.
and immune cells are MHC class I positive. The lower
Furthermore, anagen-associated hair bulb matrix ker-
 hair follicle also produces immunosuppressive pep-
atinocytes display one of the highest rates of prolifera
tides derived from POMC including α-melanocyte-
tion in the body (faster than many malignant tumors)
stimulating hormone ( MSH) and adrenocorticotropic
 and are exposed to melanogenesis-related reactive oxy.
hormone (ACTH) (Paus et al. 1999; Kauser et al. 2004,
2005). Furthermore, the extracellular matrix of the
follicular papilla and that encapsulating the hair fol-
1.2.6 Pigmentation of hair
licle in the dermal sheath may provide a further pro-
tective role to the lower hair follicle (Westgate et al.
Of all mammalian phenotypic traits, skin and hair
1991b). Similar basement membrane matrix barriers
color communicate more immediate information to
surround other tissues with immune privilege.
the observer than any other. Mammals display a rich
There is also some evidence that the hair follicle
and varied palette of surface color that not only high-
uses a primitive epithelial defense system against bac-
lights striking superficial variations between the gen-
teria (Paus 1997). Normally, the hair canals contain a
ders and age groups, but also underscores how mam-
resident microflora of nonpathogenic bacteria includ-
malian species differ from one another. Despite such
ing Propionibacterium acnes, Staphylococcus aureus, S.
variation, all hair color is derived from the pigment
epidermidis, Demodex mites, and Malassezia species.
 melanin, synthesized via a phylogenetically ancient
The hair follicle appears to have a very effective anti-
biochemical process termed melanogenesis (Wood et
infection capacity as can be seen by the comparatively
al. 1999). Synthesis occurs within melanosomes, i.e.,
 26  Hair follicle biology
specialized organelles unique to highly dendritic, neu-
implications for the regulation of hair pigmentation,
ral crest-derived cells called melanocytes (Slominski et
is the observation that the activity of the hair bulb
al. 2004). Study of coat color in mice has contributed
melanocyte is tightly coupled to the hair growth cycle
hugely to our elucidation of the regulatory factors in-
(Slominski and Paus 1993). Constitutive melanogene-
volved in the continuous pigmentation in the mam-
sis in the epidermis, by contrast, appears to be contin-
malian epidermis and cyclically regulated pigmenta-
uous (Nordlund and Ortonne 1998), though this can
tion of the hair follicle.
be further upregulated (i.e., facultative) via a number
The sheer variety of colors among mammals under-
of stimuli including UV radiation.
scores the value of pigment to the mammal. Hair color
 Although the murine and human hair folicle pig-
provides camouflage (e.g-, seasonal coat color change
mentary units are clearly the best characterized, it
in the arctic hare) and social and sexual communi
is likely that a very similar situation exists in other
cation (e.g-, silver-backed gorilla). While humans do
mammalian species (Barsh 2007; Candille et al. 2007;
not rely on such adaptations for their actual survival
Schmutz and Berryere 2007). Briefly, DOPA-positive
these still play a significant role in our social and sexual
melanotic melanocytes occur in three hair follicle
communication.
locations, namely, the basal layer of the ORS of the
However, the dramatic diversity of hair colors is one
infundibulum, the sebaceous gland, and in the hair
of the enduring enigmas of the mammalian pheno-
bulb around the follicular papilla. DOPA-negative and
type. Molecular geneticists have started to unravel this
amelanotic hair follicle melanocytes are distributed in
enigma and have shown that skin and hair pigmenta-
the mid-to-lower ORS and also in the peripheral and
tion phenotypes are linked to genetic variations ( called
most proximal hair bulb (Fig. 1.2.4). While DOPA-
polymorphisms) in several genes, most especially the
oxidase activity of tyrosinase may not be detectable in
 gene encoding the melanocortin-1 receptor (MCR-1).
amelanotic hair follicle melanocytes, the protein itself
e s pe oi, e se sie ioidai I- a
may be detected in some of these cells (Tobin 2004).
 or engaged via binding a small number of POMC-
 Moreover, amelanotic melanocytes may express c-Kit
derived peptides including α-MSH and ACTH. More
and Bcl-2 (Grichnik et al. 1996), though these cells do
recently, a new locus (the K locus) has been identi-
not tend to express the melanogenesis enzymes such as
fied in domestic dogs coding for beta-defensin 103
tyrosinase-related protein-1 (TRP-1) and tyrosinase.
(CBD103) whose protein product can bind with high
related protein-2 (TRP-2, also called dopachrome tau-
affinity to MCR-i (Candille et al. 2007). This gene
tomerase) (Horikawa et al. 1996).
regulates pigment-type switching in domestic dogs.
Although several melanocyte subpopulations are
located in the hair follicle, the hair bulb is the only
site of pigment production for the hair shaff. The
1.2.6.1 Biology of the hair follicle
melanogenically active melanocytes are restricted to
pigmentary unit
the upper hair matrix of the anagen hair folicle, just
While follicular melanocytes are derived from epi-
below the precortical keratinocyte population (Tobin
 dermal melanocytes during hair follicle development,
et al. 1995; Tobin and Bystryn 1996)(Figs 1.2.1-1.2.4).
 n  s  n 
This location correlates with the fact that melanin is
important ways as they distribute to their respective
transferred during anagen to the hair shaft cortex, less
though open distinct compartments. For example,
so to the medulla, and very rarely to the hair cuticle in
 hair bulb melanogenic melanocytes are larger,
have
the human follicle. By contrast, melanin is predomi-
longer and more extensive dendrites, contain more
nant in the medulla of the murine hair follicle, where
developed Golgi and rough endoplasmic reticulum,
it forms the majority of the hair fiber's melanin.
and produce melanosomes two to four times larger
 In a manner analogous to the epidermal melanin
than those in epidermal melanocytes. While melanin
unit of the skin, the melanogenically active
degrades almost completely in the differentiating lay-
melanocytes in the hair bulb form functional units
ers of the epidermis, melanin granules (especially eu-
with neighboring immature precortical keratinocytes.
melanin) transferred into hair cortical keratinocytes
The follicular melanin unit resides in the proximal
remain minimally digested (Tobin and Paus 2001).
 anagen bulb and, in man, consists of approximately
By far the most striking difference between these two
 one melanocyte to five keratinocytes in the hair bulb
melanocyte subpopulations, and one with significant
as a whole and a l:1 ratio in the basal layer of the
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle 27
(b)
(a)
Epi-Mc
IF-Mc
SG-Mc
ORS-AMc
ORS-AMc
DF
Mastcells
B-AMc
B-MMc
Fg. 1.2.4 Melanocytes in the anagen hair folicle. (a) Cartoon of the distribution of melanocytes in the anagen human hair follicle; (b)
immunohistologic localization of melanocytes using an antibody against the melanocyte-lineage marker gp-100 in different regions
of the human anagen scalp hair follicle. Epi-Mc, epidermal melanocyte; IF-Mc, infundibular melanocyte; SG, sebaceous gland;
B-AMc, bulbar amelanotic melanocyte; HS, hair shaft. The cartoon also depicts perifollicular blood vessels, nerves and mast cells.
(Modified from Tobin (2003).)
 28  Hair fllicle biology
hair bulb next to the follicular papilla. Melanogenic
romelanin (Prota 1995). Despite the broad association
bulbar melanocytes interact closely with the follicular
of eumelanin with brown/black hair and pheome-
 papilla via the thin basal lamina that separates them
lanins with red/blonde hair, relatively minor differ-
from the mesenchymal follicular papilla (Fig. 1.2.5).
ences in melanin content can have significant effects
By contrast, each human epidermal melanocyte is as-
on the visible hair color. Moreover, melanocytes in
sociated with 36 “viable" keratinocytes in the epider-
the blackest of hair (in Caucasians best characterized
mal melanin unit (Fitzpatrick and Breathnach 1963).
by Indian hair fibers) can produce both eumelanins
The cytoplasm of melanocytes in the hair bulb
and pheomelanins within the same hair fiber and even
commonly contains a high proportion of fully ma
within the same melanocyte.
ture, highly melanized (i.e., stage IV) melanosomes,
in contrast to epidermal melanocytes that rarely
collect significant numbers of mature melanosomes
1.2.6.2 Regulation of hair pigmentation
(Fig. 1.2.5b,c). Rather, in the latter these maturing
 melanosomes are swifly transferred to surrounding
The pigmentation of hair fibers is affected by numer-
epidermal keratinocytes. Melanocyte dendricity is an
ous intrinsic factors including species differences, hair
important phenotypic regulator of melanin transfer
cycle-dependent changes, body distribution, gender
to keratinocytes. Notably, myosin Va (encoded by
differences, variable hormone responsiveness, genetic
the “dilute” gene), Rab27a (encoded by the “ashen"
 defects, and age-associated change (Slominski et al.
gene), and melanophilin (encoded by the “leaden"
2004). Study of hair pigmentation may be further
 gene) have al been proposed as molecular motors in-
complicated by the effects ofextrinsic variables includ-
volved in dendrite outgrowth and melanosome move-
ing climate and season, infestations, pollutants,toxins,
ment in mammalian melanocytes (Wu et al. 1997;
and chemical exposure. Given that melanosome bio-
 Lambert et al. 1999). When mutated they can be as-
 genesis and melanogenesis involves multiple steps, it is
sociated with dilution of hair color, for example, in
 perhaps not surprising that positive and negative reg-
Griscelli syndrome in humans (Menasche et al. 2003)
ulators of hair follicle melanogenesis will involve mul-
or in black hair follicle dysplasia and coat color dilu-
tiple biological factors that can target one or more of
tion in dogs (Philipp et al. 2005).
these checkpoints in the process. These include growth
Transfer of melanin granules to cortical and
factors, cytokines, hormones, neuropeptides and neu-
medullary keratinocytes of the growing hair shaft is
rotransmitters, cyclic nucleotides, nutrients microele.
 presumed to involve the same mechanism as that in
ments, and cations/anions (Nordlund and Ortonne
the epidermis, although its ultimate fate (i.e., degrada-
1998). These may act via autocrine, paracrine, and en-
tion) is strikingly different compared to its status in the
docrine mechanisms (Nordlund and Ortonne 1998;
epidermis. Eumelanin granules transferred into hair
Slominski et al. 2004).
cortical keratinocytes remain minimally digested, con-
 In stark contrast to its primary regulatory role in
trasting with epidermis where melanin is almost com-
epidermal pigmentation, UVB radiation does notpen-
pletely degraded in the differentiating keratinocytes.
etrate to the melanogenic cells of the anagen hair bulb,
A striking phenotypic verification of this differential
commonly located deep in the subcutaneous fat layer
tissue processing of melanin can be seen in eume-
of the skin. Thus, UV radiation is unlikely to influence
lanic Caucasians with raven black hair coexpressed
the follicular melanin unit, at least directly. Examples
with very fair skin.
 of positive regulators of melanogenesis are α-MSH,
An evaluation of the biosynthetic pathway involved
ACTH, prostaglandin E, and endothelin-1 and -3
 in the production of melanins (called melanogene-
(Nordlund and Ortonne 1998; Hearing 1999; Slomin-
sis) is beyond the scope of this chapter. However, the
ski and Wortsman 2000; Slominski et al. 2004). By
 interested reader is directed to a recent and compre-
contrast, negative regulation is provided by melatonin,
hensive review on the subject (Slominski et al. 2004).
interleukin-1 and -6, TNF-α, and TGF-β (Swope
Briefly, melanins are the end products of multistep
et al. 1991; Slominski and Pruski 1993; Valverde et al.
transformations of L-phenylalanine/L-tyrosine. These
1995a,b; Carroll et al. 1997; Martinez-Esparza et al.
polymorphous and multifunctional biopolymers in-
1999).
clude the cutaneous melanins (eumelanin, pheome-
Follicular pigmentation occurs only during the an
lanin, and mixed melanins) (Biliska 2001) and neu-
agen hair growth phase (Figs 1.2.1 and 1.2.6). The
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle  29
[a】
a
[d}
Fig. 1.2.5 The hair follicle pigmentary unit in the growing
human scalp hair follicle. (a, a) High-resolution light mi-
croscopic view of the lower anagen pigmented scalp hair
bulb showing the distribution of melanin to the cortical
keratinocytes (Co) but not to the inner root sheath (IRS).
outer root sheath (ORS), or lower hair matrix (Mx). (b) UI-
trastructural view of a hair bulb melanocyte replete with
eumelanosomes in different stages of maturation. (c) High-
power ultrastructural view of an active hair bulb melanocyte
containing melanosomes at different maturation stages
(I-IV) and containing extensive Golgi apparatus (arrow).
(d) High-resolution transverse semithin section of human
scalp hair shaft. Mature (stage IV) melanin granules (Mel)
remain undigested as they distribute between cortical
macrofibrils but not in the hair cuticle (Mc, melanocyte;
CTS, connective tissue sheath).
30Hairfolliclebiology
TELOGEN
ANAGEN
Sebaceous
gland
Arrector
pili
muscle
IRS
Auber'sline
Proliferation
EMc
Follicular
dermal
papilla
HFMc
CATAGEN
Bulge
Apoptosis
Apoptosis
Fig. 1.2.6 Schematic representation of changes in hair bulb melanocyte status during the hair growth cycle. EMc, epidermal
melanocyte; HFMc, hair follicle melanocyte.Inset: Dorsum pelage of C57BL6 mouse at different stages after cycle initiation post
depliation. A, anagen characterized by black skin; C, catagen characterized by gray skin; T, telogen skin characterized by pink 
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle  31
extended anagen phase of human scalp hair, together
imminent hair follicle regression include the retrac-
with its mosaic pattern of hair growth, has hindered
tion of melanocyte dendrites and the attenuation of
a systematic analysis of melanocyte dynamics dur-
 melanogenesis during late anagen VI (Sugiyama and
ing the human hair cycle. By contrast, the relatively
Kukita 1976). Limited keratinocyte proliferation con-
short growth phase (15-17 days), synchronous hair
tinues for a while, leaving the most proximal telo-
 growth pattern, and restriction of melanogenically ac-
gen hair shaft characteristically unpigmented. One
tive truncal melanocytes to the hair follicles ( Reynolds
can already detect a dramatic and rapid drop in lev.
1954) all make black-haired mice an invaluable tool
els of active tyrosinase beginning during late anagen
for hair pigmentation studies (Paus et al. 1990). The
VI itself. The termination of melanogenesis may re-
junctions of the hair cycle phases exhibit striking
flect an induction of melanogenesis inhibitory fac-
 changes in the status of the follicular melanin unit
tors (see below)(Slominski et al. 2004). Alternatively,
(Fig. 1.2.6).
the low supply of L-tyrosine in the now reducing
 Briefly, the relatively quiescent telogen hair germ
hair bulb environment inhibits melanogenesis, un-
contains all cell precursors needed to reconstitute a
til an increased production of GTP-cyclohydrolase-
fully developed anagen VI hair follicle, including the
1,6-tetrahydrobiopterin and phenylalanine hydroxy-
follicular melanin unit (Slominski and Paus 1993).
lase occurs again during telogen in preparation for
Telogen murine truncal skin does not contain ty-
optimal melanogenesis conditions during the subse-
rosinase (either mRNA or protein), TRP-1 protein,
quent anagen phase (Schallreuter et al. 1998).
and melanin (Silver and Chase 1970). During the 
 An enduring enigma of both hair folicle and pig-
frst one or two days of anagen induction, tyrosi-
ment biology concerns the fate of the pigmented
 nase mRNA and protein become just about detectable
hair bulb melanocytes during catagen (Figs 1.2.3a-d
and occasional tyrosinase-positive premelanosomes
and 1.2.6). When folicular melanogenesis is resumed
 can be detected in amelanotic melanocytes (Slominski
during the next anagen phase, the particularly rele-
et al. 1991). Interestingly, the follicular papilla pools
vant questions to be answered are, where do formerly
high concentrations of L-phenylalanine (Schallreuter
melanogenically active melanocytes go during cata-
et al. 1998) at this stage, conditions that support the
 gen and telogen? and Where do they originate from?
production of high amounts of L-tyrosine. In this
Although melanogenically active melanocytes are no
way, the anagen-associated stimulation of undiffer-
 longer detectable in the proximal hair follicle during
 entiated telogen melanocytes (i.e., melanoblasts) pre-
 catagen, their “disappearance" is not unannounced
 dates the melanogenic stimulus delivered during ana-
and residual melanin generated during anagen can be
 gen I1. This is followed by active melanogenesis and
 i eded r a u , us
the subsequent transfer of mature melanosomes into
2004). Our current view suggests that many of the
keratinocytes of the precortical matrix.
melanocytes in early anagen, previously described as
Melanocytes in the S-phase of the cell cycle have
“redifferentiating” by earlier authors, actually corre-
been reported as early as anagen II (Silver and Chase
 spond to newly recruited immature melanocytes de-
1970, Sugiyama et al. 1995, Commo and Bernard
rived from a melanocyte stem reservoir (Grichnik
 2000) and significant proliferation is clearly appar-
et al. 1996; Tobin et al. 1999) and are not reacti-
ent in anagen II (Jimbow et al. 1975). Mitosis is
vated from preexisting hair bulb melanocytes that
also observed in melanogenically active cells, indi-
were melanogenically active during the previous an-
cating that melanocyte differentiation does not in all
agen phase. This is supported by the recent identifi-
 cases preclude mitotic activity (Tobin et al. 1999). Bul-
cation of a population of immature TRP-2-positive
bar melanocytes during the anagen II to anagen VI
 melanocytes (though these are apparently more ma-
transition increase in their dendricity, develop more
ture than true stem melanocytes themselves) in the
Golgi bodies and rough endoplasmic reticulum, in-
crease the size and number of their melanosomes
cells.
(Sugiyama and Kukita 1976), and begin to transfer
 It is possible that at least some of the “new gener-
mature melanosomes to precortical keratinocytes.
ation" of melanogenically active melanocytes derive
Even before catagen-associated structural changes
from a population of catagen-surviving postmela-
 are apparent in the hair bulb, the earliest signs of
nogenically active cells. Indeed, low numbers of
32  Hair follicle biology
apparently dendritic melanocytes can be detectable in
tion of melanogenic melanocytes to the hair follicle
the retreating epithelial strand of catagen hair follicles
bulb in anagen. Thus, we need to interpret the rodent
undergoing active resorption via apoptosis (Commo
coat color literature very carefully before extrapolating
and Bernard 2000; Tobin 2004). Alternatively, these
to other mammals. For example, studies in guinea pigs
weakly or nonmelanogenic cells, which lack tyrosinase
have shown that α-MSH increased the proportion of
and TRP- 1 expression, may in fact represent the poorly
black to gray hairs when administered intramuscularly
differentiated melanocytes that codistribute with pig-
(Snell 1972), while the injection of both α-MSH and
 mented bulbar melanocytes in anagen hair matrix
a potent synthetic analogue ([Nle4,D-Phe′]-α-MSH)
(Tobin et al. 1995), especially in the most peripheral
into human skin was observed to increase melano-
and proximal matrix. Explaining most, if not all, of
genesis particularly of sun-exposed skin with no effect
 the aforementioned observed changes during catagen
seen in hair follicles (Levine et al. 1991).
is perhaps the demonstration that the highly melan-
Recently, we have proposed a role for the β-
 otic (presumably terminally differentiated) hair bulb
endorphin/μ-opiate receptor system in the regulation
melanocytes do not survive catagen (Tobin et al. 1998,
 of both epidermal and follicular melanocyte biology
1999).
(Kauser et al. 2003, 2004), suggesting that POMC pep-
Curiously, not all the pigment formed during
tides may also modulate melanocyte biology in a non-
anagen-associated melanogenesis is actually incorpo-
MC1R-dependent manner. Moreover, the hormone
rated into the hair shaft. The “excess" pigment appears
corticotrophin-releasing factor can also induce phe-
to be removed from the hair follicle, though not imme-
notypic change in hair follicle melanocytes in vitro by
diately. Its origin appears to be related to melanocyte
upregulating cell dendricity and pigmentation levels
degeneration by apoptosis and the resultant pigment-
(Kauser et al. 2006), though it is not yet clear if this
containing apoptotic fragments enter the follicular
activity operates via direct or indirect mechanisms.
papilla, epithelial strand, or connective tissue sheath of
Agouti signaling protein is likely to be an impor-
catagen. Pigment incontinence may also be detected
 tant negative regulator of nonhuman hair pigmenta-
in the epithelial sac of the telogen hair follicle. The
tion. It can act as an antagonist to o-MSH and an
 precise mechanism of this pigment redistribution is
inverse agonist at the MC1-R (Barsh 1999; Hearing
unclear, although it is likely to involve phagocytosis,
1999). Transient synthesis of agouti protein switches
particularly by macrophages ( Paus 1997; Christoph et
 eumelanogenesis (brown/black) to pheomelanogen-
al. 2000) and Langerhans cells (Tobin 1998), whose
esis (red/yellow) (Silvers 1979), a change that can
numbers increase during hair follicle regression (Paus
be associated with decreased tyrosinase activity over-
1997).
all. Moreover, the products of attractin (Atrn) and
Among positive regulators of follicular melanogen-
mahogunin (Mgrnl) may also act as modulators of
esis are the POMC-derived peptides ACTH, v-MSH,
pigmentation, as they appear to prevent hair follicle
 β-MSH, and B-endorphin (Eberle 1988; Slominski
melanocytes from responding to the agouti protein
and Paus 1993; Cone et al. 1996; Paus et al. 1999;
(He et al. 2003). This system has so far been described
Slominski and Wortsman 2000; Slominski et al. 2000;
most thoroughly in rodents, though a similar system
Kauser et al. 2003, 2004, 2005). A full discussion of
 is also thought to operate in other mammals (Schmutz
the role of POMC peptides in pigmentation is be-
and Berryere 2007).
yond the scope of this chapter. Interested readers can
Other negative regulators of hair pigmenta-
learn more in Slominski et al. (2004). Briefly, these
tion include melatonin, glucocorticoids, INF-y, and
 neuropeptides are also produced locally in anagen
dopaminergic and cholinergic agonists (Silvers 1979;
skin or can be released locally from nerve endings
 Logan and Weatherhead 1980; Burchill and Thody
(Furkert et al. 1997; Paus et al. 1999; Mazurkiewicz et
1986; Carroll et al. 1997; Ermak and Slominski 1997;
al. 2000; Slominski et al. 2000). Murine studies have
Barsh 1999). Melatonin, albeit at pharmacological
underpinned much of our current knowledge on the
doses, inhibits tyrosinase activity (Slominski et al.
1994, 2008), and anagen epidermis and hair folli-
However, this species lacks functional melanocytes in
cles express melatonin-binding sites (Slominski et al.
the truncal epidermis and shows restricted distribu-
2003).
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle  33
1.2.7 The hair fiber
oval, or flattened. As a result, hair fibers have a major
and minor axis. However, for ease of comparison, an
The hair fber is a truly amazing natural composite
average “equivalent circular diameter” (ECD) may be
with unique physical and chemical properties. The
quoted. In humans, the average Caucasian ECD value
product of millennia of evolutionary selective pres-
for scalp hairs is approximately 70 μm (though it can
sures, the hair fiber exhibits a wide variability in form
be up to 180 μm) (cf. Robbins 2002). Specific struc-
--the scientific basis for the latter remains broadly enig-
tural traits can also generate hairs that vary between
matic. Despite its robust nature, the hair shaft is not
straight, wavy, and crimped.
indestructible and lesions on/in the hair can provide
 In humans, fine hairs commonly average less than
us with a plethora of valuable information as a sensor
30 μm and tend to be termed “vellus" if less than
of the external world we live in etc., and importantly,
1 mm in length, though vellus hairs can be as fine as just
can be the most apparent diagnostic clue to intrin-
4 μm across. It is important to emphasize that normal
sic systemic biological disorders and deficiencies. It is
coats contain hairs throughout this caliber range. Fur-
the unique growth characteristics of hair that permits
thermore, different types of hair fiber can be produced
such enormous scope for examination, from study
during mammalian life, even for the same hair folli-
 of interactions with topical modifications (personal
cle, as classically observed in this “vellus-to-terminal
care/cosmetic scientists) to assessment of individuals
transformation" of hairs on the face of the postpuber-
medical status (dermatologists, trichologists) in hu-
tal male and “terminal-to-vellus miniaturization" of
mans to yielding medicolegal (forensic scientists), his-
 hair on the balding human scalp.
torical (bio-archeologists) aspects for both human and
nonhuman hair as well as in conservation for endan-
1.2.7.1 The hair fiber cuticle
 gered species (Jones 2001). As in most aspects of hair
follicle biology research, we owe much to investiga-
The surface of the hair fiber consists of the hair cuticle,
tors of hair growth in particular nonhuman mammal
which forms an overlapping cortex-encircling sheath
systems, and for the hair fiber, the wool literature has
of flattened cells (sometimes also called scales) ar-
been most informative.
ranged in a longitudinal-circumferential manner with
The terminal hair shaft, as exemplified by human
free ends of the scales oriented in a root-to-tip direc
scalp hair, contains a significant water content (up
tion. It should be remembered that the surface of the
to 30% by weight) with the remainder consisting of
cuticle is likely to reflect the significant interactions
 proteins. A hair fiber consists of an outer cuticle en-
- nu a um , s hunp pa
sheathing an inner cortex. All hairs, irrespective of
 licle's second cuticular layer provided by one of the
their caliber (i.e., diameter), length, color, or stage of
three component layers of the IRS of the hair folli-
growth within the hair follicle, are constructed of a
cle. Indeed, the hair fiber remains tightly anchored in
bulk cortex surrounded by a protective covering of
the skin via reciprocal hair cuticle to IRS cuticle in-
flattened cuticle cells. However, a third component,
teractions, deep within the growing hair follicle. Hair
the medulla, is commonly located in the fiber center,
fibers of each mammal species exhibit their own pe-
especially of large terminal hair fibers. The relative size
culiarities, which facilitate easy identification, and so
of each of these three components differs throughout
is important for species conservation and protection
the mammalian class (Figs 1.2.5d and 1.2.7b,e,f). This
issues.
variation is, in large part, dependent on their associ-
 Each cuticle cell is a multilaminated, translucent,
ated requirements for thermoregulation.
 and pigment-free structure measuring approximately
 Before examining each of these layers in detail, it is
0.3-0.5 μm width and 60 μm long (Swift 1997). The
 perhaps appropriate to review some general terminol-
cells are slightly overlapping and create a 4° angle with
ogy used in descriptions of hair fiber morphology. The
the long axis of the hair fiber (Fig. 1.2.7a). Cuticle
cylindrical hair fiber exhibits an eliptical transverse
cells are at their most intact as the hair fiber emerges
sectional shape, the extent of which can vary consid-
from the follicle at the skin surface, and here there
erably between different mammals, so much so that
 may be as many as 10 cuticle cells ensheathing the
 hair cross section in specific groups may appear round,
human terminal scalp hair cortex. However, as one
34  Hair follicle biology
IMC
CL
C
[b)
RS
(C)
f)
us  iu dies un e jo ans au jo ma ios uaa b (e) a i a jo ans i' 
the distally oriented and overlapping cuticular scales. (b) Low-power transmission electron microscopic view of a transverse section
of a human scalp hair fiber showing the location of the cuticle (Cu) and the cortex (Co) containing numerous melanin granules
(c) High-power transmission electron microscopic view of a transverse section of a human scalp hair fiber showing the detailed
structure of the cuticle (Cu) layers; (d) High-power ultrastructure view of the cortical macrofilbrils and the inter-cortical cel membrane
complexes (IMC);: (e) High-resolution light microscopy view of a longitudinal resin section of a C57BL/6 murine hair follicle showing
the relative volume of the medula (Mu) replete with melanin, compared with the narrow cortex (Co). Other visible layers include
human scalp hair follicle showing the low volume of the medula (Mu) compared to the much greater of that of cortex (Co). Other
visible layers include the cuticular layers (Cu) and the IRS.
moves distally along the hair fiber, especially on the
18 nm), sandwiched between two lightly or nonstain-
human scalp, natural wear-and-tear forces reduce this
 ing narrower β-bands (Leeder 1986) (Fig. 1.2.7c).
number. Moreover, cuticle quality is further modified
by chipping of small fragments at the scale edges. The
1.2.7.2 The hair fiber cortex
multilaminated substructure of a cuticle cell can be
best appreciated by transmission electron microscopy
Without the cuticle, the hair fiber cortex would fray
(Fig. 1.2.7b and c). Individual cuticle cells connect to
 and fall apart. The cortex, which forms the bulk of
 one another at intercellular membrane complexes ( ap-
the fiber mass, is composed of elongated (50-100 μm
proximately 25 nm across), which contain a trilaminar
long) spindle-shaped (3-6 μm across) cortical ker-
substructure of a central dense &-band (approximately
atinocytes with fine finger-like projections. In human
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle 35
scalp hair fibers, these high sulfur-containing cells
medullary cell is a relatively poorly described, spheri-
are arranged symmetrically (unlike in sheep wool)
cal, and mostly hollow cell within the hair shaft core,
and contain both fibrillar and nonfibrillar material
which becomes highly vacuolated during its formation
arranged in a mostly orthocortical pattern (Robbins
as a result of progressive dehydration. Both the pres-
2002; Wolfram 2003). The cortex cells next to the cu-
ence of a medulla and also its degree of vacuolation
ticle exhibit a more flattened morphology and con-
influence the physical properties of the fber, particu-
tain lower levels of sulfur proteins than elsewhere
larly with regard to reflection of incident light. In this
in the cortex. Each cortical cell usually contains rec-
way, this component can contribute the fiber's sheen
ognizable features of its prehardened life, for exam-
 and subtle color tone. For animals, the air-trapping
ple, centrally located nuclear remnants and pigment
characteristic of the medulla provides a degree of in-
(melanin) granules. In the absence of pigment gran-
sulation to the pelage. During medulla cell formation,
ules (e.g-, in senile white hair) the entire cortex appears
distinctive large electron-dense granules can be seen
translucent with a yellowish tinge—-the intrinsic color
 by ultrastructural analysis. These granules contain tri-
of keratin. In transverse section, the packing of in-
 chohyalin, a nonfilamentous material that lacks cys-
dividual cortical cells can be seen to depend on the
teine but contains citrulline residues with isopeptide
presence of intercellular membrane complexes, which
cross-links of e-(y-glutamyl)-lysine, accounting for
appear tortuous due to incorporating the fluted inter-
low solubility of this fiber component (Steinert et al.
sections of the cells finger-like projections. Nonker-
2003).
atinaceous membrane complexes not only consist of
the two cell membranes, but also contain a glue-like
1.2.7.4 Biochemical constituents of the hair fiber
material that confers adhesion to the cortical cells.
The repeating structural unit ofthe hair cortex is the
The hair fiber is constructed as a highly integrated
cysteine-rich macrofibril unit (40-200 μ m across) that
system of several components including, in order of
extends the full length ofthe cell. Hair cortex, where in-
decreasing amount, keratins, water, lipids, pigment,
dividual macrofibril units are positioned very close to
and trace elements. The biosynthesis of hair proteins
one another (Fig. 1.2.7d), has been termed paracortex,
begins in the bulb ofthe anagen hair follicle and ceases
while macrofbril units interspersed with nonkeratin
in the keratogeneous zone, approximately 500 μm
inter-macrofibrillar matrix has been termed orthocor-
above the level of the zone of maximal keratinocyte
tex (cf. Robbins 2002).
proliferation (so-called sub-Auber's matrix) in hu-
Under high-power transmission electron mi-
man scalp terminal hair follicles. This location will
croscopy, individual keratinaceous macrofbrils can be
differ of course for hair follicles in other regions of the
seen to consist of a composite of spirally arranged Qα-
human body, and also for other mammalian species.
keratin intermediate filaments (o-KIF) (Fig. 1.2.7d).
 Low-sulfur and high-sulfur proteins are synthesized si-
These are 7.5 nm across, form a spiral 40 nm across,
 multaneously, though the synthesis of the latter peaks
and are termed microfbrils and matrix, and consist of
later. Despite the significant variability in hair form be-
KIF-associated protein (KAP), in a ratio generally less
tween humans of different ethnicities (e.g-, with regard
than 1.0 (Wolfram 2003).
to environment, diet, and hair texture) the chemical
composition of hair protein across the human ethnic
groups is remarkably uniform (Wolfram 2003). Thus
1.2.7.3 The hair fiber medulla
there are no significant differences in amino acid com-
Hair fbers of a particular diameter contain this
position of hair of different ethnicities.
nonessential component of the hair fber In humans,
 all scalp hairs, except the most fine or miniaturized,
1.2.7.4.1 Hair keratins
contain a medulla (Fig. 1.2.7f). However, unlike in
some nonhuman mammals with very coarse hairs
in hair and nail (i.e., claw) has benefited much from
(e.g-, horse) this component contributes little to the
 recent advances in molecular cloning, yielding unex-
overall mass of the hair fiber (Fig. 1.2.7e). The medulla
 pected new information about keratin genes and their
may be continuous (especially in fibers of large cal-
expression as a function to hair growth and cycling.
iber), discontinuous, or fragmented in finer hairs. The
 Hair keratins are the products of several gene families.
36  Hair follicle biology
each with closely related family members and with
acids. Both Type I and II hair keratins have similar
structural similarities shared across different fami-
levels of cysteine residues.
lies. Recently, there have been attempts to simplify
The “hard" hair keratins (7-8 nm across) can be dis-
the rather confusing nomenclatures for classifying ker-
tinguished from epidermal “soft" keratins by their lack
atins within the KIF gene system and to apply a similar
of extended runs of glycine residues; instead “"hard"
system to the one used in naming keratin-associated
hair keratins contain many cysteine residues (partic-
proteins (KAPs) (Schweizer et al. 2006). The reader
ularly at the N- and C-terminal domains) that enable
is directed to the following excellent and comprehen-
them to form extensive disulfide bond cross-linking
sive treatments of this topic (Powell and Rogers 1997;
with other cysteine-rich proteins. Due to the pres-
Langbein et al. 1999, 2001).
ence of nonpolar amino acid residues (e.g-, leucine
Hair keratins have been grouped into two ma-
and valine) within a repeating heptad sequence, the
jor classes: (a) low-sulfur, high-molecular-weight o-
filaments take up a coiled-coil conformation whereby
helical keratins (45-58 kDa) and (b) high-sulfur, low-
right-handed α-helices coil around each other in a
molecular-weight (10-20 kDa) random-coil keratins.
left-handed coil to form a rod structure ( Jones 2001).
The former, the fibrillar fraction, is termed “α-keratin
A pair of these (heterodimer α-helices) coiled rods
intermediate filaments" and is embedded in the ma-
 align in an anti-paralll manner to form a tetrameric
trix protein of the latter. Thus, the hair fiber exhibits
unit—the KIF subunit.
a very high sulfur content (5% in humans). KIF can
The dynamics of assembly of keratin intermediate
be further subgrouped into Type I (acidic) and Type
filaments in epidermis and in hair fbers are very dif-
II (basic to neutral) keratins, with nine hair keratin
ferent. Whereas these can disassemble during mitosis
Type I genes and six Type II genes currently recog-
 in epidermal keratinocytes, they are the product of
nized. Both gene families exhibit great similarities of
nonviable keratin-producing cortical keratinocytes in
physical organization. Type I hair keratin genes can
the keratogeneous zone of the hair follicle.
be further subclassified by gene organization and se-
quence homology into subgroups A, B, C, where A and
1.2.7.4.2 Keratin-associated proteins
B are highly related and C keratins are less related. The
Keratin-associated proteins (KAPs) are essential for
six Type II genes are also organized into subgroups
the formation of a rigid and resistant hair shaft be.
that are counterparts of subgroups A and C in Type I
 cause they form extensive disulfide bonds that cross-
genes.
link with the abundant cysteine residues of the hair
dnoia ll pue adaL palela klualy Suyeads Aipeoig
keratins. Hair proteins have been fractionated to re-
 A genes are all expressed in the cortex of terminal
veal an increasingly complex group of proteins. Rogers
scalp hair, while unrelated Type I and II genes ap-
and Powell described eight families of KAPs and clas-
 pear to be differentially expressed in hair matrix, cuti-
sified these on the basis of their amino acid compo-
cle or cortex. Remarkably, some specific keratin gene
sition as (a) high sulfur (16-30 mol% cysteine), (b)
 products are expressed in only singly scattered corti-
ultra-high sulfur (>30 mol% cysteine), and (c) high
cal keratinocytes (e.g., Type I group B keratin hHa8).
 glycine/tyrosine proteins (Powell and Rogers 1997).
 Recently, an exceptional Type I group B hair keratin
These were described mostly in wool, but also in
(hHa7), previously undetectable in terminal scalp hair,
rabbit fur.
was found to be expressed in sexual hair (Jave-Suarez
 Since then there has been considerable growth in
et al. 2004).
this field with at least 23 KAP families now known
The keratin intermediate filament (8- 10 nm across)
(Shimomura et al. 2002). These have been grouped
unit differs from other intermediate filaments in that
as follows: high sulfur KAPsfamily 1-3, 10-16, and
it is a heterodimeric unit formed as a pair of equimo-
23; ultra-high sulfur—family 4, 5, 9, and 17; and high
lar amounts of one Type I and one Type II keratin.
glycine/tyrosine KAPs—6-8 and 18-22. However, re-
Furthermore, these units are expressed in a highly
 search from the last couple of years has led to even
tissue-specific and differentiation status-specific man-
 greater complexity, with large clusters of novel human
ner. Type I hair keratins are acidic and range in size
KAP genes now defined (Rogers et al. 200l; Shimo-
from 392-416 amino acids, with mostly highly con-
mura et al. 2002, 2003).
served N-terminal sequences. Type II hair keratins are
KIFs and the interfilamentous matrix of the cor-
basic to neutral and range in size from 479-506 amino
tex composed of KAPs form a complex group of
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle  37
interactive proteins in the hair cortex and cuticle. As
granules of trichohyalin that later fuse to form large
alluded to above (hair) keratins contain many cysteine
mature medullary granules, though without any ap-
residues (particularly at the N- and C-terminal do-
 parent involvement of KIFs. The unusual conversion
mains) that enable them to form extensive disulfide
 of arginine to citrulline with IRS and medullary cell
bond cross-linking (both intra-chain and inter-chain)
differentiation is catalyzed, at least in part, by a pep-
with other cysteine-rich proteins of the matrix. In-
tidylarginine deaminase (Rogers et al. 1977).
 deed, some KAP families may contain up to 70 cysteine
residues (out of approximately 180 amino acids) that
1.2.7.4.3 Genetic variation in hair fiber proteins
would facilitate many covalent interactions within and
Several mouse mutations have been described that
between proteins.
map to KIF or KAP genes (Sundberg 1994). For ex-
Thus, there is a potential for a bewilderingly com-
ample, the nude phenotype in mice is due to reduced
plex set of interactions given the sheer numbers of
content of cysteine-rich proteins, resulting in weak-
proteins involved and their potential for interaction.
ened hair fibers. A similar mutation in the winged.
It is of some relief to note from in situ hybridization
helix nude (WHN) gene is associated with a hairless
 studies that genes for different KIFs and KAPs are se-
phenotype in humans (Frank et al. 1999). The con-
quentially activated as a function of hair growth. For
 genital hair disorder monilethrix is caused by muta-
example, Type II KIF genes are expressed sequentially
tions in the hair keratin hHb1 or hHb6 genes ( Winter
in precortical keratinocytes in separate stages. More-
et al. 1997), while copper deficiency in Menkes’ syn-
over, expression of hard hair and soft epidermal KIF
drome results in kinked hair with defective oxidation
genes is usually mutually exclusive during hair growth.
of sulfhydryl groups in disulfide bonds (Price 1990).
These observations may suggest a degree of order for
 Reduction in sulfur content leads to increased fber
sets of preferential protein interactions during hair
fragility as seen in some trichomalacias (see Chapter
fiber formation. There is good evidence for linkage
3.2).
 between KIFs and the keratinocyte plasma membrane
Evidence that hair fibers are coated with surface
via desmosomes (Smith and Fuchs 1998), suggesting
lipids is inferred from data showing that increasing
that desmosomes play an important role in hair ker-
hair fiber diameter is associated with a decrease in to-
atinocyte differentiation.
tal bound fatty acid. Thus, it is now well-appreciated
 Unlike the precortical keratinocyte, cuticle cells con-
that hair fibers have approximately a 3 nm or greater
tain a very different protein composition of mostly
coating of long chain fatty acids covalently bonded to
cysteine-rich proteins that form cytoplasmic gran-
the protein membrane of the epicuticle. Recent tech-
ules. While these cells do contain some KIFs, only
 nological advances have allowed exceptionally high
very rarely are filamentous structures detectable. Thus,
observational power views of the surface of the hair
protein-protein interactions here are mostly to permit
fiber surface, and how this is altered by changes in
the formation of lamellar structures-the product of
-do 'sraaoa r pid d uep erad
fusion between these granules. This difference is re-
ically applied cosmetic products, and so on. The main
flective of the cuticle's greater protective function.
function of the branched methyleicosanoic acid found
 The medulla of the hair fiber contains a major
 on the fiber surface “F-layer" is currently unknown,
arginine-rich multirepeat matrix protein called tri-
but it may be involved with increasing the degree of
chohyalin of 200-220 kDa, seen most dramatically as
hydrophobicity over straight-chain fatty acids and/or
a differentiation-associated protein in the IRS. Indeed,
altering the frictional quality of the fber (Wertz and
trichohyalin serves as an excellent marker of hair fol-
Downing 1989). Small amounts of cholesterol sulfate,
licle differentiation as it is expressed earlier than KIF
cholesterol, and fatty alcohol are also associated with
mRNA. However, the formation and functionality of
the F-layer, though the nature of bonding (e.g-, via
trichohyalin in the IRS and medulla are very different,
thioester linkages) is unclear.
perhaps reflective of the nonobligatory involvement of
the medulla in hair growth. In IRS cells, trichohyalin
1.2.7.5 Mechanical properties of the hair fiber
forms as granules of matrix protein with the role of
linking arrays of KIF. These then fuse to form multiple
What our eyes see when we look at hair or fur is the
trichohyalin-KIF granules in citrulline-rich lamellar
 interplay of several physical characteristics including
arrays. By contrast, medullary cells synthesize small
the hair fiber's geometry/curvature, its color/shade,
38  Hair follicle biology
and its shine/luster These attributes, however, can be
ences include the dramatic variation in comb ability
subcategorized further to include fber diameter, ten-
stressin African hair. While combing ofCaucasian and
sile strength, torsion, swelling, and friction ( Wolfram
Asian dry hair induces hair shaft parallelism, this does
2003).
not occur in curly African hair. Moreover, a surpris-
While the cuticle is most important for protecting
ing reversal occurs when the comb ability/combing
the hair fiber, the actual strength and elasticity of the
stress of wet hair is compared. Here, African hair be.
hair fiber is very much derived from the nature of
 comes much more easily combed when wet than does
the KIFs and KAPs and their interactions within the
wet hair in Asians and Caucasians. This difference is
hair cortex. Thus, stretching the hair fiber can cause
largely due to the significant configuration change of
the cuticle, particularly the endocuticle and cell mem-
hair from Asians and Caucasians when wet compared
brane complexes, to split. Although keratin biosyn-
to when dry, whereas litle configuration change ac-
thesis occurs in an aqueous environment within the
companies the wetting of African hair fibers. Similar
 hair follicle, the process of hydration-dehydration of
considerations are likely to be relevant in mammals
the hair fiber reveals an anisotropism (nonuniform
with coats of different crimp levels.
hardness) when wet. However, despite the relatively
high affinity of hair keratin for water and the relative
1.2.7.6 Hair fiber curvature
ease of water to permeate the hair fiber, this process is
highly selective whereby water molecules are variably
 It is well known that hair fibers can assume noncircular
excluded from certain molecular structures within the
 profles via twists, curls, crimps, and indentations in
hair. Whereas the matrix material of the hair cortex
all mammalian species. For some ma mmals seasonal-
 absorbs water and then softens, the microfibrilar com-
ity in the level of crimp may be apparent, usually with
 ponents themselves remain water-impenetrable (Wol-
the summer coat exhibiting less crimp. The presump-
fram 2003). Keratin fibers are significantly weakened
 tion here is that the additional volume of air trapped
when wet. The remarkable ability of hair to extend
in highly crimped hair acts as a thermal insulator. De-
by almost a third is due to the properties of the
 spite our familiarity with these phenotypes and our
KIFs rather than reflecting any contribution of the
ability to technically induce these forms chemically
KAPs.
(in humans), little is known of the actual physical ex-
 The radial swelling of hair fibers, which occurs when
planations for natural curl and crimp. One possibility
it is wet, results from an uptake of water by the KAP
is that the IRS may “guide” or “mould" the still mal-
matrix material. Several models have been proposed
leable hair fiber as it grows through the follicular wall.
to explain the remarkable stress-strain curve of hair
Any such molding influence is likely to be greatest at
fbers in terms of either the KIFs alone or KIF-KAP
the keratogeneous zone of the hair follicle.
combined (Wolfram 2003). However, matrix proteins
 In this manner, a curved follicular wall of IRS should
do have the effect of excluding water from the inter-
 cause the emerging and hardening hair fiber to assume
 cortical KIF space, so the higher the content of KAPs
the corresponding shape. Perhaps more convincingly,
the stiffer (and less swellable) the fiber is likely to be.
variations in hair curl and crimp may reflect a variable
Torsional properties of the hair fiber rely on me-
degree of asymmetry in the hair fiber itself. For exam-
chanical properties of hair fber components that are
ple, keratinization itself can occur asymmetrically on
very different from those for tensile strength. Whereas
 one side of the fiber causing it to exhibit short and long
the matrix material confers little to the tensile strength
longitudinal axes. Asymmetrical keratinization could
of the hair fiber, there is a 15-fold corresponding de-
also affect how the hair shaft responds with variable
crease in the torsion or rigidity modulus when the
levels of moisture. There is ample evidence from the
fiber is wet.
sheep wool literature for asymmetry in cortical ker-
 atinocyte differentiation, such that different types of
 in the mechanical properties of different hair fibers.
cells are formed (Jones et al. 1988; Franbourg et al.
However, little work has been conducted on this sub-
2003).
ject. There is some evidence that axial twisting of
When high-crimp and low-crimp merino wool were
African hair can provide zones of weakness to break-
compared, cells on one side of the crimp expressed
ing stresses upon extension. Other interesting differ-
KIFs in a whorled pattern (so-called orthocortex)
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle 39
while cells on the opposite side of the fiber lacked this
and its production of a unique biochemical composite
whorled pattern called paracortex in high-crimp fibers
material, that is, its fiber, makes the study and care of
and mesocortex in low-crimp fibers. Furthermore, as
mammals such a joy and responsibility.
hair fiber diameter increases so also does the amount
of orthocortex. The above description applies particu-
References
larlyto ovine wool hair fibers. Indeed, this bi-/trilateral
structure of hair cortex has been difficult to detect in
Amoh Y, Li L, Katsuoka K, Penman S, Hoffman RM. 2005. Mul-
 human hair follicles. However, when Mongolian-type
tipotent nestin-positive, keratin-negative hair-follicle bulge stem
cells can form neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of
straight hair (consisting of paracortex) was compared
Sciences of the United States ofAmerica 102(15):5530-5534.
with curly Caucasian hair, a small amount of ortho-
ArckPCHandjsBPsMPASHaiha
cortex was found in the latter. This orthocortex was
BF, Paus R. 2003. Stressinhibits hair growth in mice by induction
of premature catagen development and deleterious perifollicular
distributed preferentially at the cuticle-cortex junc-
inflammatory events via neuropeptide substance P-dependent
tion (Swift 1997).
pathways. American Journal of Pathology 162(3):803-814.
 In the high-crimp hair of some people of African
 Barsh G. 1999. From Agouti to Pomc-00 years of fat blonde mice.
origin, an asymmetrical arrangement of ortho- and
Nature Medicine 5(9):984-985.
Barsh GS. 2007. How the dog got its spots. Nature Genetics 39(11):
paracortex has been reported. It should be noted, how-
1304-1306.
ever, that significant curvature of the hair follicle it-
Biliska B. 2001. On the structure of human hair melanins from
 self could be observed in some of these individuals.
 an infrared spectroscopy analysis of their interactions with Cu2+
ions.Spectrochimica ActaPartA:Molecularand BiomolecularSpec-
In any event it appears that the composition of the
troscopy 57(12):2525-2533.
 intermacrofbrillar matrix will be very important in
Botchkarev VA, Paus R. 2003. Molecular biology of hair morpho-
genesis:developmentandcycling.JournalofExperimentalZoology
determining the curve of the hair fiber.
Part B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution 298(1):164-180.
Burchill SA, Thody AJ. 1986. Dopaminergic inhibition of tyrosinase
activity in hair follicular melanocytes of the mouse. Journal of
1.2.7.7 Hair fiber abnormalities
Endocrinology 111:233-237
Candille SI, Kaelin CB, Cattanach BM, Yu B, Thompson DA, Nix
Extreme trauma or protracted mechanical stress can
MA, Kerns JA, Schmutz SM, Millhauser GL, Barsh GS. 2007. A
result in damage to the normal hair shaft (trichoma-
beta-defensin mutation causes black coat color in domestic dogs.
Science 318(5855):1418-1423.
lacia, see Chapter 3.2), and this cause needs to be
Carroll JM, Crompton T, Seery IP, Watt FM. 1997. Transgenic mice
distinguished from hair shaft abnormalities due to in-
expressing IFN-gamma in the epidermis have eczema, hair hy-
trinsic defects, either genetic or nutritional. In hu-
popigmentation, andhairloss fouralofIvestigativeDematf
mans particularly, the location of the damage along
ogy 108(4):412-422.
Christoph T, Muller-Rover S, Audring H, Tobin DJ, Hermes B, Cot-
the fiber is also highly relevant, as the “oldest" frac-
sarelis G, Ruckert R, Paus R. 2000. The human hair follicle im-
tions (i.e., distal sections toward and at the tip) will
 mune system: cellular composition and immune privilege. British
Journal Dermatology 142:862-873.
have been “weathered" by repeated washings, cosmetic
Chuong C-M.1998.Molecular BasisofEpithelialAppendage Mo-
 treatments, brushings, and other manipulations that
phogenesis. Austin, Texas: RG Landes.
cause splitting and cuticular damage. Conversely, these
Commo S, Bernard BA. 2000. Melanocyte subpopulation turnover
features when observed in short hair lengths suggests
during the human hair cycle: an immuno-histochemical study.
Pigment Cell Research 13:253-259.
the presence of more traumatic damage, an underlying 
Cone RD, Lu D, Koppula S, Vage DI, Klungland H, Boston B, Chen
nutritional deficiency, or some intrinsic defect. An-
W, Orth DN, Pouton C, Kesterson RA. 1996. The melanocortin
receptors: agonists, antagonists, and the hormonal control of
other source of structural damage to normal hair can
pigmentation. Recent Progress in Hormone Research 51:287-317.
be due to extreme heat stress. Cosmetic practices, for
Cotsarelis G, Sun T-T, Lavker RM. 1990. Label-retaining cells re-
example, those associated with straightening (e.g, of
log suonndut un snoaasod ro eae ang ay u apis
follicularstemcellhairycleandskinarcinogenesisCe
human African hair), may induce the so-called “bub-
13291337.
ble" hair where extreme heat induces bubble forma-
Eberle AN.1988. The Melanotropins: Chermistry, Physiology and
tion under the cuticle within the hair cortex.
Mechanism of Action. New York: Karger.
Ebling FJG. 1990. The hormonal control of hair growth. In: Orfanos
In summary, the hair follicle, as one of two
CE,Happle R(eds),Har and Hair Diseases,PP. 267299. erin:
mammal-specific traits, is a near-perfect biological
Springer-Verlag.
universe through which nature provides this class of
Ermak G, Slominski A. 1997. Production of POMC, CRH-R1, MC1,
 animals with significant survival advantage. The man-
and MC2 receptor mRNA and expression of tyrosinase gene in re-
lation to hair cycle and dexamethasone treatment in the C57BL/6
 ner of its development, its lifelong cyclical activity,
mouse skin. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 108(2):160-165.
 40  Hair follicle biology
 Fitzpatrick TB, Breathnach AS. 1963. The epidermal melanin unit
Kauser S, Thody AJ, Schallreuter KU, Gummer CL, Tobin DJ. 2004.
system. Dermatologische Wochenschrift 147:481-489.
Beta-endorphin as a regulator of human hair follicle melanocyte
Franbourg A, Hallegot P, Baltenneck F, Toutain C, Lery F. 2003.
biology. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 123(1):184-195.
Current research on ethnic hair. Journal of the American Academy
KauserS, Thody AJ, Schallreuter KU, GummerCL, Tobin DJ. 2005. A
of Dermatology 48(6 Suppl):S115-S119
fully functional proopiomelanocortin/melanocortin-1 receptor
 Frank J, Pignata C, Panteleyev AA, Prowse DM, Baden H, Weiner
 system regulates the differentiation of human scalp hair follicle
L, Gaetaniello L, Ahmad W, Pozzi N, Cserhalmi-Friedman PB,
melanocytes. Endocrinofogy 146(2):532-543.
Aita VM, Uyttendaele H, Gordon D, Ott J, Brissette JL, Chris-
 Langbein L, Rogers MA, Winter H, Praetzel S, Beckhaus U, Rackwitz
tiano AM. 1999. Exposing the human nude phenotype. Nature
HR, Schweizer J. 1999. The catalog of human hair keratins. I.
398(6727):473474.
 Expression of the nine type I members in the hair follicle. Journaf
Fuchs E, Merrill BJ, Jamora C, DasGupta R. 2001. At the roots of a
of Biological Chemistry 274(28):19874-19884.
never-ending cycle. Developmental Cell 1(1):13-15.
Langbein L, Rogers MA, Winter H, Praetzel S, Schweizer J. 2001.
Furkert J, Klug U, Slominski A, Eichmuller S, Mehlis B, Kertscher U,
The catalog of human hair keratins. Il. Expression of the six
 Paus R. 1997. Identification and measurement of beta-endorphin
type II members in the hair follicle and the combined catalog
levels in the skin during induced hair growth in mice. Biochimica
of human type I and I keratins. Journal of Biological Chemistry
et Biophysia Acta 1336(2):315-322.
276(37):35123-35132.
Giacomet L. 1965. The anatomy of the human scalp. In: Montagna
 Lambert J, Vancoillie G, Naeyaert JM. 1999. Molecular motors and.
W (ed), Aging Pp. 97-120. London: Pergamon.
their role in pigmentation. Celular and Molecular Biology (Noisy-
Grichnik JM, Ali WN, Burch JA, Byers JD, Garcia CA, Clark RE,
{e-Grand, France) 45{7):905-918.
Shea CR.1996. KIT expression reveals a population of precursor
Leeder JD. 1986. The cell membrane complex and its influence on
melanocytes in human skin. Journal of Investigative Dermatology
the wool fibre. Wool Science Review 63:3-35.
106:967-971.
 Levine N, Sheftel SN, Eytan T, Dorr RT, Hadley ME, Weinrach
He L, Eldridge AG, Jackson PK, Gunn TM, Barsh GS. 2003. Ac-
JC, Ertl GA, Toth K, McGee DL, Hruby VJ. 1991. Induction of
cessory proteins for melanocortin signaling: attractin and ma-
skin tanning by subcutaneous administration of a potent syn-
hogunin. Annais of the New York Academy of Sciences 994:288-
thetic melanotropin. Journal of the American Medical Association
298.
266:2730-2736.
Hearing VJ. 1999. Biochemical control of melanogenesis and
 Lindner G, Botchkarev VA, Botchkareva NV, Ling G, Van Der Veen
melanosomal organization. Journal of Investigative Dermatology
C, Paus R. 1997. Analysis of apoptosis during hair follicle regres-
Symposium Proceedings 4(1):24-28
sion (catagen). American Journal of Pathology 151(6):1601-1617.
Horikawa T, Norris DA, Johnson TW, Zekman T, Dunscomb
Logan A, Weatherhead B. 1980. Post-tyrosinase inhibition of
N, Bennion SD, Jackson RL, Morelli JG. 1996. DOPA-negative
melanogenesis by melatonin in hair follicles in vitro. Journal of
 melanocytes in the outer root sheath of human hair follicles ex-
Investigative Dermatoflogy 74(1):47-50.
 press premelanosomal antigens but not a melanosomal antigen
 Martinez-Esparza M, Solano F, Garcia-Borron JC. 1999. Indepen-
or the melanosome-associated glycoproteins tyrosinase, TRP-1,
dent regulation of tyrosinase by the hypopigmenting cytokines
and TRP-2. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 106:28-35.
TGF betal and TNF alpha and the melanogenic hormone alpha-
 Jahoda CA, Reynolds AJ. 1996. Dermal-epidermal interactions.
MSHinB16mousemelanocytes.CeluarandMolecuarBioogy
Adult folice-derived cllpopulations andhair growthDerma
(Noisy-fe-Grand, France) 45(7):991-1000.
tofogic Clinics 4(4):573-583.
Mazurkiewicz JE, Corliss D, Slominski A. 2000. Spatiotemporal
 Jahoda CA, Whitehouse J, Reynolds AJ, Hole N. 2003. Hair follicle
expression, distribution, and processing of POMC and POMC-
dermal cells differentiate into adipogenic and osteogenic lineages.
derived peptides in murine skin. Journal of Histochermistry and
Experimental Dermatology12(6):849-859.
Cytochemistry 48(7):905-914.
 Jaks V, Barker N, Kasper M, van Es JH, Snippert HI, Clevers H,
 Mecklenburg L, Tobin DJ, Miller-Rover S, Handjski B, Wendt G,
Toftgard R. 2008. Lgr5 marks cycling, yet long-lived, hair follicle
Peters EM, Pohl S, Moll I, Paus R. 2000. Active hair growth (ana-
stem cells. Nature Genetics 40(11):129i-1299.
gen) is associated with angiogenesis. Journal of Investigative Der-
Jave-Suarez LF, Langbein L, Winter H, Praetzel S, Rogers MA,
matoflogy 114(5):909-916.
Schweizer JI. 2004. Androgen regulation of the human hair fol-
 Menasche G, Ho CH, Sanal O, Feldmann J, Tezcan I, Ersoy F,
licle: the type I hair keratin hHa7 is a direct target gene in tri-
Houdusse A,Fischer A, de Saint BasileG.2003. Griscelli syndrome
dhocytes. Journal of Investigative Dermatotogy 122(3):555-564.
 restricted to hypopigmentation results from a melanophilin de-
Jimbow K, Roth SI, Fitzpatrick TB, Szabo G. 1975. Mitotic activity in
fect (GS3) or a MYO5A F-exon deletion (GS1). Journaf of Clinical
non-neoplastic melanocytes in vivo as determined byhistochem-
Investigations 112(3):450-456.
Z4
ical, autoradiographic, and electron microscope studies. fourna!
Messenger AG. 1991. Extracellular matrix and the hair growth cycle.
of Cell Biology 66: 663-670.
Journal of Investigative Dermatology 96(5):75S.
Jones LN. 2001. Hair structure anatomy and comparative anatomy.
Milner Y, Sudnik J, Filippi M, Kizoulis M, Kashgarian M, Stenn K.
Clinics in Dermatology 19:95-103.
2002. Exogen, shedding phase of the hair growth cycle: charac-
 Jones LN, Rivett DE, Tucker DJ. 1988. Wool and related mammalian
terizationof a mouse model. Journal of Investigative Dermatology
fibers. In: Lewin M, Pearce EM (eds), Handbook of Fiber Chem-
119(3):639644.
1X
istry, pp. 355-414, New York: Marcel Dekker.
 Moore GP, Du Cross DL, Issacs K, Pisansarakit P, Wynn PC. 1991.
Kauser S, Schallreuter KU, Thody AJ, Gummer C, Tobin DJ. 2003.
Hair growth induction: roles of growth factors. Annais of the New
Regulation of human epidermal melanocyte biology by beta-
York Academy of Sciences 642:308-325.
endorphin. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 120(6):1073-
 Miller-Rover S, Handjiski B, van der Veen C, Eichmuller S, Foitzik
一
K, McKay IA, Stenn KS, Paus R. 2001. A comprehensive guide for
 Kauser S, Slominski A, Wei ET, Tobin DJ. 2006. Modulation of the
the accurate classification of murine hair follicles in distinct hair
human hair follicle pigmentary unit by corticotropin-releasing
cycle stages. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 117(1):3-15.
hormone and urocortin peptides. FASEB Journal 20(7):882-
Nishimura EK, Jordan SA, Oshima H, Yoshida H, Osawa M,
895.
Moriyama M, Jackson IJ, Barrandon Y, Miyachi Y, Nishikawa
Anatomy and physiology of the hair follicle  41
S. 2002. Dominant role of the niche in melanocyte stem-cell fate 
Rogers MA, Langbein L, Winter H, Ehmann C, Praetzel S, Korn
determination. Nature 416(6883):854860.
B, Schweizer J. 2001. Characterization of a cluster of human
Nordlund JJ, Ortonne J-P. 1998. The normal color of human skin.
high/ultrahigh sulfur keratin-associated protein genes embedded
In: Nordlund JI, Boissy RE, Hearing VJ, King RA, Ortonne J-P
in the type I keratin gene domain on chromosome 17ql2-21.
(eds),The Pigmentary System: Physiotogy and Pathophysiology,
Journal ofBiological Chemistry 276{22):19440-19451.
pp. 475-535. New York: Oxford University Press.
Safer JD, Fraser LM, Ray S, Holick MF. 2001. Topical triodothyro-
Oliver RF. 1967. The experimental induction of whisker growth in
nine stimulates epidermal proliferation, dermal thickening, and
the hooded rat by implantation of dermal papillae. Journal of
hair growth in mice and rats. Thyroid 11(8):717-724.
Embryology and Experimental Morphology 18:43-51.
Schallreuter KU, Beazley WD, Hibberts NA, Tobin DJ, Paus R, Wood
Panteleyev AA, Jahoda CA, Christiano AM. 2001. Hair follicle pre-
 JM. 1998. Pterins in human hair follicle cells and in the syn-
determination. Journaf of Celf Science 114(Pt 19):3419-3431.
chronized murine hair cycle.Journal of InvestigativeDermatology
Panteleyev AA, Paus R, Christiano AM. 2000. Patterns of hairless
111(4):545-550.
(hr) gene expression in mouse hair follicle morphogenesis and
Schmutz SM, Berryere TG. 2007. Genes affecting coat colour and
cycling.American fournal of Pathology 157(4):1071-1079.
pattern in domestic dogs: a review. Animal Genetics 38(6):539-
Paus R. 1997. Immunology of the hair follicle. In: Bos JD (ed), Skin
549.
Immune System, Pp. 377-398. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Schweizer J, Bowden PE, Coulombe PA, Langbein L, Lane EB, Ma-
Paus R, Botchkarey VA, Botchkareva NV, Mecklenburg L, Luger
gin TM, Maltais L, Omary MB, Parry DA, Rogers MA, Wright
T, Slominski A. 1999. The skin POMC system (SPS). Leads and
MW. 2006. New consensus nomenclature for mammalian ker-
lessons from the hair follicle. Annals of New York Academy of
atins. Journal of Cell Biology 17;174(2):169-174.
Sciences 885:350-363.
Shimomura Y, Aoki N, Rogers MA, Langbein L, Schweizer J, Ito
Paus R, Cotsarelis G. 1999. Biology of hair follicles. New England
M. 2003. Characterization of human keratin-associated protein 1
Journal of Medicine 341(7):491-497.
family members. Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium
Paus R, Nickoloff BJ, Ito T. 2005. A “hairy" privilege. Trends in
Proceedings 8:96-99.
Immunology 26(1):32-40.
Shimomura Y, Aoki N, Schweizer J, Langbein L, Rogers MA, Win-
Paus R, Peters EM, Eichmuller S, Botchkarev VA. 1997.Neural mech-
ter H, Ito M. 2002. Polymorphisms in the human high sulfur
anisms of hair growth control. Journal of Investigative Dermatof-
hair keratin-associated protein l, KAPl, gene family. Journal of
ogy Symposium Proceedings 2(1):61-68.
Biological Chemistry 277:45493-45501.
Paus R, Stenn KS, Link RE. 1990. Telogen skin contains an inhibitor
Silver AF, Chase HB.1970. DNA synthesis in the adult hair germ
of hair growth. British Journal of Dermatology 122(6):777-784.
during dormancy (telogen) and activation (early anagen). Dever-
 Peters EM, Botchkarev VA, Botchkareva NV, Tobin DI, Paus R. 2001.
opmentalBiology21:440-451.
Hair-cycle-associated remodeling of the peptidergic innervation
Silvers WK. 1979. The Coat Colors of Mice: A Model for Marmrmalian
of murine skin, and hair growth modulation by neuropeptides.
Gene Action and Interaction. NewYork: Springer.
Journal of Investigative Dermatology 116(2):236-245.
 Slominski A, Chassalevris N, Mazurkiewicz J, Maurer M, Paus R.
Philipp U, Quignon P, Scott A, Andre C, Breen M, Leeb T.
1994. Murine skin as a target for melatonin bioregulation. Exper-
2005.Chromosomal assignment of the canine melanophilin gene
iental Dermatology 3(1):45-50.
(MLPH): a candidate gene for coat color dilution in Pinschers.
Slominski A, Paus R. 1993. Melanogenesis is coupled to murine
Journal of Heredity 96(7):774-776.
anagen:towardnewconcepts fortheroleofmelanocytes and the
 Philpott M, Paus R. 1998. Principles of hair follicle morphogenesis.
regulationofmelanogenesis inhair growth.Journalof Investiga
In: Chuong C-M (ed), Molecular Basis of Epithelial Appendage
tive Dermatology 101(1 Suppl):90S-97S.
Morphogenesis, pp. 75-110. Austin, Texas: RG Landes.
Slominski A, Paus R, Constantino R. 1991. Differential expression
Powell BC, Rogers GE. 1997. The role of keratin proteins and their
and activity of melanogenesis-related proteins during induced
genes in thegrowth, struture and properties of hair In: Jolls
hair growth in mice. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 96:172-
P, Zahn H, Hocker H (eds), Formation and Structure of Human
179.
Hair, pp. 59-149. Basel: Birkhauser Verlag.
Slominski A, Pisarchik A, Zbytek B, Tobin DJ, Kauser S, Wortsman
Price VH. 1990. Structural abnormalities of the hair shaft. In: Or-
 J. 2003. Functional activity of serotoninergic and melatoniner-
fanos CE, Happle R (eds), Har and Hair Disease, Pp. 363-423.
gic systemsexpressed intheskin.JournalofCelularPhysiology
 
196(1):144-153.
Prota G. 1995. The chemistry of melanins and melanogenesis.
Slominski A, Pruski D. 1993. Melatonin inhibits proliferation and
Fortschrtte der Chemie Organischer Naturstoffe 64:93-148.
 melanogenesis in rodent melanoma cell. Experimental Celf Re-
Randall VA, Hibberts NA, Thornton MJ, Hamada K, Merrick AE,
search 206(2):189-194.
Kato S, Jenner TJ, De Oliveira I, Messenger AG. 2000. The hair
Slominski A, Tobin DJ, Shibahara S, Wortsman J. 2004. Melanin
follicle: a paradoxical androgen target organ. Hormone Reseurch
pigmentation in mammalian skin and its hormonal regulation.
54:243-250.
Physiological Reviews 84(4):1155-1228.
Randall VA, Sundberg JP, Philpott MP. 2003. Animal and in vitro
Slominski A, Tobin DJ, Zmijewski MA, Wortsman J, Paus R. 2008.
models for the study of hair follicles. Journal of Investigative Der-
Melatonin in the skin: synthesis, metabolism and functions.
matology Symposium Proceedings 8(1):39-45.
Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism 19(1):17-24.
Reynolds J. 1954. The epidermal melanocytes of mice. Jourmal of
Slominski A, Wortsman J. 2000. Neuroendocrinology of the skin.
Anatommy 88:45-58.
Endocrine Reviews 21(5):457-487.
Robbins CR. 2002. Morphological and macromolecular structure.
Slominski A, Wortsman J, Luger T, Paus R, Solomon S. 2000.
In: Robbins CR (ed), Chemical and Physical Behavior of Human
Corticotropin releasing hormone and proopiomelanocortin
Hair, pp. I-58. New York: Springer.
involvement in the cutaneous response to stress. Physiologicaf
Rogers GE, Harding HW, Llewellyn-Smith IJ. 1977. The origin of
Revie ws 80(3):979-1020.
citrulline-containing proteins in the hair follicle and the chemical
Smith EA, Fuchs E. 1998. Defining the interactions between in-
nature of trichohyalin, an intracellular precursor. Biochimica et
termediate filaments and desmosomes. Journal of Celf Biology
Biophysica Acta 495(1):159-175.
141(5):1229-1241.
42   Hair fllicle biology
Snell RS. 1972. Hormonal control of hair color. In: Riley V (ed),
important regulator of keratinocyte and melanocyte differenti-
Pigmentation: Its Genesis and Biologic Control, Pp. 193-210. New
ation during hair follicle morphogenesis and cycling. American
York: Meredith.
Journal of Pathology 160(5):1807-1821.
Soma T, Tsuji Y, Hibino T. 2002. Involvement of transforming
Tobin DJ, Gunin A, Magerl M, Handijski B, Paus R. 2003a. Plas-
growth factor-beta2incatageninduction during thehuman hair
ticity and cytokinetic dynamics of the hair follicle mesenchyme:
cycle. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 118(6):993-997.
implications for hair growth control. Journal of Investigative Der-
Steinert PM, Parry DA, Marekov LN. 2003. Trichohyalin me-
matology 120(6):895-904.
chanically strengthens the hair follicle: multiple cross-bridging
Tobin DJ, Gunin A, Magerl M, Paus R. 2003b. Plasticity and cytoki-
roles in the inner root shealth.Journal of Biological Chemistry
 netic dynamics of the hair follicle mesenchyme during the hair
278(42):4140941419.
 growth cycle: implications for growth control and hair follicle
Stenn KS, Paus R. 2001. Controls ofhair follicle cycling. Physiological
transformations.JournalofInvestigativeDermatology Symposium
Revie ws 81(1):449-494.
Proceedings 8(1):80-86.
Sugiyama S, Kukita A. 1976. Melanocyte reservoir in the hair folli
Tobin DJ, Hagen E, Botchkarev VA, Paus R. 1998. Do hair bulb
cles during the hair growth cycle: an electron microscopic study.
 melanocytes undergo apoptosis during hair follicle regression
In: Hori Y, Morikawa F (eds), Biology and Disease of the Har,
(catagen) Journat of Investigative Dermatology 11l(6):941-947.
Pp. 81-92. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Tobin DJ, Paus R. 200i. Graying gerontobiology of the hair follicle
Sugiyama S, Saga K, Morimoto Y, Takahashi M. 1995. Proliferating
pigmentary unit. Experimental Gerontology 36:29-54.
activityof thehairfollicularmelanocytesat theearlyandanagen
Tobin DJ, Slominski A, Botchkarev V, Paus R. 1999. The fate of
II stages in the hair growth cycle: detection by immunocyto-
hair foliclemelanocytesduring thehairgrowth cyclounal
dhemistry for bromodeoxyuridine combined with DOPA reac-
ofInvestigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings 4(3):323-
tion cytochemistry. Journal of Dermatology 22:396-402.
332.
Sun TT, Cotsarelis G, Lavker RM. 1991. Hair follicular stem cells: the 
Valverde P, Benedito E, Solano F, Oaknin S, Lozano JA, Garcia-
bulge-activation hypothesis. Journal of Investigative Dermatology
 Borron JC. 1995a. Melatonin antagonizes alpha-melanocyte-
96(5):77S-78S.
stimulating hormone enhancement of melanogenesis in mouse
Sundberg IP. 1994. The nude (rnu) and streaker (nustr) muta-
 melanoma cells by blocking the hormone-induced accumula-
tions, chromosome ll. In: Sundberg JIP (ed), Handbook of Mouse
tion of the c locus tyrosinase. European Journal of Biochemistry
Mutations with Skin and Hair Abnormalities: Animal Models and
232(1):257-263.
Biomedical Tools, pp. 379-391. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Valverde P, Healy E, Jackson I, Rees JL, Thody AJ. 1995b. Variants
Suzuki S, Kato T, Takimoto H, Masui S, Oshima H, Ozawa K, Suzuki
of the melanocyte-stimulating hormone receptor gene are asso-
S, Imamura T. 1998. Localization of rat FGF-5 protein in skin
ciated with red hair and fair skin in humans. Nature Genetics
macrophage-likecells andFGF-SSproteininhairfollicle: possible
11:328-330.
ysd 
Van Neste D, Tobin DJ. 2004. Hair cycle and hair pigmentation:
regulation. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 11l:963-972.
dynamic interactions and changes associated with aging. Micron
Swift JA. 1997. Morphology and histochemistry of human hair. In:
35(3):193-200.
Jolles P, Zahn H, Hocker H (eds), Formation and Structure of
Wang LC, Liu ZY, Gambardella L, Delacour A, Shapiro R, Yang
Hurman Hatr, pp. 149-177. Basel: Birkhauser Verlag.
J, Sizing I, Rayhorn P, Garber EA, Benjamin CD, Williams KP,
Swope VB, Abdel-Malek Z, Kassem LM, Nordlund J. 1991. In-
Taylor FR, Barrandon Y, Ling L, Burkly LC. 2000. Conditional
terleukins l alpha and 6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha
disruption of hedgehog signaling pathway defnes its critical role
are paracrine inhibitors of human melanocyte proliferation
in hair development and regeneration. Journal of Investigative
and melanogenesis. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 96(2):
Dermatology 114(5):901-908.
180-185.
Wertz PW, Downing DT. 1989. Integral lipids of mammalian hair.
Tobin DJ. 1998. A possible role for Langerhans cells in the removal
Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology. Part B: Comparative
of melanin from early catagen hair follicles. British Journal of
Biochemistry 92(4):759-761.
Dermatology 138:795-798.
Westgate GE, Craggs RI, Gibson WT. 199la. Immune privilege
Tobin DJ. 2003. The aging hair follicle pigmentary unit. In: Van
in hair growth. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 97:417-
Neste (ed), Hair Science and Technology, Pp. 155-168. Tournai,
420.
 Belgium: Skinterface srl.
Westgate GE, Messenger AG, Watson LP, Gibson WT. 1991b. Distri-
Tobin D. 2004. Biology of hair pigmentation. In: Forslind B, Lind-
bution of proteoglycans during the hair growth cycle in human
berg M (eds), Skin, Hair, and Nails—Structure and Function,
skin. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 96:191-195.
pp.319-365.NewYork:MarcelDekker.
Winter H, Rogers MA, Langbein L, Stevens HP, Leigh IM, Labreze C,
Tobin DJ. 2005. Pigmentation of human hair. In: Tobin DI (ed), Hair
Roul S, Taieb A, Krieg T, Schweizer J. 1997. Mutations in the hair
in Toxicology: An Important Biomonitor, Pp. 57-88. Cambridge:
cortex keratin hHb6 cause the inherited hair disease monilethrix.
The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Nature Genetics 16:372.
Tobin DJ. 2008. Human hair pigmentation-biological aspects. In-
Wolfram LJ. 2003. Human hair: a unique physicochemical com-
ternational Journal of Cosmetic Science. 30(4):233-257.
posite. Journal of American Academy of Dermatology 48(6
Tobin DJ, Bystryn JC. 1996. Different populations of melanocytes
Suppl):S106-S114.
are present in hair follicles and epidermis. Pigment Celf Research
Wood JM,Jimbow K,Boissy RE,Slominski A, Plonka, PM,Slawinski
9:304-310.
 J, Wortsman J, Tosk J. 1999. What's the use of generating melanin?
Tobin DJ, Colen SR, Bystryn JC. 1995. Isolation and long-term cul-
Experimental Dermatology 8:153-164.
ture of human hair-folicle melanocytes. fournal of Investigative
Wu X, Bowers B, Wei Q, Kocher B, Hammer JA. 1997. Myosin
Dermatology 104:86-89.
V associates with melanosomes in mouse melanocytes: evidence
Tobin DJ, Foitzik K, Reinheckel T, Mecklenburg L, Botchkarev VA,
that myosin V is an organelle motor. Journal ofCell Science ll0(Pt
 Peters C, Paus R. 2002. The lysosomal protease cathepsin L is an
7): 847859.
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals
with comparison to laboratory animals
and humans
Wilfried Meyer
The biology of the hair follicle has been extensively
 completely penetrate the latter, if necessary, for close
 studied in humans, laboratory animals, and fine wool-
 contact to the energy supplying fat cells of the hypo-
 producing sheep. However, information from a com-
 dermis. In all mammals, the hair follicle is covered
 parative point of view regarding all important groups
along its total length by two epithelial root sheaths
of domesticated mammals is still rather scarce. Never-
and one outer sheath of connective tissue. It is linked
theless, the wool hair follicle of sheep (for the correct
to the dermal connective tissue by a dense network of
definition of a “wool hair follicle" see Section 1.3.1.1)
elastic fibers within a mesh of loosely or tightly inter-
 has become a particularly unique model for hair fol-
woven collagen fiber bundles (Chapman 1979; Meyer
licle research. This includes studies on the molecular
2009).
controls involved in the development of epithelial-
mesenchymal appendages, photoperiodic influences
on these interacting systems, the origin of wool fiber
1.3.1.1 The different types of hair follicles
curliness, the origin of hair growth wave patterns, and
the effect of alterations in nutrient supply on epithelial
According to their fetal developmental course and in
 growth and wool fiber structure.
view of the fact that they are equipped with specific
glands, three types of hair follicles can be clearly de-
 termined: central primary hair follicles which emerge
1.3.1 General principles of hair follicle
first during ontogenesis, and subsequently appearing
 anatomy and physiology
lateral primary hair follicles. Both primary hair fol-
licles produce heavy and light guard hairs, respec-
 The hair follicle is a very complex biological unit and
e s   d o   
shows the same basic structure and function in all
equipped, besides sebaceous glands, with an apocrine
tubular gland, and are covered by an extensive net-
tive ones such as the egg-laying monotremes or the
work of blood capillaries and nerve fibers. The last
marsupials and the placental mammals (Figs 1.3.1
follicle type during the ontogenetic time course, the
 and 1.3.2). Depending on hair type and body region,
 secondary hair follicle that produces wool hairs, shows
hair follicles are more or less deeply, and with differ-
sebaceous glands only but no apocrine tubular gland.
ent angles, located in the skin. In most parts of the
 In addition, secondary follicles have a rather thin in.
haired skin, the angle of insertion is rather large (i.e.,
ner root sheath (Fig. 1.3.3). In small mammals, wool
steep), but in specific body areas it is very low (i.e.,
hair follicles are arranged in dense groups, whereas in
flat). In this way, the hair follicles are not only very
 large mammals, they appear as single follicles between
effectively anchored within the dermis, but can also 
 primary follicles.
 44  Hair fllicle biology
muscle specifically functions to erect the primary hair
HE
follicles with their guard hairs. Indirectly, wool hairs
surrounding the guard hairs are also erected. In this
way, the insulation of the hair coat is optimized by
producing and maintaining an air-containing layer.
The connective tissue sheath of the hair follicle is typ-
ically composed of thin collagen fiber bundles and a
dense and fine elastic fiber net that anchors the hair
follicles in a movable system, as clearly visible in thin
dermis types of densely haired species and likewise
in thick skin of sparsely haired mammals such as the
FB
horse (Fig. 1.3.4a-c). This allows the hair follicle to
passively regain its former position in the dermis after
erection by activity of the arrector pili muscle (Meyer
and Neurand 1987; Meyer et al. 1994). Embedded in
the connective tissue sheath is a network of choliner-
gic and adrenergic nerve fibers and free nerve endings
and also is a network composed of capillaries supplied
by relatively large blood vessels. The capillary network
is very distinct in both small (e.g-, cat) and large hair
follicles (e.g- pig) (Fig. 1.3.5) (Meyer et al. 2008a).
1.3.1.2 The pattern of hair folicle arrangement
The hair-producing unit and the accessory glands (se-
baceous glands and apocrine tubular glands) form the
hair follicle complex (Fig. 1.3.6a), also known in hu-
mans as the pilosebaceous unit. In the latter case, how.
ever, the hair folicle complex only shows sebaceous
Fig. 1.3.1 Histological organization of the hair bulb. Semis
 gla nds, whereas ecrine tubular glands are present that
chematic drawing from a longitudinal semithin section. CS.
develop independent of the hair follicle.
connective tissue sheath; ORS, outer root sheath; HE, Henley's
The primary hair follicles are arranged in groups of
layer: HUX, Huxley's layer; SCU, sheath cuticle; HCU, hair cu-
three, whereby the central primary hair follicle rep-
ticle; HC, hair cortex; HME, hair medulla; HM, hair matrix; FB,
fibroblasts; HP, hair papilla (W. Meyer)
resents the center and the two lateral primary hair
follicles are situated on each side of the group (Fig.
1.3.6b). This group formation is a phylogenetically
All primary hair follicles exhibit relatively thick
 old characteristic of the mammalian integument, and
bulbs (diameters: 150-600 μm), whereas secondary
is stillpresent in most domesticated species. The group
hair follicles show smaller bulbs (diameters: 70-200
arrangement is completed by varying numbers of sec-
μm). Moreover, each primary hair follicle has a strong
 ondary (wool) hair follicles, particularly in densely
arrector pili muscle composed of smooth muscle cells
haired species such as rodents, cats, or sheep.
(the muscle thickness varies according to the size of
the hair follicle thickness and is in the range of 10-
1.3.1.3 Hair follicle cycling
140 μm). On one side, these muscles connect to the
 basement membrane of the epidermis by a bundle
One of the most important features of hair folli-
of fine elastic fibers, and on the other side they are
cle biology is the fact that this unique, highly re-
linked to the hair folicle to which they are attached
generative mammalian skin structure undergoes life-
elastically below the sebaceous gland. The arrector pili
long cycles of rapid growth (anagen), short regression
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with comparison to laboratory animals and humans 45
a
C
Fg. 1.3.2 Basic histology of the primary hair follicle. (a) Lower bulb region, goat, transverse semithin section, x500; (b) upper bulb 
region, goat, transverse semithin section, x500; (c) upper bulb region, goat, longitudinal semithin section, x1,000; (d) wall of bulge
region, goat, longitudinal semithin section, ×1,400: (Continues)
(catagen), and long resting periods (telogen). This is
are controlled by changes in the local signaling mi-
known as the *hair growth cycle" (see Section 1.2.1).
lieu, in particular regarding the natural light envi-
These typical structural transformations of the lower
 ronment (day length), based on changes in expres-
third of the hair follicle are recognizable in both pri-
 sion and activity of a high number of substances such
mary and secondary follicle types (Fig. 1.3.7). They
as cytokines, hormones, neurotransmitters, and their
 46  Hair fllicle biology
e
Fig. 1.3.2 (Continueo) (e) outer hair follicle part with weakly keratinized hair fiber, pig, transverse semithin section, x500; (f) outer
staining. x250. CL, corneal lamellae; TH, telogen hair; CS, connective tissue sheath; ORS, outer root sheath; HE, Henley's layer;
HUX, Huxley's layer; SCU, sheath cuticle; HCU, hair cuticle; HC, hair cortex; HME, hair medulla; HM, hair matrix; HP, hair papilla.
cognate receptors as well as transcription factors and
tent stem cell populations of different developmental
      e s
origin (Braun and Prowse 2006; Cotsarelis 2006; Cian-
(see Section 1.2.1.5). In view of all these intriguing
ferotti et al. 2007; Tiede et al. 2007).
control possibilities, it seems clear that any influ-
ence coming from numerous domestication effects
can deeply and nonbiologically vary normal hair folli-
1.3.1.4 Influences of domestication
cle cycling and thus hair coat qualities, as is discussed
also below (Meyer et al. 1980a; Hardy 1992; Cotsarelis
It has been emphasized already that the basic hair folli-
1997; Lindner et al. 1997; Paus et al. 1997; Botchkarev
cle system described beforehand has undergone more
et al. 1999; Meyer et al. 2002; Krause and Foitzik 2006;
or less severe structural and functional changes during
Pascucci et al. 2006; Rogers 2006; Fischer et al. 2008;
domestication. Influences of domestication, however,
Meyer 2009).
show a high variability when the different domesti-
The identification of stem cells for hair follicle re-
 cated species and their manifold breeds are compared.
generation has been an important topic during the
 Changes induced by domestication have very rarely
last years (see Section 1.2.2). Stem cell populations of-
affected the basic follicular anatomy, but have mainly
ten occupy specific locations or niches where they can
influenced the hair fibers, that is, the heavy and light
reside indefinitely and undergo self-renewal or differ-
 guard hairs, and the wool hairs (Fig. 1.3.8). Domestica-
entiation into specific cell lineages, as is also required
tion can be associated with changes in hair density, hair
for hair follicle regrowth after the telogen stage. Al-
length, hair thickness, hair structure, and hair color,
though the discovery of stem cells in the bulge/isthmic
eventually resulting in a hair coat that no longer can
region of the outer root sheath of hair follicles in hu-
fulfll all its functions necessary for a typical life under
mans, mice, and dogs has encouraged research to find
 normal outdoor conditions. These changes have been
more mutual basics of mammalian hair follicle biol-
caused by genetic alterations, particularly appearing in
ogy, recent fndings have emphasized that not only the
 intensely bred and thoroughbred species such as the
hair folicle itself but also its environment contains
cat and the dog or small and large ruminants (sheep,
unipotent, multipotent, and possibly even pluripo-
 goats, catle), and even in the pig and the horse.
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with comparison to laboratory animals and humans 47
[HF/cm²]
4,000
PHF
 SHF
3,000
2,000
1,000
475560677376
85
98
11410-12
(a)
dGA
(birth)p.p.
(b)
(d)
Fig. 1.3.3 Developmental and histological aspects of the secondary hair follicle. (a) Prenatal loss of secondary follicles in the pig.
modified from Meyer and Gorgen (1986); PHF, primary hair follicle; SHF, secondary hair follicle; dGA, gestation day: pp. post partum;
(b) bundle of secondary follicles with complex bulb region (asterisk), cat, paraffin section, HE staining. x200; (c) bundle of secondary
hair shafts, dog, scanning electron microscopy. x400; (d) typical small econdary hair follicle showing strong pigmentation of hair
cortex and medulla, cat, longitudinal semithin section, toluidine blue, x5oo; (e) bulb region with cell division near hair matrix, cat,
longitudinal paraffin section, HE staining. x1,450. HP, hair papilla.
48Hair foliclebiology
C
Hg. 1.3.4 Importance of elastic fibers for hair follicle anchoring and sheathing. (a) Elastic anchoring (EF) of curved primary hair
follicles (HF) (adapted in thickness to secondaries), merino sheep, scanning electron microscopy, x1 70: (b) anchoring of thick primary
HFs in a dense elastic fiber network, horse, SEM, x160; (c) sheathing of primary HF by a fine elastic mesh with small overlying blood 
vessels, cat, SEM, x1, 700; for elastic fiber demonstration technique see Meyer et al. (1994). PHF, primary hair follicle; BV, blood 
vessel.
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with comparison to laboratory animals and humans 49
RAID
PVID
a
AO
Hg. 1.3.5 Blood supply of the primary
hair follicle. (a) Typical vessel pattern for
thin hair follicles of densely haired mam-
mals, cat, x250; (b) typical vessel pattern
RAIL
for thick HF of sparsely haired mammals,
PVID
 pig. x150; ink injection technique (cour-
tesy of S. Godynicki). RAID, rete arterio-
sum intradermale; PVID, plexus venosus
(b)
intradermale (Meyer et al. 2008a).
1.3.2 Variations in hair coat and hair
even declines prenatally (Fig. 1.3.3a), as is particularly
follicle structure
prominent in pigs, dogs, and sheep. In domesticated
 pigs, the number of secondary follicles is reduced up
1.3.2.1 Hair density and hair coat
to 30% of the original number in wild pigs. In the
Hair density varies clearly when the carnivores and
domesticated dog, between 10 and 80% of the original
the small ruminants ( mean density between 1,500 and
 amount of wool follicles are present when compared to
6,000 hairs/cm²) are compared with the large species 
its wild predecessors (Brunsch 1956; Ryder 1958, 1962;
like cattle or the horse (mean density between 500 and
Meyer 1986, 1991; Meyer and Gorgen 1986; Herre and
2,500 hairs/cm?). A sparse hair coat in domesticated
Rohrs 1990; Meyer and Schwarz 1992; Meyer et al.
mammals is often caused by a reduced number of wool
1992, 2000; Edwards 1999).
hair follicles.The development ofsuch reduction starts
 In addition to the rather sparse wool hair coat, the
long before birth and the number of this follicle type
 diameter of primary hair follicles and their primary
 50  Hair follicle biology
CPHF
IPHF+SHFgr
(a)
IPHF
IPHE
Fig. 1.3.6 Organization of the hair folli-
cle complex and of hair grouping. (a) Hair
follicle complex with central primary hair
follicles (cPHF) and lateral primary hair
follicles (IPHF), both primary types show-
ing not only sebaceous glands but also 
one apocrine tubular gland each: the lat-
eral PHFs form a small hair group with
several secondary hair follicles (SHF); (b)
typical hair group, cat, transverse paraf-
fin section, HE staining. x500, asterisk
(b)
marks excretory duct of apocrine tubular
gland. gr. group.
hairs may also decline with domestication, which re-
 have the typical apocrine tubular glands and as such
sults in an overall finer hair coat. This is particularly
 are distinct from the true secondary wool hair follicles
obvious in wool-producing species such as sheep and
(see Section 1.3.1.1).
 goats, but can also be found in the cat (e.g, Persian
breeds) and thedog (e.g, poodle). Hair thinning is fre-
1.3.2.2 Hair folficle structure
quently associated with a loss of the hair fiber medulla,
whereas a medulla is regularly found in wild mammals,
 In principle, hair follicles of all mammalian species
even in wool hairs of densely haired species (Meyer et
show the same histological structure (Figs 1.3.1 and
al. 1982). In this context it has to be emphasized that
1.3.2). Nevertheless, in some cases structural varia-
studies of fine-woolled sheep often incorrectly refer to
tions have been observed that can clearly be explained
thin primary hairs as “wool follicles,” although these
 as domestication-related effects, for example, in some
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with comparison to laboratory animals and humans  51
Fig. 1.3.7 Examples of important hair cycle stages. (a) Early anagen together with late telogen, dog. longitudinal semithin section,
toluidine blue, x600; (b) hair bulb regeneration during early anagen with new hair matrix (HM) and hair papilla (HP), Angora goat,
Aa laa yieu aui jo buouue buimous (hl) jiu gnp eidi yi uaboan () ossx anig aupinion uoas uuiuas ieuipniibuol
brush-like keratin cells forming helical ridges around the club, merino sheep, longitudinal semithin section, toluidine blue, x660;
(d) telogen primary HF showing helical ridge formation also in the outer root sheath, pig. transverse paraffin section, HE staining.
x330.
52  Hair follicle biology
Influences of Breeding
Stress lability
Keeping indoors
：
Hair follicle
Hyperactivity of skin glands
nmolting
Changes in hair follicle
and hair structure
Changes in pigmentation
且
Changes in hair density
Changes in structure 
Nonbiotogicaf body cotoration
and patterning
Overproduction
Defective
structure
Changes in secretion
Composition
Nudity
High moisture content
High poffution
Nonbiofogicaf body odor
Poor insufation
Changes of behavior
Hyper/parakeratotic epidermis
Chemicafand mechanicafinsufts
Changes of
epidermat surfacefitm
Hg. 1.3.8 Variations of structure and function of the primary hair follicle as caused by domestication influences (defects). (Modified
from Meyer (199 1); Meyer and Schwarz (1992).)
breeds of pigs (Meyer 1986; Schwarz and Meyer 1994;
epidermal basement membrane. Furthermore, it lacks
Cotsarelis 1997).
any hemidesmosomes or distinct anchoring structures
(Nutbrown and Randall 1995; Jahoda and Reynolds
1.3.2.2.1 Hair matrix and dermal papilla
1996; Meyer et al. 2002; Frase 2007). In support of
The hair bulb is composed of the one-layered ep-
the high metabolic activity in anagen hair follicles (as
ithelial hair matrix surrounding the onion-like hair
indicated by glycogen contents of papilla fibroblasts
 papilla of mesodermal origin. The cells of the hair
and strong activities of pentose phosphate pathway
 matrix show a periodical mitotic activity and produce
enzymes and β-glucuronidase in this region), the hair
all cell types of the hair follicle and the hair fiber.
papilla may contain a very dense anastomosing net-
In contrast to the connective tissue that surrounds
work of nutritive blood capillaries. These capillaries
the entire hair follicle, the folicular dermal papilla
 are often accompanied by nerve fibers, representing
contains an extracellular matrix, the composition of
 one part of the sensory mechanoreceptive properties
which is similar to that of the epidermal basement
 of the primary hair folicle. More networks of blood
membrane, thus enabling communication between
vessels and sensory and autonomic nerve fibers are
the ectodermal and the mesodermal compartment.
 found surrounding the follicular isthmus and the ar-
This is particularly relevant during the anagen phase
 rector pili muscle (Meyer and Neurand 1976; Meyer
of the hair growth cycle and is associated with high
1986; Meyer et al. 2002). The dermal papilla has the
contents of proteoglycans (heparan sulfate, papilla-
 same structure in both wild and domesticated mam-
 specific chondroitin sulfate) or fibronectin. The der-
 mals, including humans (Fig. 1.3.1). However, in par-
mal papilla lacks collagen I and (to some extent) col-
ticularly large primary hair follicles such as the bristles
lagen II. The basement membrane-separating matrix
of pigs, the dermal papilla may show a ridged shape,
cells and dermal papilla fibroblasts are typically trilam-
 in this way offering a very large surface area to support
a u  un n ae s a e iq 
 a high metabolic activity (Meyer 1986).
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with comparison to laboratory animals and humans  53
1.3.2.2.2 Inner root sheath and hair fiber
and most likely explains the production of curly hairs,
Hair matrix cells produce all clltypes of the hair shaff
although other theories are still not ruled out (see be-
(i.e., medulla, cortex, and cuticle) and the inner root 
low). Excentric hair canals can best be seen in sheep
sheath (Fig. 1.3.1). Cells forming the inner root sheath
and Angora goats, whereby the wool follicles of merino
are distinct from those forming the hair cortex and
sheep usually show retrocurvature, that is, the flexure
medulla (Meyer and Neurand 1987). The inner root
of the bulb is opposite to the curvature of the shaff.
sheath, that is, inwards Huxley's layer and outwards
The curliness of hair most likely results from selective
Henle's layer, is of specific relevance for the shape of
breeding and is presumably established during early
the hair fiber (Fig. 1.3.2). Inner root sheath cells con-
embryonic development. Curliness is found in some
tain large numbers of trichohyalin granules that are
old dog breeds (e.g., Poodle, Curly-coated Retriever,
essential for the keratinization process within the in-
Sh nq “(d pue snuds iaiem ao iaem us
ner root sheath. Sheep trichohyalin is particularly well
also present in rather sparsely haired species such as the
 characterized and demonstrates a high proportion of
pig (Mangalicza race),cattle (French Salers cattle), and
glutamate, arginine, glutamine, and leucine residues,
horse (Curly horses, a robust North American breed
making more than 75% of the total amino acids. Be-
that shows a very fine and smooth but unusually fatty
sides trichohyalin, cells ofthe inner root sheath contain
 hair coat because of hyperactive sebaceous glands)
numerous keratin filaments and free sugar residues (α-
 In Mangaliza pigs, the primary hair folicles show a
D-mannose, α-D-glucose, α-L-fucose). Keratinization
curved appearance in the dermis and an oval-shaped
of the inner root sheath seems to result in a loss of
inner root sheath (Herre and Langlet 1936; Herre
sialyl residues from the plasma membrane, particu-
and Wigger 1939; Auber 1951; Fraser 1964; Priest-
larly in Huxley's and Henle's layers. This is in contrast
ley and Rudall 1965; Straile 1965; Meyer 1986; Rogers
to keratinization in the hair cortex, and supports the
2006).
 observation that Huxley's and Henle's layers differ-
The innermost layer of the inner root sheath, the
entiate much earlier than the hair cortex, since they
 monolayered cuticle, also has an important function.
most likely are essential for guiding the growing hair
Its strongly cornified cells are oppositely interlocked
fiber (Tsukise and Meyer 1983; Meyer 1986; Meyer
with the cells ofthe hair cuticle (Fig. 1.3.2d), and in this
and Neurand 1987; Fietz et al. 1992, 1993; Bates et al.
way the newly growing hair fiber is efficiently guided
1999; Pena et al. 1999; Hynd 2000; Ishii et al. 2001;
during its upward transport. Shape and size of the
Frase 2007). It is of basic hair biological interest that a
hair cuticle cells also demonstrate large interspecies
unique type I keratin group (IRSa keratin), compris-
and even interrace variations (Fig. 1.3.2d), and can
ing three highly related proteins, has been identified
therefore not be used to identify domesticated species
in both sheep and humans (Bawden et al. 2001). A
in contrast to wild species (Meyer et al. 2000).
phylogenetic analysis suggests that the origin of this
 group precedes the origin of most of the epidermal
1.3.2.2.3 Outer root sheath
cytokeratins and all hair keratins during emergence of
The outer root sheath does not keratinize below the
the keratin intermediate filament genes, indicating a
level of the isthmus (in contrast to the inner root
very early development of the hair follicle system dur-
sheath). However, at the level of the isthmus where the
 ing mammalian evolution (Alibardi 2004). There is
inner root sheath disintegrates, the outer root sheath
most likely a close correlation between the formation
keratinizes without forming granules (trichilemmal.
of the inner root sheath and the development of the 
keratinization), which is similar to the keratinization
epidermis that finally allowed penetration ofinternally
process of the hair cortex (Figs 1.3.2a,c-e and 1.3.10c).
 produced hair fibers through the skin.
As is known from studies in sheep, the intermedi-
 In some breeds of the pig (Mangalicza pig,
ate filament keratin 15 (K15) is expressed throughout
Gottingen miniature pig), and in some goats and
the hair cycle in the basal (ie., outer) layer of the
sheep, the hair fiber has an oval to triangular rather
outer root sheath. In the hair bulb, K15 is expressed
than a round shape (Fig. 1.3.9c). Likewise, a slightly
in cells next to the dermal papilla but not in the in-
tortuous rather than straight tube is formed by Hux-
 ner bulb cells. Thus, K15 expression appears to signal
ley's layer. This can be associated with an excentric
an early stage in the pathway of keratinocyte differ-
hair canal in the upper follicle segment (Fig. 1.3.9d)
entiation. The bulge region of the basal outer root
54Hair follicle biology
(O)
HUX
ORS
Hg. 1.3.9 Examples of domestication related defects of hair follicle structure. (a) Loss of hair medulla by degeneration of hair matrix
cells and early medulla trichocytes, merino sheep, longitudinal semithin section, toluidine blue, x620; (b) thinning of hair follicle and
toluidine blue, x830; Hc, hair cuticle; ORS, outer root sheath; (c) variations of hair fiber shape caused by thickness variations of
a tortuous hair canal by the outer root sheath (ORS), secondary HF, dog. transverse paraffin section, HE staining. x5O0. HP, hair 
folliclepapila.
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with comparison to laboratory animals and humans 55
[%HFglycogen]
Angoragoat
100-
80-
60
40-
★Male
20-
Female
0
JAN
FEB
MARAPR
MAY
JUN
JUL
AUG
SEP
OCT
NOV
DEC
JAN
(a)
(b)
(c)
Hg. 1.3.10 Glycogen in the hair follicle of domesticated mammals. (a) Demonstration of indistinct hair cycle according to more
goat, transverse paraffin section, PAS staining. x330: (c) demonstration of a transit cell (arrow) for glucose transport in Henley's
56  Hair follicle biology
sheath, thought to contain the hair follicle stem cells,
 In most wild mammals and in many free-ranging tra-
is K15 negative but expresses the intermediate fla-
ditionally reared small ruminants, two annual hair
ment keratin 19 (K19), supposed to be a stem cell
growth cycles are recognized as the spring and au-
marker. This is the case in canine hair follicles but
tumn molt. This seasonality is also expressed in other
not in human hair follicles. Several studies have fur-
physiological functions such as food intake and re-
 ther corroborated the view that keratin expression in
 production. Many studies have demonstrated that,
carnivore hair follicles differs from that in humans
among others, thyroid hormones play a crucial role
 and laboratory rodents. The expression of steroid hor-
in mediating this seasonality, not only with regard to
 mone receptors in the hair follicle and the content of
hair growth but also in terms of reproductive perfor-
 glycogen appear to be susceptible to domestication in-
mance. Variations in thyroid hormone activity allow
fluences. While in most domesticated mammals and
the animals to adapt their metabolic balance to dif-
in humans relevant glycogen storage in keratinocytes
ferent environmental conditions, changes in nutrient
 of the lower part of the outer root sheath varies with
availability, and homeorhetic changes during different
the season, in female Angora-haired mammals such as
 physiological stages. Consequently, many endogenous
the Angora goat the cells of the outer root sheath often
(breed, age, gender, physiological state) and environ-
contain high glycogen amounts throughout the year
mental factors (climate, season, nutrition) are able to
(Fig. 1.3.10a,b) (Nutbrown and Randall 1995; Jahoda
affect thyroid hormone activity (Todini 2007). How-
and Reynolds 1996; Cotsarelis 1997; Meyer et al. 1997;
 ever, the strong influence of thyroid hormones in the
Whitbread and Powell 1998; Bates et al. 1999; Pena
 onset of molting, as demonstrated for the cashmere
et al. 1999; Kozaki et al. 2001; Bratka-Robia et al. 2002;
 goat, emphasizes that basic principles of hair cycle
Meyer et al. 2002; Frase 2007).
control are not completely lost during domestication
(Villar et al. 2000; Pascucci et al. 2005).
In the process of domestication, humans created
1.3.2.3 Hair pigmentation
artificial environments for the animals that has
Melanocytes within the hair bulb transfer melano-
considerably weakened the selection pressure directed
somes into matrix keratinocytes by means oftheir long
to develop specific adaptations to different climatic
cellular processes (see Section 1.2.6), with follicular
zones. As a consequence of this, many breeds have lost
melanogenesis being strongly coupled to the anagen
their seasonal changes of hair. Studies have shown that
phase. From a comparative point of view, the num-
in cattle breeds such as black spotted, Simmenthal,
ber of melanocytes both within the hair bulb and the
Schwitz, Jersey, or Red Dane, there is almost no sea-
outer root sheath varies considerably in the different
sonal change in hair density, even if bred in different 
domesticated mammals. It can be very low with rather
climatic zones, whereas the ability to adapt is still
blonde types of hairs, and can be extremely high with
 present in other breeds (e.g., shorthorn). In sheep,
black or dark hairs. This is best visualized in different
the intensity of seasonal molting decreases from
dog breeds, but can also be found in cats (Fig. 1.3.3d),
coarse-woolen breeds (e.g., Soay, Scottish Blackface,
goats, cattle, or even horses. Such domestication-
Limousine, Awasi, and Kazakh) via medium-woolen
related variations in color can be explained by the
breeds (e.g-, Suffolk, Southdown, Wiltshire horn,
very complex regulation of hair follicle pigmentation
German Blackface) to fine-woolen animals (merino
(see Section 1.2.6.2). In view of the manifold influ-
breeds of different origin), in which it is practically
ences on hair pigmentation, even slight genetic al-
lost, especially in secondary hair follicles (Yeates 1955;
terations (likely to occur during intense breeding in
Ryders 1962, 1976; Raushenbach 1972; Raushenbach
several groups of domesticated animals, such as dogs
and Prasolova 1973; Herre and Rohrs 1990; Meyer
or sheep and cattle) can lead to changes in hair shaft
1991; Meyer and Schwarz 1992; Meyer et al. 1997,
coloration (Meyer 1986, 2009; Slominski et al. 2005).
1998; Villar et al. 2000; Rogers 2006). Some breeds of
cats, dogs, and pigs have also lost their molting season-
ality, particularly if kept indoors. Mane and tail hairs
1.3.2.4 Hair cycling
in horses are no longer molted seasonally but grow
Not all domestication-induced changes affect the hair
continuously over years. Angorism as in the Turkish
structure. The hair growth cycle and its sensitivity to
Angora goat or the Angora rabbit is characterized by
respond to extrinsic influences can be affected as well.
a growth period of at least 9 months. Finally, a hair
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with comparison to laboratory animals and humans 57
growth cycle ofabout 8 years? duration is found in the
from the hair coat of humans. The most important
merino sheep, and nonshedding sheep breeds such as
differences between domesticated animal species and
Romney sheep even remain in the anagen stage for life,
man are related to hair density. However, there are also
although with seasonal variation in the rate of wool
differences in the hair follicles themselves. Although
growth. All these observations illustrate consequences
the general hair follicle structure is very similar be-
of very intense breeding, since ancestral sheep breeds
tween humans and domesticated animals, variations
such as the Wiltshire sheep still exhibit hair growth cy-
occur in the size of hair follicles and the quality of
cles that classically respond to the photoperiod (Meyer
the hair fiber produced. In addition, one needs to be
et al. 1980b; Neurand et al. 1980; Rogers 2006). Nev-
aware of regional differences, with head, anogenital
ertheless, domestication does not exclude that dogs
regions, parts of the abdominal region, or mediolat-
living outdoors under varying daylight can still show
eral surfaces of the extremities, axillar, and inguinal
a typical molt with production of some sort of lighter
regions exhibiting several structural peculiarities. In
summer coat and a denser winter coat (Favarato
 general, the dorsolateral region is most homogeneous
and Conceicao 2008). This underlines the general
with regard to hair follicle structure.
 importance of a diurnal rhythm for hair cycling.
q al jo asio ienudeodot no ieuoiaai a
1.3.3.1 Dog and cat
molt may also be influenced by domestication.
The molt normally begins at the head and proceds
Dog and cat show the typical structure of primary
dorsoventrally and caudally. A synchronized wave-like
and secondary hair follicles. The former hair follicle
pattern of hair follicle cycling is found in young mice,
type often projects into the hypodermal fat reservoir,
rats, rabbits, and in few domesticated mammalian
whereby the skin is relatively thin. The insertion depth
 species, whereas some small and several medium-
varies between 0.40 and 1.20 mm in both species.
sized and large mammals such as guinea pigs, pigs,
e Aedsi pue sdnona u paune ane say iie
dogs, and cats mostly show a nonsynchronized mosaic
higher density in the cat (800-1,600 groups/cm², each
pattern of hair follicle cycling, as is also present in the
group with about 8-20 individual hairs; 6,000-10,000
scalp region of humans (Yeates 1955; Brunsch 1956;
hairs/cm2) than in the dog (100-600 groups/cm² ,each
Raushenbach 1972; Raushenbach and Prasalova 1973;
group with 2-15 hairs; 1,500-4,000 hairs/cm²). The
Ryder 1976; Meyer et al. 1980b; Neurand et al. 1980;
number of hair follicles per group not only varies be-
Diaz et al. 2004).
tween the different body regions (particularly in the
cat),but also within one body region. The largest (cen-
tral) primary hair follicle is typically placed in the cen-
1.3.2.5 Activity of hair follicle glands
ter of a group and is flanked by several lateral primary
Influences of domestication may also affect the activ-
 Or secondary hair follicles. Primary hair follicles are
ity of the sebaceous glands and the apocrine tubular
surrounded by a distinct arrector pili muscle. The di-
glands of the hair follicle complex. Whereas under
ameter of hair bulbs varies between 150 and 450 μm
natural conditions, glandular activity shows seasonal
 in primary hair follicles (thickest in the dog), and be-
activity (i.e., increased secretion during late anagen
 tween 70 and 120 μm in secondary hair follicles. Up
stages in spring), many intensely bred animals exhibit
to 85% (cat) and 75% (dog) of follicles are wool folli-
continuously increased glandular secretion rates and
cles, ifanimals are kept outside in the winter. Hair shaft
distinct changes in the composition of the sebum with
 quality varies markedly between breeds, particularlyin
subsequent changes in the spectrum and activities of
highbred animals. The numerous holocrine sebaceous
the microbial flora on the epidermal surface (Meyer et
glands are arranged in groups around the folicles. The
al. 2001, 2008b).
tubular apocrine glands have straight secretory ducts
and only slightly coiled secretory portions. Hair folli-
1.3.3 Species-specific aspects of hair
cles and associated glands are remarkably well supplied
follicle anatomy and physiology
with blood vessels, the latter deriving from the rete ar-
teriosum intradermale/plexus venosus intradermale
The integument of most domesticated mammals, in
(Brunsch 1956; Schwarz et al. 1976; Meyer et al. 1978,
particular of carnivores and small ruminants, has 
1982; Meyer and Neurand 1987; Schwarz and Meyer
structural and functional features that are very distinct
1994; Ishii et al. 2001).
 58  Hair follicle biology
1.3.3.2 Small ruminants
sociated with relevant changes in dietary quality and
quantity. The continuous production of hair fibers
The rather densely haired sheep and goat demonstrate
 despite fluctuations in the supply of oxygen and nutri-
a similar hair follicle grouping as carnivores. Three pri-
ents (including biotin, riboflavin, pyridoxine, folate,
mary hair follicles form groups with 15-16 (sheep) or
 pantothenic acid, vitamin D, vitamin A, copper, zinc,
3-6 (goat) secondary follicles, whereby 5,000-7,000
 and amino acids) may be responsible for a minor coat
hairs/cm2 can be found in sheep and 1,200-1,800
quality in autumn and winter, which is a typical con-
hairs/cm? in the goat. There is a great variation in the
sequence of purebred animals with high wool produc-
number of secondary (wool) hair follicles per group,
tion rates (see Section 3.2.1) (Meyer et al. 1978, 1997,
particularly in medium-woolen and fine-woolen an-
1998, 2008a; Meyer and Neurand 1987; Schwarz et al.
imals. In sheep, the extremely fine-woolen merino
1991; Jonen et al. 1994; Hynd et al. 1997; Nagorcka et
breed shows a maximum of 40-60 secondary hair fol-
al. 1998; Hynd 2000).
licles per hair group similar to (the Angora goat or the
cashmere goat), wherebythe number of secondary hair
follicles is significantly higher in Angora goats ( 15-40)
1.3.3.3 Large ruminants
than in cashmere goats (8-22). Comparing the differ-
The rather sparsely haired cattle generally show single
ent breeds in sheep and goats, it seems that there has
 primary and secondary hair follicles, sothata grouping
 been a movement ofsecondaries from between the pri-
can hardly be detected, although the triple primary fol-
maries accompanied by a tendency for the primaries
licle pattern is still present. Hair follicle density varies
to move closer together and to lie on an arc. As more
according to the different body regions and breeds be-
secondaries are found in medium- and finer-woolen
tween 600 and 2,500 hairs/cm2. About 70% of hair
breeds, this hair follicle type has spread away from
follicles are secondary follicles. Glands are similar to
the primaries, so that in view of the development of a
the small ruminants with a typical subfollicular layer
 more and more homogeneous hair coat, as is typical
 of the secretory portions of the apocrine glands. Data
for fine-woolen sheep, the number of branched hair
 on hair follicle density, even from animals in the same
follicles increased to become the dominating structure
environment sampled at the same age, are oflittle com-
of the common integument. The diameter of the hair
parative value because of differences in body weight or
bulbs in fine-woolen sheep and goats measures 180-
body size (e.g., in Herefords, shorthorns, or Brahman
300 μm in primary hair follicles, and 80-130 μm in
and Afrikander breeds). Hair follicle diameters are be-
secondary hair folicles. Insertion depths of primary
tween 200 and 450 μm in primary follicles, and 100-
and secondary hair follicles varies between 0.50 and
180 μm in secondary follicles. Insertion depth varies
 0.85 mm. The sebaceous glands have no structural
between 0.85 and 1.65 mm, whereby there seems to
be a negative correlation between hair follicle density
 and folicle depth. From a comparative point of view,
 bulbs of the primary follicles. The hair follicle com-
African, Asian, and South American cattle have a more
 plex is supplied from the rete arteriosum intrader-
shallow insertion than European breeds (Turner et al.
 male/plexus venosus intradermale, and, additionally,
1962; Jenkinson and Nay 1973; Amakiri and Hill 1975;
 the rete arteriosum dermidis/plexus venosus dermidis.
Meyer et al. 1978; Meyer and Neurand 1987).
 In sheep, blood vessels arising from the deep vascular
 network donot directly penetrate intothe deepest part
1.3.3.4 Pig
>
of the hair follicle but enter laterally between the hair
 bulb and the upper border of the prekeratinizating
 In the pig, single primary and secondary hair folli-
 zone; this is in contrast, for example, to hair follicle
cles are forming a rather sparse hair coat, with a den-
 vascularization in humans.
sity between 10 and 40 hairs/cm2. Strong bristles are
With regard to hair follicle biology both medium
very obvious and dominate as typical primary follicles,
 to fine-woolen sheep and goats undergo significant
whereas the short secondary hairs are inconspicuous
morphological changes throughout the year. These
and often are not found in modern breeds such as the
changes differ from the normal sequence of events
Yorkshire or German landrace. Hair bulb diameters
associated with the hair cycle and appear to be as-
between 200 and 600 μm for primary follicles and
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with comparison to laboratory animals and humans  59
100-180 μm for secondary hair follicles are normal in
1.3.3.7 Humans
the pig. The primary hair follicles are deeply inserted
Humans exhibit a hair density of only 20-35 hairs/cm2.
(3.00-5.30 mm), with the hair roots crossing the whole
dermis and bulbs that normally anchor in the hypo-
ad  0i jo ai a ie so iaqy iiu y
month, with one hair cycle lasting for about three
dermis between fat cells. Secondary follicles show a
years. Only very delicate primary hair follicles are
rather constant insertion depth of about 1.20 mm.
present in the common integument, whereas larger
Primary hair follicles possess large sebaceous glands
primary hairs are restricted to specific body regions,
with sebum reservoirs in the excretory duct (as in
for example, the scalp and anogenital regions. Hu-
humans) and distinct apocrine tubular glands with
 mans do not have secondary (wool) hair follicles. Ec-
a secretory unit lying near or below the hair bulb. In
crine tubular glands are independent of the primary
this species, the base of primary follicles is surrounded
hair follicles and distributed in the hairy skin, whereas
by a unique but distinct horizontally arranged inter-
apocrine tubular glands are only found in specific body
follicular muscle that is independent of the arrector
 regions, for example, axillar and anogenital regions.
pili muscle (thickness 40-80 μm) (Meyer and Neu-
-o sade iea a io leidi si a iael a
rand 1976; Meyer et al. 1978; Tsukise and Meyer 1983;
minids) and in contrast to all the other mammalian
Meyer 1986; Meyer and Gorgen 1986; Meyer and Neu-
groups (Meyer 2002).
rand 1987).
1.3.4 Domestic animals in hair
1.3.3.5 Horse
follicle research
The horse very clearly exhibits the single hair fol-
Although laboratory rodents are specifically bred for
licle system, with a hair density varying at the
various research purposes, they are not generally best
trunk between 1,000 and 1,500 hairs/cm?. There are
suited to research human skin, particularly because of
high breed-related regional variations in hair density.
the above-mentioned large differences in skin anatomy
About 60% of hair follicles are secondary wool follicles.
and physiology. Normally, only hair follicles of the
Relatively large (hair bulb diameter: 200-500 μm) and
dorsolateral body region are studied in laboratory ro-
rather steeply and deeply (0.80-1.00 mm) inserted pri-
 dents. However, it is primarily this body region where
 mary follicles are found, particularly in the mane and
hair follicles are synchronized opposed to the non-
anogenital regions (3.00-4.00 mm). Secondary folli-
synchronized mosaic hair cycle in humans. In addi-
cles are particularly deep and comparatively strong
(hair bulb diameter: 100-200 μm) and insert with
tion, intense breeding may have influenced the ability
of hair follicles to respond to external stimuli such
depths of 0.30-0.50 mm more or less in the super-
 as photoperiod and temperature. In view of the great
ficial part of the medium dermis (Meyer et al. 1978;
differences between rodent and human hair follicles
Meyer and Neurand 1987; Cook et al. 2005; Meyer
(Cotsarelis 2006), research would best be performed
2009).
on human hair follicles or on scalp hair follicles from
large apes kept under controlled indoors conditions.
 Because of the above-mentioned limitations, the
1.3.3.6 Laboratory rodents
integument of domesticated mammals has developed
 Laboratory rodents (mice and rats) with their rather
 increasing biomedical relevance as a model for experi-
thin skin have 5,000 up to 8,000 hairs/cm? in the
mental skin research. In contrast to laboratory rodents,
common integument, and show a typical mixture and
the integument of domesticated animals has been sub-
grouping of primary and secondary (wool) hair fol-
jected to many structural and functional modifications
licles. A typical summer hair coat, as developed for
during domestication, which resulted in a number of
example by animals kept constantly in the labora-
similarities to man (e.g- paucity of hair, hairlessness,
tory under indoor conditions, will show about 70%
hair curling, thickness of skin layers, and variations
wool hairs. Apocrine tubular glands related to pri-
 in pigmentation). This suggests that some of the old.
mary hair follicles are only present in specific body
est domesticated species (e.g-, pig, cattle, and horse)
regions.
are ideally suited for comparative dermatological
 60   Hair follicle biology
research. Yet differences in the microstructure and the
Cotsarelis G. 2006. Gene expression profiling gets to the root of
specific functions of all parts of the skin must still be
human hair follicle stem cells. Journal of Clinical Investigation
fully appreciated, before the most relevant experimen-
116:19-22.
 Diaz SF, Torres SMF, Dunstan RW, Lekcharoensuk C. 2004. An
tal animal species is selected.
analysis of canine hair re-growth after clipping for a surgical
 In summary, every scientist needs to be aware of the
procedure. Veterinary Dermatology 15:25-30.
 species-specific differences in skin anatomy and phys-
Edwards JEH. 1999. Reduction in wool follicles prior to birth in
Merino sheep. Reproduction, Fertility and Development 1l:229-
   a  a  q 
234.
 follicle diseases in humans. Studies in healthy and dis-
Favarato ES, Conceicao LG. 2008. Hair cycle in dogs with different
Aooua Auuua jizeg jo uoa jeidonn e u sad iy
eased domestic animals can further contribute to the
19:15-20.
understanding ofhair follicle diseases in humans, since
Fietz MJ, McLaughlan CJ, Campbell MT, Rogers GE. 1993. Analysis 
they have undergone similar domestication changes as
of the sheep trichohyalin gene—potential structural and calcium-
 humans and, opposed to laboratory rodents, share the 
binding roles of trichohyalin in the hair follicle. Journal of Celf
Biology 121:855-865.
 same environment with them.
 Fietz MI, Rogers GE, Eyre HI, Baker E, Callen DF, Sutherland GR.
1992. Mapping of the trichohyalin gene—colocalization with the
 proflaggrin, involucrin, and loricrin genes. Journal of Investiga-
tive Dermatology 99:542-544.
References
Fischer TW, Slominski A, Tobin DJ, Paus R. 2008. Melatonin and
the hair follicle. Journal of Pineal Research 44:1-15.
Alibardi L. 2004. Comparative aspects of the inner root sheath in
 Frase R. 2007. Immunhistochemische und biochemische Unter-
adult and developing hairs of mammals in relation to the evolu-
suchungen zur Expression von epithelialen Keratinen in klinisch
tion of hairs. Journal of Anatomy (London) 205:179-200.
unveranderter Pferdehaut und Fufhaut yonKaltblutpferden mit
Amakiri SF, Hil DH. 1975. Hair follicle measurements in some
Warzenmauke-Syndrom. Dissertation Thesis, University of Vet-
 tropical and temperate breeds of cattle in Nigeria. International
 erinary Medicine, Hannover.
Journal of Biometeorology 19:115-121.
 Fraser IEB. 1964. Studies on the follicle bulbs of fbres. I. Mitotic
Auber L. 1951. The anatomy of follicles producing wool fibres with
and cellular segmentation in the wool follicle with references
special reference tokeratinization ransactionsof the RoyatSoc
to ortho- and parasegmentation. Australian Journal of Biological
ety ofEdinburgh 62(Pt I):191-254.
Sciences 17:521-531.
Bates EJ, Penno NM, Hynd PI. 1999. Wool follicle matrix cells:
Hardy MH. 1992. The secret life of thehair follicle. Trends in Genetics
culture conditions and keratin expression in vitro. British Journaf
8:55-61.
ofDermatology 140:216-225.
Herre W, Langlet J. 1936. Untersuchungen iber Haut, Haar- und
Bawden CS, McLaughlan C, Nesci A, Rogers G.2001. A unique type I
Lockenbildung des Karakulschafes. Zeitschrift fitr Trierzuchtung
keratin intermediate flament gene family is abundantly expressed
und Zichtungsbiologie 35:401-412.
 in the inner root sheath of sheep and human hair follicles. Journa!
Herre W, Rohrs M. 1990. Haustiere—zoofogisch gesehen, 2nd edn.
of Investigative Dermatology 1l16:157-166.
Stuttgart: Fischer.
 Botchkarev VA, Botchkareva NV, Welker P, Metz M, Lewin GR, Sub-
Herre W, Wigger H. 1939. Die Lockenbildung der Saugetiere. Kuhn
ramaniam A, Bulfone-Paus S, Hagen E, Braun A, Lommatzsch M,
Archiv 52:233-254.
Renz H, Paus R. 1999. A new role for neurotrophins: involvement
 Hynd PI. 2000. The nutritional biochemistry of wool and hair fol-
 of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin-4 in hair
'licles. Animal Science 70:18l-195.
cycle control. FASEB Journal 13:395-410.
Hynd PI, Hughes A, Earl CR, Penno NM. 1997. Seasonal changes
 Bratka-Robia CB, Egerbacher M, Helmreich M, Mitteregger G, Be-
in the morphology of wool follcles in finewool and strongwool
nesch M, Bamberg E. 2002. Immunohistochemical localization
Merino strains grazing at different stocking rates in southern
 of androgen and oestrogen receptors in canine hair follicles. Vet-
Australia. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research 48:1089-
erinary Dermatoflogy 13:113-118.
1097.
 Braun KM, Prowse DM. 2006. Distinctepidermal stem cell compart-
Ishi M, Tsukise A, Meyer W. 2001. Lectin histochemistry of glyco-
ments are maintained by independent niche microenvironments.
 conjugates in the feline hair follicle and hair. Annais of Anatomy
Stem Celf Reviews 2(3):221-231.
183:449458.
Brunsch A.1956. Vergleichende Untersuchungen am Haarkleid von-
 Jahoda CA, Reynolds AJ. 1996. Dermal-epidermal interactions.
Wildcaniden und Haushunden. Zeitschrift fiur Tierzuchtung und
Adult follicle-derived cell populations and hair growth. Derma-
Zuchtungsbiologie 67:205-240.
tologic Clinics 14:573-583.
Chapman RE. 1979. Das Tierhaar. In: Orfanos CE (ed), Haar und
Jenkinson DM, Nay T. 1973. The sweat glands and hair follicles of
Haarkrankheiten, pp. 167-195. Stuttgart: Springer.
 Asian, African, and South American cattle. Australian fournal of
Cianferotti L, Cox M, Skorija K, Demay MB. 2007. Vitamin D re-
Biological Sciences 26:259-275.
ceptor is essential for normal keratinocyte stem cell function.
Jonen M, Meyer W, Schwarz R, Davies AS. 1994. Vergle-
Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences of The United
 ichende Untersuchungen zur Struktur der Haarfollikelgruppen
States of America 104:9428-9433.
bei neuseelandischen Cashmere-, Angora- und Cashgora-
Cook CP, Scott DW, Erb HN, Miller WH. 2005. Bacteria and fungi on
ziegen. Journal of Animal Breeding and Genetics lll:391-
thesurface and within noninflamed hair-folliclesof skin biopsy
403.
 specimens from horses with healthy skin or inflammatory der-
Kozaki M, Nakamura Y, Iquchi M, Kano R, Watanabe S, Fujiwara K,
matoses. Veterinary Dermatology 16:47-51.
Hasegawa A. 2001. Immunohistochemical analysis of cytokeratin
Cotsarelis G. 1997. The hair follicle. American Journal of Pathology
expression in dog skin. Journal of Veterinary Medical Science 63:
151:1505-1509.
14.
Hair follicles in domesticated mammals with comparison to laboratory animals and humans   61
Krause K, Foitzik K. 2006. Biology of the hair follicle: The basics.
Seminars in Cutaneous Medicine and Surgery 25:2-10.
the skin glands in the Southern pudu ( Pudu puda MOLINA 1782,
LindnerG, Botchkarev VA. Botchkareva NV, Ling G, van der Veen C,
Cervidae). Mammalian Biology 74:392-395.
Paus R. 1997. Analysis of apoptosis during hair follicle regression
 Meyer W, Uhr G, Schwarz R, Radke B. 1982. Untersuchungen an
(Catagen). American Journal of Pathology i51:1601-1617.
der Haut der Europaischen Wildkatze ( Felis siivestris Schreber).
Meyer W. 1986. Die Haut des Schweines. Hannover: Schlitersche.
II.Haarkleid.ZoologischeFahrbicher,Abteilungfir Anatomie und
Meyer W. 1991. Bemerkungen zu domestikationsbedingten Veran-
Ontogenie der Triere 107:205-234.
 Nagorcka BN, Dollin AE, Ringrose-Voase AJ. 1998. Measurement of
kunde 56(Sh):33-34.
fibre density and fbre bundles in the skin of sheep from different
Meyer W. 2002. Die tubularen Hantdrisen in der allgemeinen
breeds. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research 49:113-126.
 Neurand K, Meyer W, Schwarz R. 1980. Der Haarwechsel der
genetischer und biologischer Zusammenhänge.Der Zoologishe
Haussäugetiere. I. Allgemeine Problematik und zeitlicher Ablauf.
Garten NF72:107-123.
Deutsche Tierarztliche Wochenschrift 87:27-31.
Meyer W. 2009. Haut und Hautorgane. In: Wssdorf H, Gerhards
Nutbrown M, Randall VA. 1995. Differences between connective
H, Huskamp B, Deegen E (eds), Praxisorientierte Anatommie des
tissue-epithelial junctions in human skin and the anagen hair
Pferdes, 3rd edn. Hannover: Schlitersche, in press.
follicle. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 104:90-94.
Meyer W, Godynicki S, Tsukise A. 2008a. Lectin histochemistry of
 Pascucci L, Mercati F, Gargiulo AM, Pedini V, Sorbolini S, Ceccarelli
the endothelium of blood vessels in the mammalian integument,
 P. 2006. CD34 glycoprotein identifies putative stem cells located in
with remarks on the endothelial glycocalyx and blood vessel sys-
the isthmic region of canine hair follicles. Veterinary Dermatofogy
tem nomenclature. Annais of Anatomy 190:264-276.
17:244-251.
Meyer W, Gorgen S. 1986. Development of hair coat and skin
Pascucci L, Pedini V, Parillo F, Gargiulo AM. 2005. Apoptotic cell
glands in fetal porcine integument. Journal of Anatomy (London)
death in canine hair follicle. Histology and Histopathology 20:1-9.
144:201-220.
Paus R, Peters EMJ, Eichmiller S, Botchkarev VA. 1997. Neural
Meyer W, Hilmann G, Seger H. 2002. REM Atlas on the Hair Cuticle
mechanisms of hair growth control. Journal of Investigative Der-
Pattern of Central European Mammals.Alfeld-Hannover: Schaper.
matology SymposiurmProceedings 2:61-68.
Meyer W, Neurand K. 1976. The distribution of enzymes in the skin
Pena JC, Kelekar A, Fuchs EV, Thompson CB.1999 Manipulation
of the domestic pig. Laboratory Animais 10:237-247.
 of outer root sheath cell survival perturbs the hair growth cycle.
Meyer W, Neurand K. 1987. A comparative scanning electron mi-
EMBO Journaf 18:35963603.
croscopicviewoftheintegumentofdomesticmammals.Scanning
 Priestley GC, Rudall KM. 1965. Modifications in the Huxley layer
Microscopy 1:169-180.
associated with changes in fbre diameter and output. In: Lyne
Meyer W, Neurand K, Miller K. 1992. Integumental structure in a
AG,Short BF(eds),Biology of the Skin and Hair Growth,PP.
 Friesian calf with congenital hypo- or atrichosis combined with
165-170. Sidney: Angus & Robertson.
prognathia inferior. Veterinary Dermatology 3:43-46.
Raushenbach YO. 1972. Disturbances of seasonal rhythm of adap-
Meyer W, Neurand K, Schwarz R. 1980a. Der Haarwechsel der
tive changes in animals under domestication. Journal of Interdis-
HaussagetierpgraphishrblafergleichHast
ciplinary Cycle Research 3:166.
Wildtier und Steuerungsmechanismen. Deutsche Tierarztliche
Raushenbach YO, Prasalova LA. 1973. The disturbance of adaptive
Wochenschrift 87:96-102.
rhythm of seasonal changes during domestication of animals in
Meyer W, Neurand K, Schwarz R. 1980b. Der Haarwechsel der
the U.S.S.R. Journal of Interdisciplinary Cycle Research 4:369-377.
 Haussaugetiere. Il. Der Harwechsel von Schaf und Ziege.
 Rogers GE. 2006. Biology of the wool follicle: an excursion into
Deutsche Tierirztliche Wochenschrift 87:346-353.
a unique tissue interaction system waiting to be re-discovered.
Meyer W, Neurand K, Schwarz R, Bartels T, Althoff A. 1994. Ar-
Experimental Dermatology 15:931-940.
rangement of elastic fbres in the integument of domesticated
 Ryder ML. 1958. Follicle arrangement in skin from wild sheep,
6
mammals. Scanning Microscopy 8:375-391.
primitive domestic sheep and in parchment. Nature 182:781-
Meyer W, Neurand K, Tanyolac A. 2001. General antimicrobial prop-
783.
erties oftheintegumentin fleece producing sheep and goats. Small
Ryder ML. 1962. The histological examination of skin in the study
8
Ruminant Research 4l:181-190.
of the domestication of sheep. Zeitschrift fir Tierzichtung und
Meyer W, Saglam M, Schwarz R, Tanyolac A. 1998. Der Energiestof-
Ziuchtungsbiologie 77:168-171.
fwechsel der Turkischen Angoraziege unter saisonaler Sicht.
Ryder ML. 1976. Seasonal changes in the coat of the cat. Research in.
Deutsch-Tirkische Agrarforschung, 5. Symposium(Antatya 1997),
Veterinary Science 21:280-283.
339-344.
 Schwarz R, Le Roux JMW, Neurand K. 1976. Lichtmikroskopische
Meyer W, Saglam M, Tanyolac A, Schwarz R, Hetzel U. 1997. His-
Untersuchungen an der Haut der Katze. Verteilung, Anordnung
tochemische und biochemische Untersuchungen zu jahreszyklis-
wd Morphologie der Haare bzw. Haarfollikel. Zentraiblatt fir
chen Aspekten des Kohlenhydrat-abhangigen Energiestoffwech-
Veterinarmedizin Reihe C5:325-341.
sels der Haarfollikel von Tirkischen Angoraziegen. Schweizer
Schwarz R, Meyer W. 1994. Haut und Hautorgane. In: Frewein J,
Archiv fir Tierheilkunde 139:78-83.
Vollmerhaus B(eds),Anatomie von Hund und Katze, pp. 316-340.
Meyer W, Schnapper A, Hilmann G, Seger H. 2000. Domestication-
Berlin: Blackwell.
 related variations of thehaircuticula pattern in mammals. fourna!
Schwarz R, Saglam M, Tanyolac A, Asti R, Ozcan Z, Meyer W. 1991.
Xb
of Animal Breeding and Genetics 117:281-283.
Mikroskopische Untersuchungen an der Haut der Tirkischen
 Meyer W, Schwarz R. 1992. Zu Bau und Funktion der Haut von
 Angoraziege. I. Funktionelle Morphologie der Haarfollikel.
Hund und Katze—-mit Bemerkungen zu Domestikationseffekten.
Deutsche Tierarztliche Wochenschrift 98:297-303.
Jahresberichte derDeutschen VeterinirmedizinischenGesellschaft,
 Slominski A, Wortsman J, Plonka PM, Schallreuter KU, Paus R,
FachgruppeRleintierkrankheiten37:93-99.
Tobin DJ. 2005. Hair follicle pigmentation. Journal of Investigative
Meyer W, Schwarz R, Neurand K. 1978. The skin of domestic mam-
Dermatology 124:13-21.
 mals as a model for the human skin, with special reference to the
Straile WE. 1965. Root sheath—dermal papilla relationships and
domestic pig. Current Problems in Dermatology 7:39-52.
the control of hair growth. In: Lyne AG, Short BF (eds),
62  Hair follicle biology
Biology of the Skin and Hair Growth, pp. 35-57. Sidney: Angus &
cattle in relation to breed and body weight. Australian Journal of
Robertson.
Agricultural Research 13:960-973.
Tiede S, Kloepper JIE, Bodo E, Tiwari S, Kruse C, Paus R. 2007.
Villar D, McMillen SR, Dicks P, Rhind SM. 2000. The roles of thy-
Hair follicle stem cells: walking the maze. European Journal of
 roid hormones and prolactin in the control of fibre moult and
Cell Biology 86:355-376.
associated changes in hair follicle activities in cashmere goats.
Todini L. 2007. Thyroid hormones in small ruminants: effects of en-
Australian fournal of Agricultural Research 51:407—414.
 dogenous environmental and nutritional factors. Animaf 1:997-
Whitbread LA, Powell BC. 1998. Expression of the intermediate
1008.
flament keratin gene, Kl5, in thebasal cellayers of epithelia and
Tsukise A, Meyer W. 1983. Histochemistry of complex carbohy-
the hair follicle. Experimental Cell Research 244:448459.
drates in the hairy skin of the domestic pig. Histochemical fournal
 Yeates TM. 1955. Photoperiodicity in cattle. I. Seasonal changes in
15:845-860.
coat character and their importance in heat regulation. Australian
Turner HG, Nay T, French GT. 1962. The hair follicle population of
Journal of Agricultural Research 6:891-902.
Part 2
How to approach alopecic diseases
 Clinical aspects
G
Histopathological aspects
1
2.1
Clinical aspects
Monika Linek
Abnormalities of the hair coat are usually recognized
high incidence in the Doberman Pinscher, whereas
by the owners of an animal early in the course of the
 black hair follicle dysplasia occurs commonly in York-
disease. Alopecia (i.e., absence of hair in an area, where
shire Terriers. Other breed-specific canine alopecias
it is normally present) or hypotrichosis (i.e., a partial
that are not color-linked have been described in breeds
hair loss or abnormal thinning of the hair coat) may
such as Curly-Coated Retrievers (see Section 3.3.9.4),
represent a mere cosmetic problem with no risk to the
Irish Water Spaniels (see Section 3.3.9.1), Portuguese
patient, or it may be a manifestation of an internal
Water Dogs (see Section 3.3.9.2), Siberian Huskies and
disease with potentially serious consequences. There-
Alaskan Malamutes (see Section 3.3.9.7), Greyhounds
fore, a methodical approach and accurate diagnosis
(see Section 3.3.9.5), and Chesapeake Bay Retrievers
 are prerequisites for successful management of these
(see Section 3.3.9.3).
cases.
In small breeds such as Poodles, Dachshunds, and
The diagnostic approach to alopecia in general is
Terriers, hyperadrenocorticism is the most often seen
similar in all species and species specificities will only
endocrinopathy (see Section 3.3.2), whereas hypothy-
be mentioned where necessary. An overview on the
roidism (see Section 3.3.1) is more common in var-
most important alopecic diseases in dogs and cats can
 ious large breed dogs. Alopecia X has been reported
be found in Tables 2.1.1-2.1.3.
in plush-coated dogs such as Pomeranian and Chow
Chow, in Miniature Poodles, and in some ofthe Nordic
breeds like the Samoyed, Alaskan Malamute, and
2.1.1 Breed
Keeshond (see Section 3.3.4.). Acquired pattern alope-
Many alopecic diseases have only been observed in
cia is most common in Manchester Terriers, Miniature
Pinschers, Dachshund, Whippet, Italian Greyhound,
a subset of breeds. It is therefore crucial to consider
breed-specific diseases when dealing with alopecia.
and Greyhound, as well as the Boston Terrier (see Sec-
 Breeds with congenital or hereditary alopecia syn-
tion 3.3.8). Cyclic recurrent flank alopecia is seen in
dromes in cats are Sphinx and Canadian Hairless (see
the Doberman Pinscher, Boxer, Airedale Terrier, and
Section 3.1.2.2.5), Burmese, Birman, Devon Rex, and
Rhodesian Rigdgeback (see Section 3.3.5).
Siamese. Hairless dog breeds are Chinese Crested,
Even some inflammatory alopecias show breed
predilections like demodicosis (see Section 4.1.3) in
Mexican Hairless, Inca, and Peruvian Hairless (see
Section 3.1.2.1). In cattle, congenital alopecia has been
the short-coated dog breeds (Pugs, Boxers, Terriers)
described to occur in various breeds, with some forms
or sebaceous adenitis in Akita Inus, Poodles, Vizslas,
being associated with early postnatal mortality (see
and Hovawarts.
Section 3.1.2).
Follicular lipidosis has so far only been described in
2.1.2 History
Rottweilers (see Section 3.1.2.4.5), whereas color dilu-
tion alopecia and its subtype black hair follicular dys-
Taking a profound patient history before the clinical
plasia have been observed in various breeds (see Sec-
examination is a vital step in the diagnostic process
tion 3.1.2). Color dilution alopecia has a particularly
 Important points to consider are breed, age of onset,
66  How to approach alopecic diseases
Table 2.1.1 Diseases with inflammatory alopecia in the dog. their incidence, and their most important diagnostic procedure
Disease
Incidence
Diagnostic procedures
Alopecia areata
Rare
Biopsy. trichogram
Demodicosis
Common
 Deep skin scraping, trichogram
Dermatomyositis
Rare, most common in Collies and Shelties
Biopsy
Dermatophytosis
Common in rural areas
Wood's lamp, trichogram, culture
Drug reaction
Rare
Cytology. biopsy
Eosinophilic folliculitis
Rare
Cytology. biopsy
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Rare
Cytology,biopsy
Granulomatous mural folliculitis
Very rare
Biopsy
Leishmaniasis
Common in endemic areas
Cytology, FNA LN/BM, serology. PCR, biopsy
Pemphigus foliaceus
Rare
Cytology. biopsy
Post rabies alopecia
Quite rare
Clinical presentation and history, biopsy
Pyoderma
Common
Cytology microbiology
Scaring alopecia
Veryrare
Biopsy
Sebaceous adenitis
Rare
Biopsy. trichogram
Traction alopecia
Rare
History, biopsy
 FNA LN/BM, fine needle aspiration of lymph nodes or bone marrow; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
Table 2.1.2 Diseases with noninflammatory alopecia in the dog, their incidence, and their most important diagnostic procedure
Disease
Incidence
Diagnostic procedures
Alopecia X
 Common in certain breeds
Exclusion of any endocrinopathy, biopsy
Anagen effluvium
Veryrare
History, biopsy
Black hair follicular dysplasia
 Common in certain breeds
Biopsy
Color dilution alopecia
Common in certain breeds
Trichogram, biopsy 
Corticosteroid-induced alopecia
Common
ACTH stimmulation test
Cyclic recurrent flank alopecia
Certain breeds
History, biopsy
Ectodermal cysplasia
Veryrare
History, age, biopsy
 Follicular lipidosis
Very rare, only in Rottweilers
Biopsy
Hyper adrenocorticism
 Common in old dogs
Urin C/C, ACTH stimulation test, LDDST,
ultrasound, CT/MRI,
Hypothyroidism
 Common only in certain breeds
tT4/TSH, rhTSH stimulation test, TgAA,
T4/T3 autoantibodies, ultrasound
Other breed-specific non-color-linked
In certain breeds only
Biopsy
alopecias
Pattern baldness
Certain breeds
History, clinical features, biopsy
 Post-clipping alopecia
Rare
History, clinical features, biopsy
Hyperestrogenism
Rare
Ultrasound estradiol/testosterone ratio
 Telogen effluvium
Rare
History, clinical features
Urine C/C, urine cortisol/creatininratio; LDDST, low-dose dexamethasone suppression test; CT/MRl, computed tomography/magnetic
resonance imaging: tT4, total T4; TSH, thyroid-stimulation hormone; rhTSH, recombinant human TSH; TgAA, thyroglobulin autoan-
tibodies.
sex, environment, previous illnesses, progression of
alopecia during the first year of life is suggestive of ec-
alopecia, response to treatment, and transmission to
todermal or follicular dysplasia, dysplasia of the hair
other animals or owners (Table 2.1.4).
follicle pigmentary unit (see Chapter 3.1) or a congeni-
tal endocrinopathy such as congenital hypothyroidism
(see Section 3.3.1). Acquired hypothyroidism (see Sec-
2.1.2.1 Age of onset
tion 3.3.1) is a disease of the young to middle-aged
The age when alopecia first occurred can be help-
dog, whereas hyperadrenocorticism (see Section 3.3.2)
ful for the diagnosis. Symmetrical noninflammatory
occurs in the middle-aged to old dog. In contrast,
Clinical aspects  67
Table 2.1.3 Alopecic diseases in the cat, their incidence, and their most important diagnostic procedure
Disease
Incidence
Diagnostic procedure
Alopecia areata*
Very rare
Biopsy
Congenital alopecia
Veryrare
Age, history, biopsy
Demodicosis
Rare
Deep skin scraping
Dermatophytosis
Very common
Wood's lamp, trichogram, dermatophyte culture
Ectoparasites/fleas
Very common
Combing, skin scraping, trial therapy
Exfoliative dermatitis
Rare
Biopsy
Follicular mucinosis
Very rare
Biopsy
Hyperadrenocorticism, iatrogenic
Rare
History, blood chemistry, ACTH stimulation test
Hyperadrenocorticism, spontaneous
Rare
Urin C/C, HDDT, ACTH stimulation test
Hypersensitivity
Common
Exclusion of other skin diseases, biopsy
Hypothyroidism
Rare
fT4, tT4, TSH
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis
Very rare
Biopsy
Par aneoplastic alopecia
Very rare
Biopsy
 Pemphigus foliaceus
Rare
Cytology. biopsy
Pseudopelade (isthmic folliculitis)
Very rare
Biopsy
Pyoderma
Common
Cytology, microbiology
Psychogenic alopecia
Rare
Exclusion of other skin diseases, biopsy
Self-induced alopecia
Very common
Trichogram, history
Telogen effluvium
Rare
History, clinical examination
Urine C/C, urine cortisol/creatinin ratio; HDDT,high-dose dexamethasone suppression test; tT4, total T4; fT4, free T4; TSH, thyroid-
stimulation hormone.
*, a disease with similarities to alopecia areata but without known pathogenesis.
 inflammatory alopecia (see Part 4) with marked pru-
ritus can occur at any age.
hyperadrenocorticism often report polyuria, polydip-
sia, and polyphagia (see Section 3.3.2.1). Cats with
2.1.2.2 Sex and reproductive history
hyperadrenocorticism may develop diabetes mellitus
(see Section 3.3.2.3). In canine hypothyroidism, the
Male dogs with estrogen-producing testicular tumors
owner may describe signs that reflect the slowing of
and subsequent hyperestrogenism (see Section 3.3.3)
cellular metabolism, such as lethargy and weight gain.
may have a history of signs suggesting feminization
Most paraneoplastic syndromes will also be associated
(attractiveness to male dogs, gynecomastia, pendu-
with signs of internal disease.
lous prepuce). Prolonged estrus has been reported in
bitches with ovarian disorders and hyperestrogenism,
whereas anestrus has been reported in bitches with hy-
Table 2.1.4 Important anamnestic questions for alopecic skin
peradrenocorticism (see Section 3.3.2) and hypothy-
roidism (see Section 3.3.1). Except for the dog, sex
diseases in domestic animals
hormone-related alopecias are rare or do not exist. Al-
At what age has hair loss started?
though symmetrical alopecia of the trunk in cats has
 Are siblings or parents affected?
been associated with a sex hormone imbalance (since
Are other animals or humans affected?
Does your pet scratch, lick, chew, or rub at the alopecic area?
it responds to progesterone), most of these cases are in
Is progression of alopecia waxing and waning or does it
fact self-induced alopecias, and the response is likely
progress continuously?
 explained by the immunomodulating effect of proges-
Is the severity of alopecia changing with the season?
terone.
Are there any other physical complaints, previous illneses or
signs of systemmic illness?
Has there been a recent surgical intervention, blood loss or
2.1.2.3 Signs of internal disease
pregnancy?
What medications are currently being given or have recently
Many endocrine diseases that affect the skin are asso-
been given?
ciated with clinical signs that suggest interference with
68  How to approach alopecic diseases
2.1.2.4 Progression of afopecia
tries, but in horses and cattle copper, selenium and
zinc deficiencies can change hair quality and quantity
Seasonal or cyclic episodes of noninflammatory sym-
metrical truncal alopecia followed by spontaneous
(see Section 3.2.1).
hair regrowth are typical of canine recurrent flank
alopecia (see Section 3.3.5). Spontaneous regrowth,
2.1.3 Clinical examination of hair coat
however, can also be seen in alopecia of the Por-
and skin
tuguese Water Dog (see Section 3.3.9.2). Alopecia
areata may spontaneously resolve and regrow white
After taking a history, the close examination of the
hair (see Chapter 4.7), whereas most endocrinopathies
whole integument is the next step. Alopecia may be a
and inflammatory disorders tend to be progressive
feature of a myriad of skin diseases, if infectious dis-
without intermittent remission.
eases and alopecia caused by marked pruritus are in-
cluded. Therefore, the clinical examination should first
2.1.2.5 Stressful events
focus on signs of follicular inflammation and infection
and should differentiate them from noninflammatory
Telogen effluvium is a transient disorder of excessive
diseases. In addition, the clinician should watch out
hair shedding, resulting from a synchronous cessation
 for signs that are specific for some dermatoses: ery-
of hair growth. It usually follows pregnancy, lacta-
 thema, papules, pustules, thickening of the skin or
tion, severe illness, or a similar stressful event that has
lichenification, self-traumatizing recognized by bro-
occurred 1-3 months earlier. Burns or scalds can be
ken hairs, excoriations, erosions, and ulcerations are
followed by alopecia developing only days after the
 a ll suggestive of an inflammatory process with pruritus
insult.
(see Section 3.5.2). Thinning of the skin with promi-
nent subcutaneous vessels or calcium deposits along
dermal collagen fibers known as calcinosis cutis are
2.1.2.6 Drug administration and response
pathognomonic in hyperadrenocorticism (see Section
to treatment
3.3.2), whereas hypothyroidism is often accompanied
The clinician confronted with an alopecic patient
by thickened and hyperpigmented skin without in-
should enquire about previous drug administration.
flammation (see Section 3.3.1). In canine recurrent
Long-term glucocorticoid therapy may cause iatro-
flank alopecia the affected area of skin is well de-
genic hyperadrenocorticism and hair cycle arrest in
marcated, hyperpigmented, and feels cold (see Section
most animals and is very well known in the dog (see
3.3.5).
Section 3.3.2.2). Estrogens (see Section 3.3.3) and cy-
totoxic drugs, such as cyclophosphamide (see Sec-
2.1.3.1 Coat color change
tion 3.4.1), may as well interfere with hair growth.
In horses and large animals, acaricides and chemi-
Color dilution alopecia should be strongly suspected if
cals are often used as topicals and may induce irritant
the dog has a dilute coat color (Fig. 3.1.20). Black hair
alopecia. Focal alopecia may develop as a response
follicular dysplasia should be considered if the alope-
to injections, especially rabies vaccines (see Section
cia is confined to black (or dark)-haired areas (see
3.4.3). In addition, the response or the lack of re-
 Section 3.1.2.4.1); these two diseases usually develop
sponse to previous therapy is helpful in the diagnostic
during the first year of life. A color-linked alopecia has
process; for example, failure of hair regrowth after 3-5
also been described in the Appaloosa horse. A lighten-
months of thyroxin supplementation at an appropri-
 ing of the coat color (leukotrichia) is not uncommon
ate dosage excludes hypothyroidism as the cause of
 in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. Changes in coat
alopecia.
color and coat quality are also seen in many of the
canine breed-specific hair cycle abnormalities. In Dal-
2.1.2.7 Nutrition
matians the formerly called Bronzing Syndrome due
to multiple brown spots over the rump is now rec-
In small-animal practice, alopecia due to nutritional
 ognized as folliculitis and furunculosis. A regrowth
deficiencies is uncommon nowadays in most coun-
         
Clinical aspects  69
fa
b
Fig. 2.1.1 Hyperpigmentation versus lichenification. (a) Hyperpigmentation without lichenification as a consequence of chronic
pigmented is suggestive for alopecia areata (see Chap-
2.1.4 Laboratory examination
ter 4.7). The presence of miniaturized fine hairs in
dogs is a key feature in pattern alopecia (see Section
Laboratory tests are required for a definitive diagnosis
3.3.8). Coat color change to brown is a hallmark of
in most cases of alopecia.
licking, especially in white dogs.
2.1.4.1 Forced combing
2.1.3.2 Skin color change
Forced combing and subsequent microscopic exami-
 Intense hyperpigmentation of the alopecic areas is
 nation of the collected hairs is a simple procedure to
most commonly seen in dogs with recurrent cyclic
 determine increased shedding, but it is not a very sen-
flank alopecia (Fig. 3.3.21) and alopecia X (Fig.
sitive test as most animals shed more intensively under
3.3.16). However, hyperpigmentation is also seen in
stressful conditions. Under physiologic conditions, the
response to chronic inflammation often accompanied
hair is shed in telogen only, that is the resting stage of
by lichenification. A careful examination should be
 the follicle. Shedding of anagen hair is always consid-
able to distinguish inflammatory from noninflamma-
 tory hyperpigmentation (Fig. 2.1.1). Depigmentation
often together with proliferating stage of the follicle.
will occur in scars.
Superficial parasites such as lice and fur mites are also
easily detected with this examination technique.
2.1.3.3 Pattern of hair loss
The pattern of the hair loss such as focal, multifocal,
2.1.4.2 Hair pfucking
moth-eaten, symmetric or asymmetric should be no-
ticed, and is best recorded in a scheme. Schemes allow
Hair plucking can evaluate if hairs are easily epilated.
 to document the progress of the disease (improvement
Microscopic examination of plucked hairs mounted
 or progression). Although the pattern only allows for
 onto a glass slide with mineral oil (Fig. 2.1.2) can
a crude differentiation, infectious alopecias generally
be used to search for Demodex mites (Fig. 2.1.3) and
develop a more asymmetric, multifocal, sometimes
arthospores of dermatophytes within or along the hair
 moth-eaten pattern, whereas endocrine alopecias and
shaft (Fig. 2.1.4). Abnormal cycling of hair follicles
other hair cycle abnormalities are more symmetric in
can be detected by an altered ratio of anagen to tel-
pattern. Allergies may however also present with bi-
 ogen hairs. If keratinous debris is complicating the
laterally symmetric alopecia.
examination, the plucked hairs can be premixed with
 70  How to approach alopecic diseases
(a)
(b}
Fig. 2.1.2 Hair pull test. (a) Hairs are harvested using a surgical hemostat; (b) pulled hair shafts are mounted onto a glass slide with
mineral oil.
[a]
(b)
demonstrates morphological characteristics of eggs, larvae, nymphs and adult Demodex mites (Courtesy of C. Nett)
Clinical aspects  71
Hg. 2.1.4 Trichogram of canine dermatophytosis with numer-
Fig. 2.1.6 Trichogram from a dog with broken hair shafts. Note
ous arthrospores along the hair shaft. (Courtesy of C. Nett.)
the split ends
potassium hydroxide. It is important to wait for
 the hair shaft may reveal hyphae or arthroconidia, but
20 min or warm the slide up to clear the debris be-
their absence does not exclude dermatophytosis (see
fore examining the slide under a microscope.
Section 4.1.2) (Fig. 2.1.4).
Looking microscopically at the hair tips of plucked
hairs may help to differentiate broken hair shafts or
2.1.4.3 Trichogram
split ends from the fine-peaked ends of normal hairs
Under physiologic conditions a trichogram will re-
(Fig. 2.1.6). This is often the best way to diagnose
veal hair shafts in anagen and in telogen. Some dog
alopecia due to licking especially in the cat (see Section
breeds, however, will show very high numbers of tel-
3.5.1). Furthermore, the hair shaft and hair bulb can
ogen hair follicles. In telogen effluvium (see Section 
 reveal clumped melanin and thus will draw attention
3.3.6.) or other hair cycle arrests there is a remarkable
toward color dilution alopecia or black hair follicular
shift toward telogen follicles. A hair pluck will show
dysplasia (see Section 3.1.2.4) (Fig. 2.1.7). Pili torti,
a disproportional increase of telogen fibers with club-
trichoptilosis, and other trichomalacias are detected
shaped proximal ends (Fig. 2.1.5). In dermatophytosis
 during this step of examination. There are anecdotal
(b)
sheus yiey uaboan (a) :sheus jey uabeuy (e) bop e woy webouo 5'l'z b
72  How to approach alopecic diseases
(a)
(b)
pigmentation within the hair shafts.
reports that in alopecia areata the plucked hair bulbs
widespread, the McKenzie toothbrush method is ad-
have the shape of an exclamation point (see Chapter 
visable, in which scales and loose hairs are caught by
4.7) (Fig. 2.1.4).
brushing the entire body with a sterile toothbrush.
Cultures should be incubated between 25 and 30°C
at 30% humidity in a dark environment and must be
2.1.4.4 Wood's fight examination
Wood's light examination is opportune, whenever der-
matophytosis is on the list of differentials. The lamp
has to be warmed up for at least 5-10 min before ex-
amination. The patient should be examined with the
lamp in a dark room for at least 5 min. Hairs invaded by
Microsporurn caris may show a yellow-green fluores-
cence running along the hair shafts (Fig. 2.1.8). These
hairs should be collected for culture and microscopic
examination. It is important that a lack of fluorescence
does not rule out dermatophytosis. The interpretation
is sometimes diffcult, and false-positive fluorescence
due to creams or bacterial crusts is common. M. caris
is the only fluorescing dermatophyte that is relevant
 in veterinary medicine.
2.1.4.5 Dermatophyte culture
A fungal culture on selective dermatophyte test
medium (DTM) and Sabouraud's dextrose agar is
 necessary for the final diagnosis of dermatophytosis
(see Section 4.1.2). Hairs and scales from the edge
of a lesion should be collected and slightly pressed
Fig. 2.1.8 Wood's lamp examination with fluorescent hair
onto the culture medium. If the lesions are more
shafts in Microsporum canis infection of a cat.
Clinical aspects 73
(a)
[b}
Hg. 2.1.9 Dermatophyte colony growing on a DTM agar. (a) Red discoloration around the colony: (b) cytology of the colony shows
macroconidia of Microsporum canis.
evaluated daily. The DTM medium has to be checked
(×100). Demodex mites and their eggs are easily de-
for color change, which occurs before the growth of
tected (see Section 4.1.3).
the colony. After a colony has grown, a tape strip is
pressed onto the colony and mounted onto a slide.
2.1.4.7 Superficial skin scraping
The colony is stained with lactophenol blue or methy-
lene blue and examined microscopically for charac-
Superficial skin scrapings for mite infestation as Sar-
teristic macroconidia (Fig. 2.1.9). Due to common
coptes, Notoedres, Otodectes, Cheyletiella, Chorioptes,
false-positive and false-negative results with in-house
 and Psoroptes species are necessary if alopecia is a se-
cultures, it is recommend to send samples for der-
matophyte culture to a specialized laboratory.
to be carried out over a large area of the skin. The min-
eral oil is applied directly to the skin, scraped off with
a scalpel blade, and transferred to glass slides. The
2.1.4.6 Deep skin scraping
samples have to be systematically examined under low
In the dog, a deep skin scraping is warranted in most
power (× 40).
cases of alopecia to rule out demodicosis. The skin
at different areas is squeezed thoroughly and then
2.1.4.8 Cytology
scraped with a scalpel blade covered with mineral oil
until some blood is appearing in the orifices of hair
Cytology will be needed in any alopecia with signs of
follicles. The scraped material is mounted onto a slide
inflammation. The sampling technique varies accord-
with mineral oil and examined under the microscope
 ing to the lesion and is only briefly explained here.
74How to approach alopecic diseases
 Skin scrapings for cytology are done without oil.
The gently sampled material is spread out on a slide
and might need heat fixation before staining. This
technique is especially useful for very dry skin or for
material that is collected from around the nails.
The most commonly used technique is the impres-
sion smear, where a slide is gently pressed onto the
affected skin. It might be necessary to either remove
the overlying crust with the edge of the slide or to open
 the pustle or bulla before sampling.
Tape preparations are direct impressions using a
clear sticky tape to collect debris from the surface ofthe
Fig. 2.1.11 Cytology of canine Malassezia dermatitis. Nucle-
skin. This technique is useful for a quick examination
ated keratinocytes surrounded by numerous budding yeasts.
for Malassezia orinfectious agents, but remainsa crude
 technique for the evaluation of cells.
Fine-needle aspirations are used in nodular lesions.
are keratinocytes, that have lost their intercellular
 Cells are collected by a 22-gauge needle with or with-
connection and present as round cells with a dark
 out an attached 10-mL syringe (the negative pressure
purple central nucleus. They are encountered in the
of the syringe may increase the yield of cells). The
pemphigus complex (see Chapter 4.3). Large num-
skin is preferably disinfected before the procedure.
bers of eosinophils are seen in eosinophilic pustulo-
The gathered material is placed on a glass slide and
sis, eosinophilic folliculits/furunculosis, allergies, or
a smear is made by laying another glass slide on top
with ectoparasites (Fig. 2.1.12). In noneosinophilic
of the material and pulling the slides apart to spread
furunculosis, a more mixed type of infiltrate with
it. All cytology preparations have to be air-dried and
macrophages, neutrophils and eosinophils is found.
stained. Modified Wright's stains such as DiffQuick?
Giant cells suggest dermatophytes, mycobacteria, or
 or Hemacolor are fast and easy to apply stains that
foreign bodies (Fig. 2.1.13). Further examinations
 allow sufcient evaluation of most cytology samples.
such as biopsies and cultures are warranted for defini-
Cytology can reveal definite signs of pyoderma such
tive diagnosis in these cases.
as neutrophils with intracellular bacteria (Fig. 2.1.10)
Alopecias caused by marked pruritus after exclu-
 or Malassezia (Fig. 2.1.11). Some cells are suggestive
sion or effective treatment of infectious diseases will
for specific skin diseases. Acantholytic keratinocytes
need the approach of pruritic skin diseases, which is
Fig. 2.1.10 Cytology of canine pyoderma with neutrophils.
Fig. 2.1. 12 Cytology of eosinophilic folliculitis in a dog. Numer-
macrophages, and intracellular cocci.
ous eosinophils admixed with neutrophils and lymphocytes.
Clinical aspects  75
be obtained, if internal or endocrine diseases are sus-
-ap e joddns Au suuy Aionenoqei aui paid
nosis of a particular endocrine disease, and specific
hormone assays can then be performed as indicated.
For most of the relevant hormones special assays are
available but in many cases dynamic tests of endocrine
function are required, as basal hormone levels may
fluctuate widely in response to physiologic and patho-
logic factors (Table 2.1.5).
2.1.4.10 Skin biopsy
Biopsies offer the most valuable information in
alopecic diseases, if the clinical findings are not suf-
Fg. 2.1.13 Cytology of a dermatomycosis. Multinucleated gi-
ficient to pinpoint the disease (see Chapter 2.2). It is
ant cells surrounding fungal hyphae.
important to form a differential list before taking the
biopsy, as this will enable the clinician to choose the
explained in many textbooks on veterinary dermato-
logy.
correct location and primary lesions to get the most
specific histopathologic result. A thorough differential
list will additionally help the pathologist to interpret
2.1.4.9 Hematology, clinical chemistry
the morphological findings.
and urinalysis
 Punch biopsies for alopecia should have a mini-
Further laboratory tests such as a complete hematol-
mum size of 8 mm. With the exception of nodules,
ogy profle, a biochemical screen and urinalysis should
 no surgical preparation is needed. General anesthesia
Table 2.1.5 Clinical pathology abnormalities in canine endocrinopathies
Disease
Hemogram
Serum biochemistry
Urinalysis
Hormone assays
Hypothyroidism
Normocytic,
Hypercholesterolemia
Normal
tT4, TSH, fT4 (dialysis)
normochromic,
Hypertriglyceridemia
TgAA
nonregenerative
Slight ALT elevation
rhTSH stimulation test
anemia
Elevated
TRH stirmulation test
fructosamine
Hyperadrenocorticism
Leukocytosis
 Elevated ALP
Specific gravity < 1.015
LDDST
Neutrophilia
Moderately elevated
 Elevated urine C/C
ACTH stimulation test
Lymphopenia
ALT
Bacteriuria
Eosinopenia
Hypercholesterolermia
Thrombocytosis
Hyperlipemia
 Decreased BUN
Hyperestrogenism
Nonregenerative
 Normal
 Normal
Normal estrogens
(males)
anemia
Leukopenia with
Elevated estrogen/
lymphocytosis
testosterone ratio
thrombocytopenia
Alopecia X
Normal
 Normal
Mostly normal,
Mostly normal
 elevated long-term
High concentrations of
urine C/C
17OH-progesterone
before and/or post
ACTH
ing hormone; rhTSH, recombinant human; TRH, thyreotropin releasing hormone; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; LDDST, low-dose
dexamethasone suppression test.
76 How to approach alopecic diseases
is rarely indicated except for biopsies of the nose, foot-
ture medium or is put into a small sterile bottle where
pads, ears, or digits. Local anesthesia with 1 mL lido-
it is placed on a cotton wool drenched with saline. The
cain, xylocain, or prilocain for each biopsy location
samples should be examined for aerobic and anaerobic
is sufficient in most cases. To avoid disturbance of
bacteria. Further special cultures have to be discussed
with the laboratory depending on the suggested type
to enter the needle outside the proposed biopsy area
of infection.
and to administer the agent subcutaneously. Allow 3-5
min for the local anesthetic to have effect.
Before fixation, biopsies should be handled with
Further reading
great care in order to avoid squeezing defects or arti-
Campbell GA, Sauber L. 2007. Getting the most from der-
facts. A biopsy is most valuable before treatment and
matopathology. Veterimnary Clirnics of North America Smaff Animal
as long as the disease is in an acute phase. In later
Practice 37(2):393-402.
stages of the disease morphological findings are often
Frank LA. 2006. Comparative dermatology—canine endocrine der-
matoses. Clirnics in Dermatofogy 24(4):317-325.
less specific, and the original cause of hair loss might
Gross TL, Ihrke PI, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. 2005. Skin Diseases of
not be evaluated. Corticoids should be discontinued
the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, 2nd edn.
for at least 4 weeks before biopsies are taken.
Oxford: Blackwell Science.
Linder KE. 2001. Skin biopsy site selection in small animal der-
matology with an introduction to histologic pattern-analysis of
2.1.4.11 Microbiological culture
inflammatory skin lesions. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal
Practice 16{4):207-213.
If a deep inflammatory process is suggested, sterile
Mecklenburg L. 2006. An overview on congenital alopecia in do-
biopsies for tissue culture should be obtained. Surgical
mestic animals. Veterimary Dermatology 17(6):393-410.
Mendelsohn C, Rosenkrantz W, Griffn CE. 2006. Practical cytol-
 preparation of the biopsy site as well as sterile collec-
ogy for inflammatory skin diseases.ClinicalTechmiques in Small
tion of the biopsy is mandatory. The biopsy is then cut
Animal Practice 21(3):117-127.
 in half. One half is fixed in formalin for histopathol-
Noxon JO.1995.Diagnostic procedures in feline dermatology. Vet-
erinary Clinics ofNorth America Small Animal Practice 25(4):779-
 ogy. The other half is sent to a laboratory for microbi-
799.
ological culture. The epidermis is best cut off to avoid
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE. 2000. Muller and Kirk's SmalI
Animal Dermatofogy, 6th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
further contamination from superficial bacteria. For
Shelly SM. 2003. Cutaneous lesions. Veterinary Clinics of North
shipping, the sample is then pressed either into a cul-
America Small Animal Practice 33(1):146.
2.2
Histopathological aspects
Lars Mecklenburg
The purpose of doing a biopsy is to aid the patient
8 mm, and an excisional biopsy should measure at
by having a histopathologist render a precise, accu-
least 15 mm in length and 10 mm in width.
rate diagnosis prior to the clinician's embarking upon
A big challenge for the sampling clinician is the
appropriate management (Ackerman 1999). However,
identification of the lesions most likely to enable the
unless a biopsy specimen is taken properly, processed
histopathologist to come to a specific, accurate diag-
welltechnically, and analyzed skillfully, histopathology
nosis. If a lesion is biopsied too early in the course of
will not deliver a correct diagnosis and, even worse,
its development, histopathologic findings may be too
may deliver a wrong one. Performance of histopathol-
scant to permit a reasonable diagnosis to be made. In
ogy depends on (i) the careful selection of the le-
contrast, a lesion sampled too late in its course may
sions to be biopsied and optimal removal of the spec-
only reveal unspecific secondary findings. These com-
o ssd add a ()   q 
mon rules in surgical pathology also apply to the di-
the fixed specimen by the pathologists technician,
agnosis of alopecia. Ideally, samples from early, florid,
(ii) the accurate analysis of the submitted specimens
and late stages of the disease process should be sam-
by the histopathologist, and (iv) the proper interpre-
pled. It is recommended to fix and ship specimens in
tation of the histopathology report by the clinician.
different containers, as to allow the histopathologist to
The clinician and the histopathologist are a team, one
analyze them separately. Although samples from the
that only performs superbly if each member is in-
periphery of an alopecic patch will most likely reveal
formed about the discipline of the other. In that spirit,
an active inflammatory process targeting the hair folli-
clinicians should read and be able to understand the
cles, the chance of secondary inflammatory lesions that
morphologic description in the pathology report, and
interfere with a primarily noninflammatory disease of
histopathologists should have a detailed understand-
hair follicles is also highest in the periphery. Therefore,
ing of the gross lesions prior to evaluating biopsies.
it is recommended to sample both the center and the
 periphery of a lesion. Three to four biopsies are suf-
ficient material for most cases: a single punch biopsy
2.2.1 Selection of the lesions to be
specimen rarely provides information sufficient to en-
biopsied and sampling technique
able a precise diagnosis to be made. In specimens from
Alopecic skin samples should be taken by excision
completely alopecic skin, the direction of hair growth
using a punch or a scalpel. All sampling techniques
 go ai aul ul au e Aq paieoiu aq pinous
should deliver subcutaneous fat, as it is there where fol-
biopsy, using a waterproof marker (Fig. 2.2.2).
licles are rooted (Mondragon and Di Leonardo 1995).
Instruments for biopsies need to be sharp and used
2.2.2 Processing of biopsies
properly to avoid “crush artifacts" that distort cells
from alopecic skin
and patterns formed by them (Fig. 2.2.1). Skin samples
need to be of sufficient size in order to allow analysis 
The likelihood of accomplishing a correct histopatho-
 of numerous hair follicles. This means a punch biopsy
 logic diagnosis of an alopecic disease will be enhanced,
should measure at least 6 mm in diameter, ideally
if biopsies are performed correctly and specimens
78  How to approach alopecic diseases
(a)
C
Fig. 2.2.1 Procedure of taking a punch biopsy. (a) The punch is
used in a vertical angle; (b) the biopsy punch is simultaneously
pushed and rotated until it cuts into the subcutis; (c) the tissue
is gently removed from the punch.
are processed properly. Grossing of punch biopsy
specimens, regardless of size, requires manual skill,
precision, and the use of a very sharp blade (Yager and
Wilcock 1994). Punches that measure 6 mm or more
in diameter and excisional biopsies should be bisected
parallel to the direction in which the hairs are growing.
This enables the histopathologist to examine complete
longitudinal sections of a maximum number of hair
follicles. In specimens from completely alopecic skin,
the direction of hair is ideally indicated by a line the
clinician has drawn on the skin before sampling (Fig.
2.2.2). Punch biopsies of less than 6 mm diameter
should be processed in their entirety, but need to be
auo moe oi rapio u kladod paieiou pue paddod
Hg. 2.2.2 Marking the direction of expected hair growth in
alopecic skin enables the pathologist to make longitudinal sec-
tudinal sectioning. Special care must be taken to orient
tions of hair follicles.
them properly during embedding. Embedding should
Histopathological aspects
6
2.2.3 Light microscopical analysis of
alopecic skin specimens
Histopathologists are well advised to confront abnor-
malities in sections with an open mind and a commit-
 ment to being thoroughly unbiased by not knowing
anything beforehand about the patient from whom
the biopsy specimen came (Ackerman 1999). Once
a histopathologist has come to a tentative diagnosis,
however, it is mandatory to learn as much clinical in
formation as is useful for confirming or rejecting that
diagnosis. This asks for accurate, concise clinical in-
formation to be submitted with the biopsy specimen.
The majority of skin diseases can be diagnosed with
Fig. 2.2.3 Skin biopsy from a dog with numerous longitudinal
specificity using a scanning objective, that is, up to
sections of hair follicles. Note the compound nature of hair
2.5×.At that magnification, a histopathologist obtains
follicles.
a vantage of patterns formed by alterations in tissues as
well as those formed by infiltrates of cells. The method
of pattern analysis applies to all kinds of pathological
allow longitudinal sectioning of hair follicles, and sec-
processes in the skin, including the vast amount of
tions should ideally display the entire hair follicle from
alopecic diseases. Before assessing the general pattern
the ostium to the bulb (Fig. 2.2.3). Sections should be
in a biopsy, however, the pathologist should make a
cut at different levels throughout the specimen housed
methodical judgment about the adequateness of the
 in the paraffin block.
 biopsy specimen, the quality of the tissue section, and
Transverse horizontal sections of alopecic skin are
the anatomic site in the skin from which the biopsy
frequently promoted for the diagnosis of scarring
specimen was obtained.
alopecia in human medicine (Headington 1884; Sper-
The histopathologist should first evaluate whether
ling 2001). The main advantage is the higher yield of
 any inflammatory infiltrate is present in the skin sam-
sectioned hair follicles, which is indeed an important
ple. If there is inflammation, it needs to be charac-
aspect in human medicine where a diagnosis of an
terized and it needs to be evaluated whether inflam-
alopecic disease is usually made from a single 4-mm
matory cells target hair follicles or whether they are
s e n    n   
a secondary phenomenon, independent of the hair
biopsy is understandable considering the anatomy of
follicle disease. Next, hair follicles are evaluated mor-
the human scalp. In veterinary medicine, however, a
phologically. This begins with an examination of hair
diagnosis does not have to be based on a single biopsy.
follicle ostia and infundibula, and whether or not hair
Most owners will allow sampling of at least three biop-
shafts penetrate them. If numerous hair shafts pen-
sies of 6 mm diameter or more. Therefore, the veteri-
 etrate the follicular ostia although the biopsy is sup-
nary pathologist does not need to increase the yield of
posed to derive from an alopecic skin area, alopecia
hair follicle numbers by cutting a biopsy horizontally
 ss       o 
 instead of longitudinally. In addition, there is a large
 these have penetrated the skin. This points to either a
variety in domestic animal species with regard to the
self-induced alopecia or may indicate that hair shaft
 size and number of hair follicles that are normal in a
structure is altered, resulting in an increased fragility
biopsy of a given skin region. Interpretation of hor-
of hair shafts.
izontal sections depends on comparing the number
 Using a higher magnification, hair follicles are eval.
and size of hair follicles of the patients with a normal
 uated in more detail. The morphologic evaluation of
standard. As long as this standard has not been elab-
hair follicles requires a thorough understanding of
orated for each animal species, breed, and skin area,
their normal anatomy in general and of the changes
horizontal sections are of no benefit over longitudinal
that occur during the normal hair growth cycle in par-
sections in veterinary pathology.
ticular.
80  How to approach alopecic diseases
2.2.3.1 Hair follicle subtypes
Hair follicles can be divided into several subtypes.
Infundibulurr
Whiskers or vibrissae hair follicles are differentiated
from pelage hair follicles by their large vascular sinuses
that surround the hair bulb. Whisker hair follicles have
lnner root sheath
small sebaceous glands and lack apocrine glands. They
Occur on upper and lower lip, chin, cheeks, and around
 lsthmus
eyes. They function as tactile sensors. Pelage hair fol-
licles represent the magnitude of hair follicles on the
Sebaceous
body. Their size and shape are very variable as are
gland
the arrangement and the density with which they oc-
cur in different skin regions (see Section 1.3.3). Some
Bulge
domestic animals (e.g., horse, some pig breeds) have
single hair follicles, whereas dogs and cats have many
compound hair follicles (Fig. 2.2.3). Compound hair
follicles have the largest hair cranial and progressively
Inferior portiot
smaller hairs caudal. However, the diameter of hair
shafts represents a continuum, and there are no two
clearly defined populations of follicles based on the
hair shaft diameter. Calling the cranial follicle in each
compound follicle a “primary" follicle and all others
“secondary” follicles is the easiest and most consistent
approach (Dunstan et al. 2001).
Bull
-eo a aun be! bid e woy us tz b
ments of an anagen hair follicle. Note the single hair follicle
2.2.3.2 Morphology of hair follicle cycling
compared to compound hair follicles in dogs and cats.
Regardless of the hair follicle subtype, all hair follicles
 and lower compartments merge into each other and
undergo significant morphologic changes during the
hair growth cycle (Al-Bagdadi et al. 1979).
where significant morphological changes occur dur-
ing hair follicle cycling. The isthmus is characterized
2.2.3.2.1 Anagen
by (i) entry of the short duct that connects the hair
Hair follicles in the growing (anagen) stage of the
growth cycle can be subdivided into the following
compartments (Fig. 2.2.4): The follicular ostium is the
opening of the hair follicle infundibulum into the epi-
dermis. The infundibulum is the uppermost follicular
compartment. It is lined by a cornifying epithelium
with a stratum granulosum that is morphologically
similar to the epidermis. The follicular infundibulum
contains one (single follicles) or more (compound
follicles) hair shafts. It also contains small amounts
of desquamating fully keratinized keratinocytes simi-
lar to the epidermal stratum corneum (Fig. 2.2.5). In
contrast to all other follicular compartments, the in-
fundibulum does not change during the hair growth
cycle. Opposite of the follicular ostium, the infundibu-
Fig. 2.2.5 Histology of the follicular infudibulum and isthmus
lum merges into the follicular isthmus. The isthmic re-
(Goettingen minipig). Note disintegration of the inner root
gion is very complex, since it is the zone where upper
sheath at the level of the sebaceous gland.
Histopathological aspects 81
canal to the holocrine sebaceous gland, (ii) disinte-
cated dermal papilla that is composed of mesenchymal
gration of the highly eosinophilic inner root sheath,
cells, all separated by abundant extracellular matrix.
and (ii) a buige region of the outer root sheath, which
The dermal papilla is tightly enclosed by keratinocytes
can be more or less distinct and which represents the
and melanocytes. Keratinocytes of the bulb can be
attaching site of the arrector pili muscle (Fig. 2.2.5).
 separated into different morphological and functional
Below the isthmus is a region that is known as the infe-
zones, that is, those below the line of Auber (i.e., a
rior segment. The inferior segment is rather long and is
line through the dermal papilla at its largest diame-
composed of a cylindrical arrangement of cells which
ter) that show the highest proliferative activity, and
build from outside in (Fig. 2.2.4): the fibrous cornec-
those above the line of Auber that are less prolifer-
tive tissue sheath, baserment membrane (also known as
atively active but undergo early differentiation. The
glassy membrane), outer root sheath (with basal and
anatomical structures mentioned above characterize
suprabasal cellayers), inner rootsheath (separated into
each anagen hair follicle, independent of its subtype.
Huxley layer, Henle layer, and cuticula), and finally the
However, not all features may be histologically iden-
hair shaft (with cuticula, cortex, and medulla). Op-
tifiable in each section since most hair follicles are
cut obliquely. Therefore, the histopathologist needs to
shaft is closely apposed to the inner and outer root
become familiar with oblique and transversal cuts of
sheath. The inferior segment merges into the hair bulb.
hair follicles as well.
The bulb is again a very complex region of the hair
follicle (Fig. 2.2.6). It is characterized by a centrally lo-
2.2.3.2.2 Catagen
The regression phase of the hair growth cycle is associ-
ated with very characteristic morphological changes.
These changes are best studied in rodents where hair
follicles cycle synchronously and therefore allow a
more precise morphological evaluation ( Muller- Rover
et al. 2001). However, they are identical in nonrodent
mammals, where they are less well described, because
hair follicles cycle independent of one another. Cata-
gen is a very short phase of the hair growth cycle and
therefore only very few (less than 3%) catagen hair fol-
licles can be examined in normal skin. The first event
of catagen development is cessation of melanization
and cessation of keratinocyte proliferation in the hair
matrix. This leads to thinning of the entire hair bulb.
As precortical matrix cells still undergo differentiation
into hair shaft and inner root sheath, the matrix zone
becomes thinner and keratinocytes no longer com-
pletely enclose the dermal papilla (Fig. 2.2.7). Further
regression of the matrix zone separates it completely
from the dermal papilla. A very distinct basement
membrane occurs that separates a bunch of closely
 apposed mesenchymal cells from the epithelial rem-
nants of the hair bulb (Fig. 2.2.8). As keratinocytes
that derive from the precortical matrix continue to
differentiate and since no further daughter cells are
produced in the bulb, the inferior segment changes
Hg. 2.2.6 Anatomy of the hair follicle bulb. Dog: note der-
as well. It is transformed into an undulating epithelial
mal papilla, matrix with proliferating keratinocytes, precortical
matrix with melanocytes and differentiating keratinocytes, hair
strard, composed oflargely similar small keratinocytes
shaft medulla, hair shaft cortex, inner root sheath, and outer
that frequently show morphologic features of apopto-
root sheath
sis. The epithelial strand is surrounded by a markedly
82  How to approach alopecic diseases
region of the hair follicle. Directly below the isthmus
is an accumulation of immature epithelial cells, called
the “secondary hair germ." It is these cells that will pro
liferate and produce a new hair follicle upon initiation
 of a new anagen phase. Directly below the secondary
hair germ is a small and condensed dermal papilla. It
shows very little extracellular matrix. Its nuclei stain
intensively for estrogen receptors (Fig. 2.2.9).
2.2.3.2.4 New anagen
The first morphological sign of a new anagen develop-
ment is proliferation of keratinocytes in the secondary
hair germ that start to form a new hair bulb where der-
mal papilla cells become enclosed by keratinocytes.
This newly formed hair bulb will then be “pushed"
downward into the dermis by the new formation of an
 inferior segment. Mid anagen stages are recognized by
 a remaining club hair of the previous telogen phase.
Later anagen stages are morphologically indistinguish-
able from a mature anagen hair follicle that can persist
for several months or even years.
When evaluating biopsies from alopecic diseases,
the histopathologist needs to determine the hair cycle
Fig. 2.2.7 Anatomy of the early catagen hair bulb. Dog: note
stage of each follicle and thus should be able to deter-
dermal papilla, retracted matrix, prominent basement mem-
mine the ratio between early anagen, mature anagen,
brane, irregular epithelial strand, and prominent perifollicular
connective tissue sheath.
normal skin should reveal a majority of anagen hair
follicles. Simultaneous presence of telogen hair folli-
thickened basement membrane that stains positively
cles is normal with a percentage as high as 50% in some
with PAS and is a very distinctive feature of catagen.
 breeds of dogs. Cata gen should not be observed in any
During further catagen development, the epithelial
biopsy from any animal species in a significant level
strand shortens and the dermal papilla, still firmly
(less than 3% of all hair follicles). A larger percentage
attached but separated by a distinct basement mem-
of catagen hair follicles always points to abnormalities
brane, moves upward, that is, toward the follicular
in the hair growth cycle (see Chapter 3.3).
isthmus. In the later stages ofcatagen development, the
isthmus region undergoes characteristic changes too.
2.2.3.3 Hair folficle dysplasia
Due to terminal differentiation of inner root sheath
keratinocytes, a club hair forms, which is characterized
 Dysplasia is an abnormality in the development or in
by a highly eosinophilic material, known as trichilem-
the organization of cells. Keratinocyte proliferation is
mal keratinization. The keratinization forms a brush-
mandatory for the development of most forms of hair
like zone that separates the actual hair shaft from the
follicle dysplasia. Consequently, dysplasia of hair folli-
surrounding keratinocytes of the isthmus region.
cles usually occurs during morphogenesis (dysplastic
morphogenesis). Most forms of dysplastic morpho-
2.2.3.2.3 Telogen
 genesis are congenital and most of these are hereditary
Catagen finally merges into the resting stage called
(see Chapter 3.1). The variety of dysplastic changes
telogen. In telogen, regression of the inferior portion
 during morphogenesis is huge and ranges from rudi-
is completed and no further keratinocyte apoptosis
 mentary hair follicle anlagen to almost normal hair
is detected. The trichilemmal keratinization has now
follicles with very subtle changes of the hair shaff
formed a distinct club hair that demarcates the isthmus
(Fig. 2.2.10).
Histopathological aspects 83
a
D
prominent basement membrane, and epithelial strand.
Since hair follicles undergo repeated regression
tion. Such hair follicles are also known as “flame fol-
(catagen) and reformation (anagen), abnormalities in
licles,” since the highly eosinophilic trichilemmal ker-
 the organization of hair follicle cells can also occur be-
 atin adopts the shape ofa flame. The term flame follicle
23
 yond morphogenesis. Malformations during the an-
 was originally used to describe an abnormal catagen
agen phase should be termed “anagen dysplasia" op-
hair follicle that shows an excessive amount of brightly
 posed to those that occur during catagen development
 eosinophilic homogenous material that surrounds the
(i.e., “catagen dysplasia"). Anagen dysplasia refers to
 club hair and that projects radially and irregularly into
those malformations of hair follicles that occur spon-
the surrounding outer root sheath (Scott 1989; Yager
taneously during hair follicle cycling. The prototypic
and Wilcock 1994). The problem with this term is that
example of anagen dysplasia is the dilated follicular in-
 brightly eosinophilic trichilemmal keratin is a normal
fundibulum of hair follicles in canine recurrent flank
 feature of anylate catagen and telogen hair follicle (Fig.
 alopecia before they undergo catagen development 
 2.2.9). Therefore, the term flame follicle has also been
(Fig. 3.3.23). However, since this disease represents
used to describe normal telogen hair follicles (Ordeix
 an abnormality of hair follicle cycling with increased
et al. 2002). In order to avoid confusion, the pathol-
 catagen hair follicles, it is still under debate whether
 ogist needs to be familiar with the normal amount
 this disease should be classified as a dysplasia or a hair
 of trichilemmal keratin in catagen and telogen hair
cycle abnormality (see Section 3.3.5).
follicles of a given breed and species. In the disease
The prototypic (and the only diagnostically rele-
"alopecia X" of plush-coated dogs, many hair folli-
vant) form of catagen dysplasia described so far is
 cles with an increased amount of trichilemmal keratin
hair follicles with excessive trichilemmal keratiniza-
Occur (see Section 3.3.4).
84 How to approach alopecic diseases
that can be correctly addressed as dystrophy, since first
they represent a degenerative process and, second, they
are associated with the “malnutrition" of hair follicle
cells in the wider sense (see Chapter 3.4). Morpholog-
ical signs of hair follicle dystrophy are uncoordinated
vacuolar degeneration or apoptosis of keratinocytes.
It is important to differentiate dystrophic apoptosis
 in hair follicle keratinocytes from apoptosis occurring
a highly coordinated process that begins with cessation
of follicular pigmentation and ends with complete dis
appearance ofthe lower follicular portion, dystrophyis
uncoordinated. Uncoordinated keratinocyte degener
ation without previous cessation of follicular pigmen-
tation results in uneven distribution of melanin within
the hair shafts. Melanin may spill out ofthe hair follicle
and will be taken up by perifollicular melanophages
(pigmentary incontinence). Therefore, perifollicular
 melanophages are very good evidence of hair follicle
 dystrophy. Other parameters of hair follicle dystrophy
that may or may not be present are a wide-open hair
canal, distortion of the entire follicle, and an irreg-
ular diameter of hair follicles (Hendrix et al. 2005)
Fig. 2.2.9 Anatomy of a canine telogen hair follicle. Note arrec-
(Fig. 2.2.11). Dystrophic changes can occur in ana-
tor pili muscle, telogen hair shaft (club hair) with trichilemmal
 gen or in catagen hair follicles. Therefore, terms such
keratinization, and the prominent basement membrane sepa-
rating secondary hair germ and dermal papilla.
o  s, pe u or, 
and should be used to describe dystrophic hair folli
2.2.3.4 Hair follicle dystrophy
cles more precisely (Hendrix et al. 2005). Hair follicle
dystrophy may be reversible if stem cells remain and
The term dystrophy is used to describe a degenera-
if a new anagen phase is initiated after the follicle has
uhno ue jo uonu, oi anp s peu saond a
reached telogen. However, if the insult is too severe,
There are rare hair follicle diseases in domestic animals
hair follicles may become terminally damaged and may
undergo atrophy.
2.2.3.5 Hair follicle atrophy
Although cyclic hair follicle regression (catagen) and
hair follicle rest (telogen) are associated with a loss
of follicular cells, these physiological stages of hair
 since they do not necessarily represent a pathologi-
cal change. Hair follicle atrophy is represented by a
loss of hair follicle cells beyond the physiological tel-
ogen phase (see Chapter 3.4). Atrophic hair follicles
have also been named “fading follicles," emphasizing
their small size compared to the overall size of der-
mis and other cutaneous adnexa. Atrophic hair fol-
licles are histopathologically characterized by small
Fig. 2.2.10 Skin histology of the Chinese crested dog. Severe
dilation of follicular infundibula and condensed mesenchymal
remnants of keratinocyte strands that are surrounded
cells, likely representing dermal papilla fibroblasts
by a markedly thickened connective tissue sheath
Histopathological aspects85
(a)
C
Fig. 2.2.11 Histology of hair follicle dystrophy in the dog. (a)
Atrophic inferior segment, fibrotic tracks, and numerous cells
with dark-brown pigment (melanophages);: (b) dystrophic ana-
gen with distorted hair bulb and thinned irregular inferior seg-
ment; note the thickened perifollicular fibrous sheath; (c) dys-
trophic catagen with condensed dermal papilla, irregular short
epithelial strand, and heavy intrafollicular pigmentation.
(Fig. 2.2.12). Occasionally, dystrophic changes may
the epidermis, hyperkeratosis can be orthokeratotic
be present as well, characterized by vacuolar degener-
 or parakeratotic with the clear majority being orthok-
ation or apoptosis of keratinocytes, and clumping of
eratotic (Fig. 2.2.13). Marked infundibular hyperk-
follicular melanin and perifollicular melanophages.
eratosis is seen in diseases such as canine idiopathic
seborrhea, demodicosis, canine sebaceous adenitis,
canine idiopathic comedo formation, canine hyper-
2.2.3.6 Infundibular hyperkeratosis
estrogenism, canine hyperadrenocorticism, canine re-
Hyperkeratosis within the follicular infundibulum is
current flank alopecia, and various other forms of
a common finding in hair follicle pathology. As in
hair cycle abnormalities. In canine sebaceous adenitis,
86Howto approach alopecicdiseases
(a)
[b]
Fig. 2.2.12 Histology of hair follicle atrophy in the dog. (a) Hair
folliles with thin inferior segment; (b) loss of hair follicles and
replacement by fibrous tissue. Some follicular epithelial cells re-
main.
hyperkeratosis within the follicular infundibulum is
fundibular keratin is extruded with the elongating hair
due to the lack of sebum and impaired desquamation.
shaft, it accumulates within the infundibulum when
 In endocrine diseases and other hair cycle abnormal-
the hair shafts do not grow properly or if they are lost
ities, infundibular hyperkeratosis is likely caused by a
entirely. In diseases such as idiopathic seborrhea, in-
lack of hair shaft elongation. Whereas normally the in-
fundibular hyperkeratosis is associated with epidermal
hyperkeratosis and simply reflects a yet unexplained
abnormality in epithelial keratinization. A very severe
form of infundibular hyperkeratosis with intralesional
bacteria is termed “comedo" according to similar mor-
phologies in human acne vulgaris. A closed comedo
has an obstructed follicular ostium and may rupture to
cause a foreign body inflammatory reaction, whereas
an open comedo has a wide ostium and is capped with
a crust composed of debris (Elder et al. 1997).
2.2.3.7 Hair follicle inflammation
Inflammation of the hair follicle is called “folliculitis,
a term that is used both clinically and histopatholog-
ically. Whereas folliculitis is classified clinically by its
etiology, hair follicle inflammation can be classified
Fig. 2.2.13 Histology of infundibular orthokeratotic hyperker-
anatomically based on the character and distribution
atosis in the dog.
of inflammatory cells (see Part 4).
Histopathological aspects  87
though it may be contained in a very descriptive dis-
ease name such as “"lymphocytic mural folliculitis of
the isthmus" (see Section 4.4.2.2). Mural folliculitis
will occur in many different conditions and refers to
all levels of the hair follicle wall unless otherwise spec-
ified. It can be purely lymphocytic as in lymphocytic
mural foliculitis (see Chapter 4.4), can be dominated
by eosinophils (see Chapter 4.2), or may even be histi-
ocytic and granulomatous in nature (see Chapter 4.5).
Mural folliculitis is a frequent finding in various dis-
eases and its severity can range from cell poor to cell
rich. Mural folliculitis can be further subdivided into
 an interface type, an infltrative type, a pustular type,
and a necrotizing type (Gross et al. 1997).
Interface mural folliculitis is associated with indi-
vidual cell necrosis (apoptosis) or vacuolar degener-
ation of outer root sheath keratinocytes (Fig. 2.2.15).
It has therefore some similarities to hair follicle dys-
trophy with the difference that dystrophy is a nonin-
flammatory degenerative process. The inflammatory
infiltrate may obscure the glassy membrane. Inter-
face mural folliculitis can be associated with pigmen-
tary incontinence and perifollicular accumulation of
 melanophages. It is usually dominated bylymphocytes
with some plasma cells and histiocytes being associ-
Fig. 2.2.14 Histology of luminal folliculitis in the dog. Perifol-
ated with them. It occurs in association with similar
licular inflammatory cells that penetrate the follicular wall and 
accumulate in the follicular lumen.
epidermal changes in diseases such as erythema multi-
forme, lupus erythematosus, or cutaneous drug reac-
tions (see Section 4.4.1), or without similar epidermal
Any inflammation that occurs outside of the hair
changes in diseases such as follicular mucinosis, der-
follicle, that is, that strikingly surrounds hair follicles
matophytosis, or demodicosis.
without inflammatory cells invading the glassy mem-
Infiltrative mural folliculitis describes those in-
brane, is called “perifolliculitis. Diagnostic specificity
flammatory lesions where mural inflammation is
of this pattern is low since many nonfollicular in-
not associated with degeneration of hair follicle
flammatory processes of the dermis will fit into this
keratinocytes. Infiltrative mural folliculitis can be
pattern.
subdivided according to the predominant type of in-
Luminal folliculitis describes inflammation of the
fla mmatory cells. Lymphocytic infiltrative mural folli-
hair follicle wall and its periphery with simultaneous
culitis occurs in diseases such as equine linear alopecia,
 presence of inflammatory cells in the hair canal (Fig.
feline exfoliative dermatitis, or canine pseudopelade-
2.2.14). This is a frequent but not diagnostic finding in
like disease (see Section 4.4.2.2). Eosinophilic infiltra-
diseases such as bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis,
tive mural folliculitis occurs in diseases such as canine
or demodicosis (see Chapter 4.1). It is mostly associ-
eosinophilic pustular folliculitis and feline mosquito-
ated with pathogens (i.e., bacteria, dermatophytes, or
bite hypersensitivity (see Chapter 4.2). Eosinophilic
 parasites) that are localized within the hair canal.
 infiltrative mural follicuitis is often very destructive,
Mural folliculitis is used to describe inflammatory
and will frequently result in furunculosis. Histiocytic
 processes where inflammatory cells invade the glassy
infiltrative mural folliculitis is a very rare variant of
 membrane and the outer root sheath, but where in-
 mural hair follicle inflammation. It can comprise large
flammatory cells do not reach the lumen. “Mural fol-
numbers of giant cells and is usually associated with
liculitis" is a descriptive term in anatomic pathology
marked destruction of the follicular wall (see Chapter
and does not refer to a specific clinical diagnosis, even
4.5).
88Howto approach alopecic diseases
(a)
Fig. 2.2.15 Histology of mural folliculitis in the dog. (a) Infiltra-
tive type with lymphocytes infiltrating the follicular wall; (b) inter-
face type with vacuolar degeneration of follicular keratinocytes.
Necrotizing mural folliculitis summarizes diseases
where there is severe degeneration of hair follicle ker-
atinocytes with a secondary inflammatory response.
This is the case in feline poxvirus infections or feline
herpesvirus dermatitis (see Chapter 4.6).
Pustular mural folliculitisis used to describe pustule
formation within the infundibular epithelium. This is
usually associated with a pustular dermatitis, where
epidermal lesions merge into the follicular infundibu-
lum (see Chapter 4.3).
Finally, bulbitis describes a characteristic lympho-
cytic infiltrative folliculitis that targets the hair follicle
bulb. Lymphocytes may also be found within the in-
ferior segment. Bulbitis is characteristic for alopecia
areata (see Chapter 4.7).
Furunculosis is a penetrating or perforating follic-
ular inflammation, meaning that the follicular wall
is destroyed by the inflammatory process. Furuncu-
losis is associated with fragmented hair shafts that
are no longer surrounded by an intact follicular
wall. Inflammatory infiltrates are composed of neu-
trophils, eosinophils, and macrophages, often with
some giant cels. These are surrounded by lym-
phocytes and plasma cells and often merge into
Fig. 2.2.16 Histology of furunculosis in the dog. Perifollicular
a demarcation by fibrovascular granulation tissue
inflammatory cells, infiltrating the follicular wall and surround-
(Fig. 2.2.16).
ing hair shafts, associated with destruction of the follicular wall
Histopathological aspects 89
2.2.4 Interpretation of the
Dunstan RW, Credille KM, Mansell J, Tucker KA, Bloom PJ, Petersen
histopathology report
AJ, Nachreiner RF, Davenport GM, Lupton CJ. 200l. A common
sense approach to the morphology of alopecia: addressing 10
 points of follicular confusion. ISVD Meeting, Norfolk, VA.
As was mentioned before, the clinician and the
Elder D, Elenitsas R, Jaworsky C, Johnson B (eds). 1997. Levers
histopathologist are a team that only works if both
Histopathotlogy of the Skin, &th edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott-
supply accurate information to each other. The clin-
Raven Publishers.
Gross TL, Stannard AA, Yager JA. 1997. An anatomical classification
ician who has submitted skin biopsies should read
of folliculitis. Veterimary Dermatology 8:147-156.
the full histopathology report. No report without a
Headington J. 1884. Transverse microscopic anatomy of the human
 morphological description should be accepted, since
scalp. Archives of Dermatofogy 120:449.
Hendrix S, Handjiski B, Peters EM, Paus R. 2005. A guide to assess-
such a report does not allow to understand how the
ing damage response pathways of the hair follicle: lessons from
conclusion was drawn. An adequate pathology report
cyclophosphamide-inducedalopeciainmice.ourmal ofTnvestiga
mentions the tissue that was submitted, gives a thor-
tive Dermatology 125(1):42-51.
ough morphological description of lesions resulting
Mondragon G, Di Leonardo M. 1995. Punch biopsy of alopecias:
methods and implications. American fourmalof Dermatopathology
in a morphological diagnosis, and ends with a con-
1(2):138.
clusion that comments on correlation to gross lesions,
Muller-Rover S, Handjiski B, Van Der Veen C, Eichmuller S, Foitzik
K, McKay IA, Stenn KS, Paus R. 2001. A comprehensive guide for
etiology, and pathogenesis of the disease, exclusion of
the accurate classification of murine hair follicles in distinct hair
differential diagnoses, and the prognosis for the pa-
cycle stages. Journal of Investigative Derrmatology l17(1):3-15.
Ordeix L,Fondevila D, Ferrer L,Fondati A.2002.Quantitative study
tient (Yager and Wilcock 1994).
of “flame follicles" in skin sections of Shar-pei dogs. Veterinary
Dermatology 13:261-265.
References
Scott DW. 1989. Excessive trichilemmal keratinization (flame folli-
cles) in endocrine skin disorders of the dog. Veterinary Derma-
Ackerman AB.1999.A Philosophy of Practice of Surgical Pathology:
tology 1:37-40.
Sperling LC. 2001. Scarring alopecia and the dermatopathologist.
Dermatopathology as Model. Philadelphia: Ardor Sribendi.
Journal of Cutaneous Pathology 28:333-342.
Al-Bagdadi FK, Titkemeyer CW, Lovell JE. 1979. Histology of the
YagerJA,WilcockP994CorAtlasandTextofSurgiatPatholgy
hair cycle in male beagle dogs. Americam Jourmal of Veterinary
of the Dog and Cat: Dermatopathology and Skin Tumors. London:
Resenrch 40:1734-1741.
Wolfe Publishing.
Part 3
Non-inflammatory alopecias
Congenital alopecia
93
Hair follicle dystrophy and atrophy
177
Trichomalacia
115
Traumatic alopecia
185
 Disorders of hair follicle cycling
119
Scarring alopecia
189
3.1
Congenital alopecia
Lars Mecklenburg
Clinically, alopecia can be classified as either congen-
other ectoderm-derived cutaneous appendages such
ital or tardive. Congenital alopecia is present at birth
as apocrine and eccrine glands, nails/claws, and teeth
or develops soon after birth, when normal individ-
(i.e., ectodermal dysplasia). More than 190 different
uals develop a hair coat. Since hair follicle develop
forms of ectodermal dysplasia have been described in
ment continues after birth, a congenital defect in hair
humans, and a huge amount of mouse models with
follicle development does not necessarily present im-
ectodermal dysplasia exist (Freire-Maia et al. 2001).
mediately at or shortly after birth. Even months after
Data on ectodermal dysplasia in domestic animals,
birth, when the first hair cycle is initiated, alopecia
however, is very sparse.
may develop due to a defect that has been present con-
genitally. Therefore, congenital alopecia should always
3.1.1 Hair follicle aplasia
be considered if lack of hair develops within the first
year of life, but does not progress beyond that point of
Hair follicles arise from an ectodermal thickening
time.
overlying a mesenchymal condensation (hair pla-
Congenital alopecia is a result of defects in hair fol-
code). The mechanisms that regulate placode for-
licle morphogenesis that can be subdivided into an
mation in the mammalian ectoderm are extremely
organogenesis and a differentiation phase (Fig. 3.1.1).
complex and still insufficiently understood. There are
The term “dysplasia" is defined as an abnormal devel-
different subsets of hair follicles in most species that
opment of tissues or organs, associated with alterations
supposedly recruit different molecular mechanisms of
in size, shape, and organization of cells. It is therefore
placode formation, further complicating the mecha-
correctly and frequently used to describe morpholog-
nisms of early hair follicle development.
ical abnormalities associated with congenital alopecia.
However, it must not be confused with “dysplastie"
3.1.1.1 X-finked hair folficle aplasia and dentaf
hair follicle diseases that occur later in life (such as
dysplasia (analogous to anhidrotic ectoderma!
canine recurrent flank alopecia) (see Section 3.3.5).
dysplasia in humans)
Congenital alopecia does not necessarily imply a
genetic basis, although in most cases the disease is
 Until now, only one molecular pathway has been dis-
based on genetic abnormalities and thus is heredi-
covered that is clearly linked to the very early stages of
tary. In most cases, genetic abnormalities arise spon-
hair placode formation and that results in a lack of hair
taneously, although rare cases of teratogenicity asso-
follicle development if one of its genes is mutated. This
ciated with alopecia have been described in domestic
pathway involves the signaling molecule ectodysplasin
animal species. Congenital defects can occur in a single
(Eda, analogous to the mouse tabby gene) and its re-
differentiated cell population, or can affect undiffer-
ceptors (analogous of the mouse downless and crin-
entiated cells that transmit the defect to their daugh-
kled gene). Mice with a defect in either tabby, down-
ter cells. A defect within the ectoderm can therefore
less, or crinkled gene show multifocal alopecia, based
be restricted to the hair follicle (i.e., follicular dys-
on a complete lack of primary (tylotrich) hair follicles
plasia) or can be associated with abnormalities in
in affected skin regions. As ectodysplasin signaling is
94Non-inflammatory alopecias
Organogenesis
Differentiation
linked trait and as such primarily occurs in males, al-
though very rare cases in females are possible because
Make an appendage
Make a hair shaft
of inactivation (lyonization) of the unaffected allele
(Moura and Cirio 2004). X-linked ectodermal dys-
plasia in dogs is characterized by multifocal alopecia,
affecting the frontotemporal region, the sacral region,
the abdomen, and the proximal limbs (Moura and
Placocle
Cirio 2004) (Fig. 3.1.2). The expressivity of alopecia
DE
SG
Peg
varies, mostly affecting about two-third of the body.
aeg
HS
This variable expressivity is possibly due to allelic het-
erogeneity (Moura and Cirio 2004). Alopecia is caused
by complete absence of hair follicles, associated with
SC
DP
 a lack of arrector pili muscles, sebaceous glands, and
apocrine glands (Fig. 3.1.3). In contrast, biopsies from
Fig. 3.1.1 Scheme on hair follicle morphogenesis that can be
normally haired skin regions show normal piloseba-
lo aponeid saonpu!(abepuadde ue aew,) leubis leukuoua
ceous units (Casal et al. 1997). Dogs with X-linked ec-
mation. This placode consists of an epidermal ingrowth and an
todermal dysplasia also show a lack of eccrine glands
in the footpads and dental alterations affecting both
enchyme later builds the dermal papilla. The placode elongates
deciduous and permanent teeth. Claws are normal,
and grows into the dermis (DE). Once a hair peg is formed (der-
mal papilla is completely enclosed by keratinocytes), hair shaft
as is the immune system. Frequent respiratory tract
aessaw lewsuuasau puoas e a pnpui s! uoeoy (sh)
infections have been reported (Casal et al. 2005) and
("make a hair shaft"). The hair shaft grows towards the skin
may be due to a lack of mucous glands as has been ob-
surface, whereas the hair follicle simultaneously grows into the
served in ectodermal dysplasia in humans and cattle
opposite direction by elongation of the outer root sheath (indi-
(Seeliger et al. 2005).
cated by the green arrows). In the later stages of morphogen-
esis, the sebaceous gland (SG) is formed and the lower portion
of the hair shaft grows into the subcutis (SC). (Reprinted with
3.1.1.1.2 Bovine X-linked hair follicle aplasia
permission from Mecklenburg 2006.)
and dental dysplasia
In cattle, congenital X-linked hypotrichosis associated
with severe dental abnormalities (also called "hypotri-
also involved in the development of other cutaneous
chosis and anodontia defect" or “anhidrotic ectoder-
appendages such as teeth, alopecia is associated with
mal dysplasia in cattle") has been described in sev-
dental dysplasia, characterizing the disease as a true
eral breeds (Drieux et al. 1950; Rieck 1985; Braun
ectodermal dysplasia. In both mice and humans, the
et al. 1988; Wijeratne et al. 1988; Distl et al. 2000;
disease is X-linked and is inherited in a recessive pat-
Drogemuiller et al. 2002a, 2003). Other reports of hy-
tern. In humans, the disease is called anhidrotic (or
 potrichosis and dental dysplasia in cattle are probably
hypohydrotic) ectodermal dysplasia, emphasizing its
also variants of this disease (Cole 1919; Ojo 1987). As
most crucial effect, which is a complete lack of sweat
in humans, mice, and dogs, this form of congenital hair
 glands and a resulting insuffcient thermoregulation.
follicle aplasia shows an X-linked monogenetic reces-
sive inheritance and primarily occurs in male calves.
3.1.1.1.1 Canine X-linked hair follicle aplasia
Affected animals show a variable degree of alopecia,
and dental dysplasia
with head, ear pinnae, neck, back, and tail being most
A disease analogous to anhidrotic ectodermal dyspla-
 prominently affected. Eyelashes and vibrissae may be
 sia in humans has repeatedly been described in various
absent too (Fig. 3.1.4). Histologically, the number of
breeds of dogs (Thomsett 1961; Kral and Schwartzman
hair follicles is greatly reduced (aplasia), as is the num-
1964; Selmanowitz et al. 1970a,b, 1977a,b; Muller and
ber of apocrine glands and eccrine nasolabial glands
Kirk 1976; Kunkle 1984; Chastain and Swayne 1985;
(Fig. 3.1.5). The disease is associated with incomplete
Grieshaber et al. 1986; Casal et al. 1997; Moura and
dentition, resulting in the lack of several teeth and a
Cirio 2004). Comparable to mice and humans, this
lack of secondary tooth development. Mucous glands
form of ectodermal dysplasia in dogs is a recessive X-
 in the respiratory tract are reduced as well (Seeliger
Congenital alopecia95
D
C
(d)
Hg. 3.1.2 X-linked ectodermal dysplasia in an 8-month-old dog. (a-d) Extensive alopecia on head and abdomen; (e) dental dysplasia
(Reprinted with permission from Moura and Cirio (2004).)
et al. 2005). Anhidrotic X-linked ectodermal dyspla-
ing affected, has been reported in swine (Roberts and
sia in cattle is linked to the bovine Edl gene, with
 Carroll 1931; Meyer and Drommer 1968). One report
various mutations leading to a defective Eda protein
 describespiglets that lack hair except for eye lashes and
(Drogemiller et al. 2001, 2002b; Kuiper et al. 2001).
sparse hair on the bridge ofthe nose and the base ofthe
ear pinnae. Hypotrichosis was inherited in a dominant
3.1.1.2 Aplasia of hair follicles without
autosomal trait (gene symbol: Hy) and was associated
with a 70% reduction in the hair follicles in homozy-
dental dysplasia
gous individuals. The affected piglets showed intoler-
Except for the aforementioned X-linked aplasia of hair
 ance for cold temperatures and usually died within 10
follicles with dental dysplasia that is analogous to an-
days after birth. Another variant of congenital alopecia
hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in humans and that is  i
 in swine (that appears to be distinct from X-linked hair
associated with defects in ectodysplasin signaling, re- 
 follicle aplasia with dental dysplasia) involves Iberiar
ports on hair follicle aplasia in domestic animals are  f
 pigs (Fig. 3.1.6). These are an ancient population of
very rare. A significant reduction in the number of Mediterranean pigs that are differentiated into several
hair follicles, with other ectodermal tissues not be- subtypes, one of them being hairless (black Iberian
96  Non-inflammatory alopecias
are normal, except for rudimentary sebaceous glands
associated with them. Dental dysplasia is not reported
3.1.2 Hair follicle dysplasia
Forms of congenital alopecia that are associated with
malformed hair follicles are best described as “"hair
follicle dysplasia." In these diseases, hair follicle mor-
phogenesis has progressed beyond the placode stage
(differentiating them from mere hair follicle aplasia
as discussed before). As mentioned earlier, dysplasia
refers to a change in size, shape, and organization of
cells. The severity of those structural changes can vary
Fig. 3.1.3 Cutaneous histopathology in canine X-linked epi-
widely. For the ease of classification, hair follicle dys-
dermal dysplasia. Absence of hair follicles, arrector pili muscles
plasia can be separated into those forms where hair
sweat glands, and sebaceous glands. Note also orthokeratotic
hyperkeratosis and normal dermal collagen fibers. Mallory stain,
shafts are formed by dyslastic hair follicles and those
x40. (Reprinted with permission from Moura and Cirio (2004).)
where hair follicle dysplasia is so severe that no hair
shaft formation is seen at all.
hairless pig) (Lemus-Flores et al. 2001). The respon-
sible gene has been mapped to chromosome 14 but
3.1.2.1 Hair follicle dysplasia without
has not been further analyzed (Fernandez et al. 2003).
hair shaft formation
Hairless Iberian pigs are probably the founders of the
Mexican hairless pig breed that still exists in Mexico
There are several dog breeds that per definition are
(also known as the Mexican Creole pig). Mexican hair-
supposed to lack fur and that are promoted for
less pigs have a reduced number of hair follicles and
their “hypoallergenic" nature. Several extinct hairless
breeds have been reported from Africa. It is assumed
apocrine glands (David 1932). Remaining hair follicles
that Spanish traders introduced hairless dogs to the
New World and four of those hairless breeds are still
known today: the Chinese Crested Dog, the Mexican
Hairless Dog, the Inca Hairless Dog, and the Peruvian
Inca Orchid Dog.
 Due to the phenotypic similarity, congenital alope-
cia in these breeds is assumed to be related to a simi-
lar genetic deficit. Indeed a recent publication reports
 a frameshift mutation within the FOX13 coding se-
 quence in Mexican and Peruvian Hairless Dogs and
Chinese Crested Dogs. FOX13 is a member of a tran-
scription factor family encoded on dog chromosome
17. It appears to be involved in hair and tooth devel-
 opment, although its precise function has not been
elucidated yet (Drogemiller et al. 2008).
3.1.2.1.1 Chinese Crested Dog
The Chinese Crested Dog is known since the late nine-
teenth century and is now the most popular breed of
hairless dogs. Hairlessness is inherited as an autoso
Hg. 3.1.4 X-linked ectodermal dysplasia (hypotrichosis and
mal dominant trait, symbolized as *hr" The hr allele is
oligodontia) in a black and white German Holstein calf. Note
prenatally lethal when homozygous; hence, the hair-
the sparse haircoat, which is most obvious around the eyes, and
less Chinese Crested Dog is heterozygous. The haired
Drogemuller et al. (2002a).)
littermates with long fur are known as “powderpuffs"
Congenital alopecia 97
(b)
Fig. 3.1.5 X-linked ectodermal dyspla-
e u! (eyuopobo pue sisoupodku) es
black and white German Holstein calf.
Histology of the skin from the back of
the ear pinna. (a) Hair follicles are com-
pletely absent:; (b) a control animal of the
same age and breed with normal skin and
adnexa; scale bar = 75 xm; e, epider-
mis; fo, hair follicle; sg. apocrine sweat
gland; seg. sebaceous gland; c, ear car-
tilage. (Reprinted with permission from
Drogemiller et al. (2002a).)
(Robinson 1985) (Fig. 3.1.7). Hairless littermates are
is unlikely that the EDl gene is responsible for the
devoid of hair except for the crown of the head, lower
hairless phenotype in the Chinese crested dog, as has
parts of the extremities, and the tail. Adult Chinese
 Crested Dogs exhibit several hair follicle infundibula
et al. 2005).
that are distorted and filled with abundant keratin
squames (Fig. 2.2.10). Some hair follicles show a con-
3.1.2.1.2 Mexican Hairless Dog
densation of mesenchymal cells at the base of those
The
Mexican Hairless Dog (also known as
comedones, suggesting remnants of an immature der-
"Xoloitzcuintli") is supposed to date back more than
mal papilla. Hairlessness is usually associated with de-
5,700 years. The scientific literature on Mexican Hair-
fects in dentition, suggesting another variant of an
less Dogs is sparse (Yankell et al. 1970a,b; Goto et
ectodermal dysplasia in the dog. Although the phe-
al. 1987) and primarily focuses on their use in der-
 notype has some similarities to X-linked anhidrotic
matological research, mostly describing descendants
ectodermal dysplasia, the distribution of alopecia is
of Mexican Hairless Dogs crossbred with Beagles
different as is the histopathological picture. Hence, it
(Kimura et al. 1992, 1998; Kimura and Doi 1994a,b,
98  Non-inflammatory alopecias
Fig. 3.1.8 Alopecic phenotype of the Mexican Hairless Dog.
Fig. 3.1.6 Alopecic phenotype of the hairless Iberian pig. (C our-
(Courtesy of J. Declercq.)
tesy of M.A. T. Ibanez.)
1998a,b, 1999). Hairlessness is inherited by an auto-
2 weeks of age have a relatively thick epidermis with
somal dominant trait, with the gene symbol being
 many melanocytes and prominent epidermal rete pegs
“Hm" (Kimura et al. 1992, 1993), and therefore lit-
(Fukuta et al. 1991; Kimura and Doi 1994a, b).There
ters reveal both hairless and coated individuals. The
 are several aborted hair follicle plugs that are unable
hairless siblings completely lack a hair coat except for
 to produce a hair shaft Hair follicle plugs consist of
some tufts of short, stiff hair on the head and on the
an epidermal ingrowth with a mesenchymal condensa-
tip of the tail (Fig. 3.1.8). Hairlessness is associated
 tion at its base, likely representing an immature dermal
with dysplastic teeth and therefore represents another
 papilla. Those epidermal ingrowths do not develop
form of ectodermal dysplasia affecting more than one
 into normal hair follicles and their number is finally re.
ectoderm-derived tissue. There are no immunological
 duced with age ( Kimura and Doi 1996). Many of those
defects in hairless dogs (Hirota et al. 1990) and no 
 aborted hair follicles form an infundibulum that accu-
significant abnormalities in hematological and serum
 mulates masses of keratin squames and develops into
biochemical parameters. Hairless dogs of less than
a comedone. Comedones are most prominent on the
 dorsum, ventral neck, distal extremities, and prepuce.
 s e   s  
sies from adult Mexican Hairless Dogs show a severely
reduced number of cutaneous appendages. Whether a
primary reduction of hair folicles is present in these
dogs has not been clarified yet. Very few normal hair
follicles with associated sebaceous and apocrine glands
develop in the dorsal skin of hairless dogs (Kimura
1996). Interestingly, minoxidil, a potassium-channel
agonist with hypotonic properties, has been reported
to stimulate and improve postnatal hair follicle devel-
opment in descendants of the Mexican Hairless Dog,
but description of results and understanding of the un-
derlying mechanism are poor (Kimura and Doi 1997).
3.1.2.1.3 Peruvian Hairless and Peruvian Inca
Fig. 3.1.7 Alopecic phenotype of the heterozygous Chinese
OrchidDog
Crested Dog. Note typical truncal alopecia with some tufts of
hair at the crown of the head and the lower parts of the ex-
The Peruvian Hairless Dog and the Peruvian Inca
tremities.
Orchid Dog (also known as Inca Hairless Dog) are
Congenital alopecia 99
distinct but very rare breeds. They resemble the Mexi-
If hair shafts are formed that penetrate the follicular
can hairless and Chinese Crested Dog in that hairless-
 ostium, alopecia usually results from frequent break-
ness is caused by an autosomaldominanttrait that pro-
 ing of hair shafts. Hair follicle dysplasia with almost
duces normally haired and hairless littermates. Hair-
 normal hair shaft formation may be difficult to de-
lessness is associated with dental abnormalities, sug-
 tect morphologically, as the defects in hair shafts can
gesting an ectodermal dysplasia, most likely different 
be very subtle. It can be indistinguishable from mere
from the anhidrotic form.
trichomalacia (defects in hair shafts that are not asso.
ciated with any abnormality in the hair follicle itself)
(see Chapter 3.2).
3.1.2.2 Hair follicle dysplasia with hair
 Hair follicle dysplasia with some degree of hair shaft
shaft formation
formation is common in laboratory animal models of
Once a hair follicle has undergone organogenesis, it 
alopecia. The prototypic hair follicle dysplasia with
starts producing a hair shaft (Fig. 3.1.1). This is the
hair shaft formation is present in nude mice that have
beginning of the differentiation phase of hair follicle
a defect in the Foxnl transcription factor (see Chapter
morphogenesis (see Section 1.1.5) and it requires the
1.1). In homozygous mice, hair shafts lack certain ker-
anlage ofa normal hair bulb. Many forms of congeni-
atins and consequently they are soft and twist as they
tal hair follicle dysplasia show histological evidence of 
enter the follicular infundibulum. Most hair shafts are
 not able to penetrate the follicular ostium and instead
hair shaft formation, ranging from severely dysplastic
hair shafts to those that are almost normal (Fig. 3.1.9).
 coil within the infundibulum from which they are oc-
casionally released during the still ongoing hair cycle.
Although the nude phenotype has also been described
in rats and humans, it has not been found in domestic
animals so far.
3.1.2.2.1 Spiculosis in Kerry Blue Terriers
Hair shaft dysplasia with hair shaft formation has
been described in Kerry Blue Terriers, where the dis-
ease is known as “spiculosis in Kerry Blue Terriers."
Young male dogs are usually affected and will demon-
strate thickened hair shafts that are known as thorns,
spikes, or bristles. These symptoms are usually found
around elbows, hocks, and on the feet. Hair follicles
are dysplastic with premature keratinization (McK-
eever 1992).
3.1.2.2.2 Autosomal recessive congenital
alopecia in cattle
There are various forms of autosomal recessive con-
genital alopecia in cattle. They are clinically dis-
tinct from X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal dyspla-
sia (see Section 3.1.1.1.2). In many reports, however,
histopathological descriptions are sparse (Eldridge
and Atkeson 1953; Holmes and Young 1954; Acker-
man 1983) and a more precise subclassification of
these disease entities is currently impossible. An auto-
somal recessive hereditary form of progressive alope-
Hg. 3.1.9 Histology of congenital hair follicle dysplasia in a
cia, occurring within the first weeks of life, is known in
young Golden Retriever. Note formation of severely dysplastic
polled Hereford calves (Steffen et al. 1991, 1993). This
dermal papilla and hair matrix cells.
"congenital progressive alopecia in polled Hereford
100Non-inflammatory alopecias
cattle" might be the same condition that is known as
"semihairlessness" (Craft and Blizzard 1934; Kidwell
and Guilbert 1950; Young 1953; Hutt 1963). Calves
have wiry and kinked or curled hair fibers at birth and
 present with alopecia over the bridge of the nose and
the ears. Within weeks, alopecia progresses and affects
head, lateral neck, shoulders, and dorsal lumbar ar-
eas (Fig. 3.1.10). Alopecia is associated with excessive
scaling. Other consistent findings in affected animals
are bone marrow erythroid hyperplasia with dysery
thropoiesis and persistent macrocytic normochromic
anaemia with mild reticulocytosis, subcapsular hep-
atic fibrosis, and subtle neurological findings (Steffen
et al. 1992a,b). Histologically, the number of hair fol-
licles is unaltered. Hair follicles are reported to show
Fig. 3.1.10 Alopecic phenotype of polled Hereford cow. (Cour-
infundibular hyperkeratosis and degeneration of indi-
tesy of D. Steffen.)
vidual keratinocytes both within the infundibular ep-
ithelium and within the inner root sheath (Fig. 3.1.11).
3.1.2.2.3 Autosomal dominant congenital
An increase in telogen hair follicles is described and
alopecia in cattle
there are atrophic sebaceous glands as well as dilated
There is also an autosomal domina nt congenital alope-
apocrine glands (Steffen et al. 1991).
cia in cattle that has been described in the polled
a
(b)
Fig. 3.1.11 Skin histopathology of alopecia in a polled Here
ford calf. (a) Hyperkeratosis and irregular contour of hair fol-
licles; (b) apoptotic keratinocyte in epidermis. (Courtesy of
D. Steffen.)
Congenital alopecia101
Hereford breed. Itis characterized by congenital alope-
cia with sparse curly hair, often associated with abnor
malities of the hoofs. Hair follicles are hypoplastic and
show vacuolization and enlarged trichohyalin gran-
ules in the inner root sheath (Jayasekera 1979; Rose et
al. 1983; Bracho et al. 1984).
3.1.2.2.4 Hair follicle dysplasia in horses
Hair follicle dysplasia in horses is very rare and for
 most anecdotal cases detailed clinical and histopatho-
logical investigations are lacking. There is only one
scientific report describing the clinical and histopatho-
logical features of hypotrichosis in a male blue roan
Percheron draught horse (Valentine et al. 2001). The
horse was born with patchy areas of alopecia over
the trunk and extremities, whereas hair was present
Fig. 3.1.12 Alopecic phenotype of a Sphynx cat.(Courtesy of
on mane, tail, and forelocks. With age, alopecia pro-
M. Paradis.)
 gressed and became generalized, with only sparse
remaining vibrissae, mane, tail, and forelock hairs.
3.1.13). Most of those hair follicles are in anagen and
Histopathology revealed a normal density of hair fol-
they produce hair shafts. The latter, however, are very
licles, but hair shafts were mostly absent from fol-
 smallin diameter, they bend within the dermis, and al-
licles. Hair follicles had a severely reduced diam-
though some degree of hair shaft formation is evident,
eter (hypoplasia) and were often surrounded by a
many hair follicle infundibula are empty.
thickened connective tissue sheath, interpreted as
-  sm aa oh, yo  
3.1.2.3 Hair follicle dysplasia associated with
fundibular hyperkeratosis. Sebaceous glands as well
congenital defects in hair follicle cycling
as epitrichial apocrine glands were normal. Those fea-
tures suggest a follicular dysplasia with dysplastic hair
Hair follicle morphogenesis ends with initiation of the
shafts.
first hair growth cycle, which is initiation of hair folli-
cle regression (catagen). A well-characterized pheno-
3.1.2.2.5 Hair follicle dysplasia in cats
type of congenital alopecia in mice and humans is the
"hairless" mutation. The hairless protein (that inter-
in various breeding programs throughout the world,
acts with intranuclear histone deacetylases) functions
but has rarely been reported in the scientific literature.
 as a transcription factor. Morphological studies sug-
First hairless individuals were reported from Mexico
 gest that hairless protein plays a crucial function in
and France, but have not been bred systematically un-
 catagen development of hair follicles. Individuals with
til hairlessness has occurred spontaneously in Canada
a nonfunctioning hairless protein develop a normal
in the 1960s and was finally maintained as the “Sphynx
hair coat after birth but start loosing their hair shortly
cat" breed. The hairless phenotype is symbolized by
thereafter. In mice, alopecia progresses from the neck
"hr” and is characterized by complete absence of fur
caudally, following initiation of the first postnatal hair
except for tufts of short, soft hair on the ears, muzzle,
 growth cycle. In affected individuals the mesenchy-
tail, feet, and scrotum (Fig. 3.1.12). Whiskers are short
mal cells of the dermal papilla loose contact with the
and curled. Hairless cats with normal whiskers have
ectodermal cells of the hair germ. This results in for-
been described as well, and the gene symbol "hi" has
 mation of cystic hair follicle infundibula and a lack
been suggested (Hendy-Ibbs 1984). Histopathologi-
of anagen initiation. Instead cysts form in the deep
cal changes in Sphynx cats have not been sufficiently
 dermis, possibly arising from an inductive potential of
described. Biopsies from Sphynx cats that occasion-
dermal papilla cells that lay in proximity to remnant
ally occur in diagnostic services show rather small and
curved hair follicles that appear otherwise normal (Fig.
hairless mutation is rather characteristic and is almost
102Non-inflammatory alopecias
b
sheus jiy pseidsp (a) :sapioy jiey uabeien pue uabeuy (e) ten xuuds e jo Aooisy uis et'l'e b
identical in mice and humans (where the disease is
known as “"papular atrichia").
3.1.2.3.1 Hairless cats
 Recently, a hairless cat with congenital alopecia and
to hairless mice has been described (Figs 3.1.14 and
3.1.15). It is currently not known whether alopecia
in this individual is linked to the analogous hairless
gene,and more detailed investigations arewarranted
(Neuber et al. 2006).
3.1.2.3.2Alopecia inValle del Belice sheep
 Mutations in the analogous hairless gene of sheep
 have been described in alopecic Valle del Belice sheep
(Fig. 3.1.16). Exon 3 of the hairless gene shows a
high frequency of recombination and conversion in
alopecic individuals, suggesting a pathogenetic in-
Fig. 3.1.14 Cat with congenital hairlessness. Extensive alopecia
volvement ofthe sheep hairless gene ( Finocchiaro et al.
on head, trunk, and extremities. (Reprinted with permission
2003).
from Neuber et al. (2006).)
Congenital alopecia103
number of hair follicles, however, is reported to be
normal, as are sebaceous glands. Apocrine glands un-
dergo cystic degeneration. Lethal hypotrichosis occurs
in Holstein-Friesians as an autosomal recessive trait
and is clinically characterized by generalized alopecia
with only sparse hair on muzzle, eyelids, ears, tail, and
pastern (Mohr and Wreidt 1928). Affected calves die
within a few hours after birth. Viable hypotrichosis
has been described in the Guernsey, Jersey, Holstein,
 and Hereford breeds (Surrarrer 1943; Hutt and Saun-
ders 1953; McGavin and Alexander 1961; Becker et al.
1963; Schleger 1967). It is inherited as an autosomal
recessive trait and is characterized by generalized con-
genital alopecia, with sparse hair on legs, tail, eyelids,
Hg. 3.1.15 Cat with congenital hairlessness. Skin histology
and ear pinnae.
with cystic dilation of hair follicles. (Reprinted with permission
from Neuber et al. (2006).)
3.1.2.4 Dysplasia of hair follicle pigmentation
3.1.2.3.3 Lethal and viable hypotrichosis in cattle
The forms of congenital alopecia that were discussed
so far involve abnormalities in epithelial and mes-
Some cases of hypotrichosis in cattle show a strik-
enchymal cells of the hair follicle. However, the
ingly similar morphology to hairless mice. Diseases
 neuroectoderm-derived follicular melanocytes also
contribute to the formation of a pigmented hair shaft,
potrichosis" in cattle are associated with dysplastic hair
follicles that do not produce hair shafts (Fig. 3.1.17).
and abnormalities in melanocytes have been described
that are associated with alopecia, primarily in the
However, morphology shows trichilemmal keratiniza-
dog.
tion, suggesting that inner root sheath formation,
which is always associated with hair shaft formation,
3.1.2.4.1 Canine black hair follicle dysplasia
has once been present. Hair shafts may have been lost
Black hair follicle dysplasia (BHFD) in dogs was first
during improper telogen formation. Alopecia is due
described in 1972 as alopecia that is confined to
to dysplastic hair follicles that do not form hair. The
black (or very dark brown) regions of the hair coat
(Selmanowitz et al. 1972, 1977a). It has since been
reported in a variety of breeds such as the Bearded
Collie, Saluki, Border Collie, King Charles spaniel,
 Jack Russell Terrier, and Gordon Setter (Harper 1978;
Gosselin et al. 1982; Hargis et al. 1991; Rest and Davies
1994; Delmage 1995; Dunn et al. 1995; Lewis 1995;
Knottenbelt and Knottenbelt 1996; Bohnhorst et al.
2001). First clinical abnormalities are usually noted
around 4 weeks of age and comprise fracture of hair
shafts in black-coated regions, later resulting in par-
tial alopecia and scaling (Fig. 3.1.18). Most severely
affected regions are usually found on the head, ear
pinnae, neck, and back, whereas other black-coated
areas may exhibit almost normal hair. Trichograms
will show pigment clumping in hair shafts (Fig. 2.1.7).
Hg. 3.1.16 Alopecic phenotype of hairless Valle del Belice
Histopathology of affected skin reveals large clumps
sheep. (Courtesy of R. Finocchiaro.)
of melanin within melanocytes of the hair matrix, the
104Non-inflammatory alopecias
(a)
(b)
05.02.200
C
Fig. 3.1.17 Viable hypotrichosis in cattle. (a) (Courtesy of M.
Paradis) Extensive alopecia affecting the trunk, head, and ex-
tremities; (b) skin histology of the same animal showing telo-
gen hair follicles and numerous dilated cysts in the subcutis;
(c) higher magnification of a telogen hair follicle, demonstrat-
ing early anagen development.
outer root sheath and, if pigmented, the epidermis. Ir-
 doap a iq q iae sp o se aa s
regularly distributed clumps of melanin are also found
later. Chronic lesions may reveal atrophic hair folli-
within the medulla and the cortex of hair shafts and
 cles and large numbers of perifollicular melanophages
the inner root sheath (Fig. 3.1.19). Those hair shafts
(Selmanowitz et al. 1977a,b; Hargis et al. 1991) (Fig.
frequently break within the hair canal resulting in a
 3.1.19). Scanning electron microscopy has shown that
distorted follicular infundibulum that is filled with
the cuticle is absent over large areas of the hair fiber,
keratin squames, fragmented hairs, and large irregular
 and the cortex may show multiple pits or be frag-
clumps of melanin. These changes have been described
mented (Hargis et al. 1991). BHFD is inherited in
Congenital alopecia105
Roperto et al. 1995; Kim et al. 2005). In those breeds,
CDA is associated with certain coat colors, known as
blue, gray, fawn, and red. Those colors are consid-
a jo speus raiq ae aaui aus ai, paa
 or brown (Laukner 1998). Clinically, a variable degree
 of alopecia and scaling affects primarily the trunk,
and rarely the head and extremities (Fig. 3.1.20). First
clinical signs are usually noticed between 3 and 12
months of age, rarely later in life. Affected dogs are
 prone to secondary bacterial folliculitis, and lesions
are usually slowly progressive with age. Scanning elec-
 tron microscopy reveals cortical defects with large
vacuoles that contain melanin granules in medullary,
subcortical, and intracortical areas (Beco et al. 1996)
Hg. 3.1.18 Black hair follicle dysplasia in a Jack Russell Ter-
(Fig. 3.1.21).
rier. Note extensive alopecia restricted to dark-colored skin
areas.
3.1.2.4.3 Etiology and pathogenesis of canine
coat color dilution and black hair follicle
dysplasia
an autosomal recessive mode. Its etiology and patho-
The etiology of both BHFD and CDA is still not
genesis are still obscure. It is known that the MSH
completely understood. Both diseases have been con-
receptor gene is not linked to BHFD (Schmutz et al.
sidered an ectodermal defect, although it is most
likely that its origin is manifest in neuroectodermal
cia areata (Selmanowitz et al. 1977a,b; Bohnhorst et
melanocytes. Miller (1990a) was the first to compare
al. 2001), but until today there is no evidence that
 the histopathological phenotype ofCDA-affected dogs
an inflammatory process causes this follicular disease.
with certain strains of mice and cats (Maltese dilu-
Association with symmetric lupoid onychitis has been
tion). He considered a central role of the “d" locus
made in a Gordon Setter affected with BHFD and pos-
that controls intensity of hair shaft pigmentation by
itive antinuclear antibodies have been demonstrated
influencing size, shape, and distribution of melanin
in a few affected dogs (Bohnhorst et al. 2001), but fur-
granules within the hair shaft (Silvers 1979; Miller
ther evidence ofany causative link is lacking and seems
1991). In mice, there are three spontaneous mutations
unlikely. BHFD has been classified as an ectodermal
at the “d" locus that cause coat color dilution and
dysplasia by some authors ( Foil 1990; Knottenbelt and
similar histomorphological changes as seen in CDA
Knottenbelt 1996), but morphological and genetic ev-
and BHFD. These are mutations in the leaden (Ir), the
idence points to a neuroectodermal rather than an
dilute (d), and the ashen (ash) gene (Silvers 1979) cor-
ectodermal defect.
responding to the human Griscelli syndrome, a rare
autosomal recessive disorder that is characterized by
3.1.2.4.2 Canine color dilution alopecia
diffuse skin pigmentation, silvery hair, and the occur-
With regard to histopathology, color dilution alope-
cia (CDA) in dogs is identical to BHFD. CDA, also
a severe immune disorder (Westbroek et al. 2001). It
known as color mutant alopecia, has been described
 has been shown that those three mutations are linked
in various breeds such as Chihuahua, Chow Chow,
to defects in the intracellular transport mechanisms
Dachshund, Doberman Pinscher, Great Dane, Irish
within cutaneous melanocytes. Melanocytes synthe-
Setter, Italian Greyhound, Poodl, Rhodesian Ridge-
size melanosomes in the cell center and transport them
back, Saluki, Schnauzer, Shetland Sheepdog, Silky Ter-
 into long cytoplasmic dendrites that reach between
rier, whippet, Yorkshire Terrier, as well as some cross-
multiple surrounding keratinocytes of the epidermis
breeds, and Mongrels (Conroy et al. 1975; Briggs and
 or the hair matrix. This transport of melanosomes
Botha 1986; Ferrer et al. 1988; Miller 1990a,1991;
involves both microtubules and actin filaments
Malik and France 199l; Finnie and Tham 1993;
(Kelleher and Titus 1998; Rodionov et al. 1998; Rogers
106Non-inflammatory alopecias
(a}
D
(C)
Hg. 3.1.19 Skin histology of black hair follicle dysplasia. (a) Dysplastic hair shafts with irregular pigmentation; (b) pigment clumping
in the hair follicle matrix; (c) pigment clumping in epidermal melanocytes; (d) catagen hair follicles with dysplastic hair shafts and
numerous pigmented cells in the dermis (melanophages).
and Gelfand 1998). Transport along actin filaments
ments in an ATP-dependent manner. Both Rab27a and
in the cell periphery requires the proteins myosin Va
melanophilin link melanosomes to myosin (Hume et
(product of the dilute locus), Rab27a (product of the
al. 2002; Nagashima et al. 2002). Consequently, func-
ashen locus) (Wilson et al. 2000), and melanophilin
tional deficits in any of those three proteins will re-
(product of the leaden locus) (Hume et al. 2002)
sult in a lack of melanosome transport into cyto-
(Fig. 3.1.22). Myosin Va is part of a motor pro-
plasmic dendrites (Provance et al. 1996, 2002). This
tein that facilitates direct movement along actin fila-
transport, however, is crucial to allow coordinated
Congenital alopecia107
ets correlate to cortical and medullary vacuoles that
are filled with abundant melanosomes, as demon-
strated by transmission electron microscopy (Beco
et al. 1996). As those melanosomes appear to be
of normal size, the term “macromelanosomes" is
rather inaccurate and should be replaced by “ag-
 gregated melanosomes." Whether the aggregation of
 melanosomes occurs in terminally differentiating ker-
atinocytes or in melanocytes that originate from the
hair bulb and have accidentally been integrated into
the hair shaft is still unknown. Recently, evidence
was provided that coat color dilution in several dog
breeds is caused by one or more mutations within
or near the melanophilin gene (Philipp et al. 2005),
indicating the similarity to the leaden mutation in
mice and the Griscelli syndrome type 3 in humans
(Menasche et al. 2003). A recent study has demon-
strated a wide breed distribution of the melanophilin
mutation, suggesting an old mutation event that most
likely occurred before the foundation of our modern
dog breeds (Drogemiller et al. 2008). Although the
current data clearly indicate that the dilute mutation
increases the risk for CDA and BHFD, there seem to
be breed-specific modifying factors.
Fg. 3.1.20 Color dilution alopecia in a brown-colored Dober-
In summary, there are various dog breeds with char-
man Pinscher.
acteristic aggregation of melanosomes within hair fol-
licles and epidermis. These abnormalities are asso
ciated with black (or dark brown) hair or various
transfer of melanosomes from melanocytes into sur-
shades of blue, silver, and red. The occurrence of pig-
rounding keratinocytes. Light microscopic evalua-
ment clumping in black hairs demonstrates that it is
tion of plucked hair shafts from CDA- and BHFD-
not necessarily associated with coat color dilution. It
affected dogs reveals large packets of clumped pigment
is likely that black hair fibers in BHFD are so heav-
within the hair shaft cortex and medulla. Those pack-
ily pigmented that even the irregular distribution of
(a)
(b)
Hg. 3.1.21 Scanning electron microscopy of a hair shaft from a Dachshund with color dilution alopecia, 3,500x. (a) Swelling of the
hair shaft cutice; (b) rupture of cuticle with release of cortical material, assumed to be melanin granules.(Reprinted with permission
from Beco et al. (1996).)
108Non-inflammatory alopecias
Actin filaments
Rab27a
Melanosome
Fig. 3.1.22 Schematic demonstration of
proteins involved in melanosome trans-
port along actin filaments.
pigment does not affect its color. The abnormality
ence that dogs were between 1 and 4 years of age at the
manifests in cutaneous melanocytes that show im-
onset of clinical disease. Another difference was the
paired melanosome transport. Evidence exists that, at
severity of pigmentary clumping that was reported to
least in some dog breeds, this melanosome transport
be much milder compared to most dogs with typical
defect is linked to the melanophilin gene, one of three
early-onset CDA. Consequently, none of these dogs
genes that occur at the “d" (dilute) locus. Some dogs
was described to have typical dilute coat color. It is
with this phenotype (e.g., Weimaraner) are healthy,
still not known whether this CDA-like disease in adult
whereas others develop alopecia and scaling in the
dogs is simply a very mild and retarded form of CDA
first months of life. The degree of melanosome aggre-
 or whether it is caused by a secondary hair cycling
gation is variable among breeds and individuals, and
abnormality that triggers expressivity of pigmentary
so is the expressivity of the clinical disease. It is most
changes that do not become clinically apparent other-
likely that BHFD and CDA are based on similar ge-
wise.
 netic defects and that they merely represent various
forms of severity. This would be in line with previ-
3.1.2.4.4 Hair follicle dysplasia in the
ous observations, suggesting that BHFD has pigment
Weimaraner dog
clumps of larger size than CDA (Hargis et al. 1991).
A specific type of alopecia has been described in young
There is no doubt that hair fibers with very irregular
adult Weimaraners (Laffort-Dassot et al. 2002). All
 pigmentation are prone to fracture. Therefore, alope-
Weimaraners have a diluted coat color. As in CDA
cia in many cases of BHFD and CDA can be explained
(see Section 3.1.2.4.2), this coat color dilution is based
by the fracture of hair shafts within or outside of the
on an irregular distribution of melanosomes within
hair canal. In addition, both BHFD and CDA are re-
the hair shaff. Normal Weimaraners have few melanin
 ported to show nongrowing hair follicles (i.e., telogen
aggregates (clumps) in both cortex and medulla of
hair follicles or follicle atrophy). This is usually associ-
hair shafts. These melanin aggregates occur with a
ated with marked hyperkeratosis within the follicular
moderate density and are quite evenly distributed
infundibulum. It is possible that hair cycle arrest is
along the hair shaft. The cuticle is normal. Histolog-
a consequence of melanin release. Alternatively, an
ically, melanocytes with aggregated melanosomes are
independent secondary disease process could explain
present in the epidermis and the hair bulb. However,
follicular inactivity, and further studies are needed to
melanosome aggregation has usually no clinical sig-
ultimately clarify the pathogenesis.
nificance as only about 20% of hair follicles in nor-
Some dogs with very mild coat color dilution may
mal Weimaraners are slightly distorted with mild in-
present alopecia later in life. This has particularly been
fundibular hyperkeratosis.
described in black- and red-coated Doberman Pin-
There is a distinct form of alopecia in Weimaran-
schers (Miller 1990b), where alopecia clinically and
ers that has been named “Follicular dysplasia of the
histopathologically resembled CDA with the differ-
Weimaraner." A genetic defect is assumed but the
Congenital alopecia109
Fig. 3.1.23 Multifocal alopecia in a Weimaraner with follicular
dysplasia. (Reprinted with permission from Laffort-Dassot et al.
(2002).)
Fig. 3.1.24 Follicular lipidosis in a Rottweiler. Subtle alopecia
of mahogany-colored skin areas. (Courtesy of C. Favrot.)
underlying pathogenesis has not been elucidated yet.
in more detail. The overall milder degree of pigmen-
Alopecia occurs in young adults of both gender, usu-
ally between 1 and 3 years of age. Alopecia involves
why alopecia in Weimaraners occurs much later in life
than CDA.
the back, lateral and ventral thorax, flanks, and ab-
domen, but spares the head and limbs (Fig. 3.1.23). In
the affected region, hair fibers break and follicles are
3.1.2.4.5 Hair matrix lipidosis in the
Rottweiler dog
 prone to recurrent bacterial infection. No pruritus is
seen with the disease. Plucked hair shafts from affected
Another color-linked and presumably hereditary dis-
ease of hair follicles that develops within the first
areas contain large aggregates of melanin. In contrast
to normal Weimaraners, the aggregates are larger and
months after birth is canine follicular lipidosis (Gross
more numerous. In addition, large circular cuticu-
et al. 1997). This disease has only been described in
 young Rottweilers so far, is rare, and is associated with
lar defects (craters) are found (best demonstrated by
early onset of alopecia, affecting mahagony-colored
areas on the feet and face (Fig. 3.1.24). Follicular lipi-
similarities to CDA, but findings are less severe. Hair
bulbs and hair shafts show melanocytes with large ag-
dosis is characterized by intracytoplasmic lipid-filled
vacuoles within cells of the hair follicle matrix (Fig.
gregates of melanosomes. Many hair follicles are dis-
3.1.25). Whether lipid vacuoles occur in keratinocytes
torted by large amounts of infundibular keratin. In
summary, macroscopical and histological findings are
or melanocytes has not been clarified yet, and the un-
almost identical to color dilution alpecia, except that
derlying pathogenesis is not known. Alopecia is most
 likely a result of increased hair shaf fragility.
their degree of severity is milder. This suggests that
“follicular dysplasia in Weimaraners" is another vari-
ant of a neuroectodermal dysplasia of the follicular
3.1.2.4.6 Follicular pigmentary abnormalities
pigmentary unit. The quantitative differences may be
in other domestic animals species
explained by the overall smaller amount of melanin
Morphological features similar to BHDF and CDA
 in Weimaraners (compared to the breeds classically
have been reported in horses and cattle (Ayers et al.
1989; Miller and Scott 1990), but are extremely rare.
affected by CDA). Because of the morphological sim-
ilarities to CDA, it can be assumed that one of the
proteins that are crucially involved in melanosome
3.1.3 Unclassified forms of
transport (melanophilin, Rab27a, myosin Va) is also
congenital alopecia
involved in the pathogenesis of alopecia in Weimaran-
ers. Whether the mutation in this protein is similar to
As suggested above, congenital alopecia can be clas-
 or different from the one in CDA has to be investigated
sified as hair follicle aplasia, hair follicle dysplasia
110Non-inflammatory alopecias
Furthermore, congenital alopecia has been de-
scribed in Poll Dorset sheep (viable hypotrichosis)
and in Karakul sheep, but information on its clini-
cal and morphologic phenotype or its genetic back-
 ground is too sparse for further subclassification (Nel
1964; Dolling and Brooker 1966; Mackie and Mcintyre
1992).
References
Ackerman L. 1983. Inheritance of baldy calf syndrome. Modern.
Veterinary Practice 64:807.
Ayers JR, Leipold HW, Schalles R, Cole D. 1989. Pathological studies
of cross-related congenital hypotrichosis in cattle. Zentralblattfutr
Veterinarmedizin A 36:447-452.
Becker RB, Simpson CF, Wilcox CA. 1963. Hairless Guernsey cattle.
Hypotrichosis - a nonlethal character. Jourmal of Heredity 54:1.
Beco L, Fontaine J, Gross TL, Charlier G. 1996. Color dilution
alopeciainseven Dachshunds.Aclinical studyandthehereditary,
microscopical and ultrastructural aspect ofthe disease. Veterinary
Dermatology 7:91-97.
Bohnhorst JO, Hanssen I, Moen T. 2001. Antinuclear antibodies
(ANA) in Gordon Setters with symmetrical lupoid onychodys-
trophyand black hair follicular dysplasia.ActaVeterinaria Sca
dinavica 42:323-329.
Bracho GA, Beeman K, Johnson JL, Leipold HW. 1984. Further stud-
ies of congenital hypotrichosis in Hereford calves. Zentraiblattfitr
VeterinarmedizinA31:72.
Braun U, Ansari HA, Hediger, R, Siss U, Ehrensperger F. 1988.
Hg. 3.1.25 Skin histology of follicular lipidosis in a Rottweiler.
 Hypotrichosis and oligodontia associated with a chromosomal
Large cytoplasmic vacuoles (presumed to be fat) within the hair
Xq-deletion in a Simmental/red Holstein crossbreed. Tierarztliche
bulb matrix
Praxis 16:39-44.
Briggs OM, Botha WS. 1986. Color mutant alopecia in a blue Italian
greyhound.Journalof theAmericanAnialHospitalAssociation
22:611-614.
Casal ML, Jezyk PF, Greek JM, Goldschmidt MH, Patterson DF.
(with or without hair shaft formation), and dyspla-
1997. X-linked ectodermal dysplasia in the dog. Jourmaf of Hered-
sia of the hair follicle pigmentary unit (neuroecto-
ity 88:513-517.
dermal dysplasia). This classification requires a de-
Casal ML, Mauldin EA, Ryan S, Scheidt JL, Kennedy J, Moore PF,
 Felsburg PJ. 2005. Frequent respiratory tract infections in the ca-
tailed histopathological evaluation of the skin. There
nine model of X-linked ectodermal dysplasia are not caused by an
are some forms of congenital alopecia in domestic
immune deficiency. Veterinary Immunology and Immumopathof-
animals, where such investigations have not been per-
ogy 107:95-104.
Chastain CB, Swayne DE. 1985. Congenital hypotrichosis in male
formed or have been reported insufficiently, not allow-
Basset Hound littermates. Jourmal ofthe American Veterinary Med-
ing further classification. Among these is the “Ameri-
ical Association 187:845-846.
can hairless terrier," a dog breed that originated from
Cole LJ. 1919. A defect of hair and teeth in cattle, probably hereditary.
Jourmal of Heredity 10:303.
the American Rat Terrier. Hairlessness spontaneously
Conroy ID, Rasmusen BA, Small E. 1975. Hypotrichosis in minia-
occurred in Rat Terriers in 1972 and was maintained
ture poodle siblings. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 166:697-699.
as an individual breed with an autosomal recessive
Craft WA, Blizzard WL. 1934. The inheritance of semihairlessness
trait. The phenotype is symbolized as “Ha." Affected
in cattle. Journal of Heredity 25:385.
dogs are born with a sparse hair coat that is eventu-
David LT. 1932. Histology of the skin of the mexican hairless swine
(sus scrofa). American Jourmal of Amatomy 50:283-292.
ally shed and never replaced. Dogs are completely bald
Delmage DA. 1995. Black hair follicular dysplasia. Veterimary Record
by 6 weeks of age with only whiskers and eyebrows re-
136:7980.
maining. Dentition ofthese dogs is normal, suggesting
Distl O, Drogemiller C, Kuiper H, Kutschke L, Hermanns W, Kehler
W, Scholz H. 2000. Genetische untersuchung von kongenitaler
that they are not analogous to the Chinese Crested or
hypotrichose mit anodontie bei deutschen Holstein Kalbern.
Mexican Hairless Dog.
Tierirztliche Umschau 55:72-79.
Congenital alopecia111
Dolling CHS, Brooker MG. 1966. A viable hypotrichosis in Poll
man pinscher by microscopic examination of hairs. Veterinary
Dorset sheep. Jourmal of Heredity 57:87-90.
Dermatology 2:69-83.
Drieux H, Priouzeau M, Thiery G, Priouzeau ML. 1950. Hypotrri-
Harper RC. 1978. Congenital black hair follicular dysplasia in
chose congenitale avec anodontie, acerie et macroglossie chez le
bearded collie puppies. Veterinary Record 102:87.
veau. Recueility de Medicine Veterinaire 126:385-399.
Hendy-Ibbs PM. 1984. Hairless cats in Great Britain. Jourmal of
Drogemiller C, Distl O, Leeb T. 2001. Partial deletion of the
Heredity 75:506-507.
bovine EDl gene causes anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in cattle.
Hirota Y, Koizumi N, Matsubara Y, Imamura K, Fukuta K. 1990.
Genome Research 1l:1699-1705.
Immunological features in hairless descendants derived from
Drogemiller C, Distl O, Leeb T. 2003. X-linked anhidrotic ectoder-
Mexican hairless dogs. The Japarese fourral of Veterinary Science
mal dysplasia (EDl) in men, mice, and cattle. Genetics, Selection,
52:1117-1121.
Evofutiom (1 Suppl):S137-S145.
Holmes JR, Young GB. 1954. Symmetrical alopecia in cattle. Veteri-
Drogemiller C, Haase B, Philipp U, Glinzel-Apel AR, Leeb T. 2008.
nary Record 66:704.
The non-coding MLPH c.-22G>A SNP associated with dilute
Hume AN, Collinson LM, Hopkins CR, Strom M, Barral DC, Bossi
coat color is found in genetically diverse dogs with and with-
G, Griffths GM, Seabra MC. 2002. The leaden gene product is
out symptoms of color dilution alopecia. Abstract, International
required with Rab27a to recruit myosin Va to melanosomes in
Congresson Transposable Elements, Saint Malo.
melanocytes. Traffc 3:193-202.
Drogemiller C, Karlsson EK, Hytonen MK, Perlaski M, Dolf G,
Hutt FB. 1963. A note of six kinds of genetic hypotrichosis in cattle.
Saimio K, Lohi H, Limdblad-Toh K, Leeb T. 2008. A mutation
Journal of Heredity 54:186.
in hairless dogs implicates FOX13 in ectodermal development.
Hutt FB, Saunders LZ. 1953. Viable genetic hypotrichosis in
Science 321:1462.
Guernsey cattle. Jourmal of Heredity 44:97.
Drogemillr C, Kuiper H, Peters M, Guionaud S, Distl O, Leeb
 Jayasekera MY. 1979. Pathological changes in congenital hypotrj-
T. 2002a. Congenital hypotrichosis with anodontia in cattle: a
chosis in Hereford cattle. Zentralblatt fiur Veterinirmedizin A
genetic, clinical and histological analysis. Veterinary Dermatology
26:744.
13:307313.
Kelleher JF, Titus MA. 1998. Intracellular motility: how can we all
Drogemiller C, Peters M, Pohlenz J, Distl O, Leeb T. 2002b. A single
work together? Current Biology 8:R394-R397.
point mutation within the ED1 gene disrupts correct splicing
Kidwell JF, Guilbert HR.1950.A recurrence of the semihairless gene
at two different splice sites and leads to anhidrotic ectodermal
in cattle. Journal of Heredity 41:190.
dysplasia in cattle.Journal of Motecutar Medicine80:319-323.
Kim JH, Kang KI, Sohn HJ, Woo GH, Jean YH, Hwang EK. 2005.
Dunn KA, Russell M, Boness IM. 1995. Black hair follicular dyspla-
Color-dilution alopecia in dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary Science
sia.Veterinary Record 137:412.
6:259-261.
Eldridge FE, Atkeson FW. 1953. Streaked hairlessness in Holstein
Kimura T. 1996. Studies on development of hairless descendants
Friesian cattle. Jourmal of Heredity 44:265.
of Mexican hairless dogs and their usefulness in dermatological
Fernandez A, Silio L, Noguera JL, Sanchez A, Ovilo C. 2003. Linkage
science. Experimental Animais 45:1-13.
mapping of the porcine hairless gene (HR) to chromosome 14.
Kimura T, Doi K. 1994a. Age-related changes in skin color and
Amimal Genetics 34:317-318.
histologic features of hairless descendants of Mexican hairless
Ferrer L, Durall I, Closa J, Mascort J. 1988. Color mutant alopecia
dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research 55:480-486.
in Yorkshire terriers. Veterinary Record 122:360-361.
Kimura T, Doi K. 1994b. Response of the skin over the dorsum to
Finnie IW, Tham VL. 1993. Colour mutant alopecia in a kelpie X
sunlight in hairless descendants of Mexican hairless dogs. Amer-
border collie dog. Australian Veterinary Jourmal 70:388-389.
icanfournal of Veterinary Research 55:199-203.
 Finocchiaro R, Portolano B, Damiani G, Caroli A, Budelli E, Bolla P,
Kimura T, Doi K. 1996. Spontaneous comedones on the skin of hair-
Pagnacco G. 2003. The hairless (hr) gene is involved in the con-
less descendants of Mexican hairless dogs. Experimental Animais
genital hypotrichosis of Valle del Belice sheep. Genetics, Selection,
45:377384.
Evofution 35:S147-S156.
Kimura T, Doi K. 1997. The effect of topical minoxidil treatment on
Foil CS. 1990. The skin. In: Hoskins JD (ed.), Veterinary Pediatrics,
hair follicular growth of neonatal hairless descendants of Mexican
Pp. 359-403. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
hairless dogs. Veterinary Dermatofogy 8:107-113.
Freire-MaiaN,Lisboa-CostaT,Pagnan NAB.2001.Ectodermal dys-
Kimura T, Doi K. 1998a. Effects of all-trans retinoic acid on the
plasias: how many? American Jourmal of Medical Genetics l04:84.
dorsal skin of hairless dogs. Toxicologic Pathofogy 26:595-601.
 Fukuta K, Koizumi N, Imamura K, Goto N, Hamada H. 1991. Mi-
Kimura T, Doi K. 1998b. Effcacy of hydroquinone in the treat-
croscopic observation of skin and lymphoid organs in the hair-
ment of cutaneous hyperpigmentation in hairless descendants of
less dog derived from the Mexican hairless. Experimental Amimals
Mexican hairless dogs. Laboratory Animal Science 48:469-475.
40:69-76.
Kimura T, Doi K. 1999. Dorsal skin reactions of hairless dogs to top-
Gosselin Y, Papageorges M, Teuscher E. 1982. Black hair follicular
ical treatment with corticosteroids. Toxicologic Pathology 27:528-
dysplasia in dogs. Canine Practice 9:8-15.
535.
Goto N, Imamura K, Miura Y, Ogawa T, Hamada H. 1987. The Mex-
Kimura T, Kuroki K, Doi K. 1998. Dermatotoxicity of agricultural
ican hairless dog,its morphology and inheritance.Experimental
chemicalsin thedorsal skinofhairlessdogs.Toxicologic Patholgy
Anmais 40:69-76.
26:442-447.
Grieshaber TL, Blakemore JC, Yaskulski S. 1986. Congenital alopecia
Kimura T, Ohshima S, Doi K. 1992. Haematological and serum
in a Bichon frise. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
 biochemical values in hairless and haired descendants of Mexican
Association 188:1053-1054.
hairless dogs. Laboratory Amimais 26:214-218.
Gross TL, Pascal-Tenorio A, Munn RJ, Hargis AM, Kline A. 1997.
Kimura T, Ohshima S, Doi K. 1993. The inheritance and breeding
Follicular lipidosis in three Rottweilers. Veterinary Dermatology
results of hairless descendants of Mexican hairless dogs. Labora-
8:3339.
tory Aimais 27:55-58.
Hargis AM, Brignac MM, Al-Bagdadi FAK, Muggli F, Mundel A.
Knottenbelt CM, Knottenbelt MK. 1996. Black hair follicular dyspla-
1991. Black hair follicular dysplasia in black and white saluki
sia in a tricolour Jack Russell terrier. Veterinary Record 138:475-
dogs: differentiation from color mutant alopecia in the Dober-
476.
112 Non-inflammatory alopecias
Kral F, Schwartzman RM (eds). 1964. Veterinary and Comparative
within the canine MLPH gene are associated with dilute coat
Dermatofogy, Pp. 183-184. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott.
color in dogs. BMC Genetics l6:34.
Kuiper H, Kutschke L, Drogemiller C, Leeb T, Distl O. 2001. As-
Provance DW, James TL, Mercer JA. 2002. Melanophilin, the prod-
signment of the bovine ectodysplasin A gene (ED1) to bovine
uct of the leaden locus, is required for targeting of myosin-Va to
Xq22-q24 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cytogenetics and
melanosomes. Traffc 3:124-132.
Cell Genetics 92:356-357.
Provance DW, Wei M, Ipe V, Mercer JA. 1996. Cultured melanocytes
Kunkle GA. 1984. Congenital hypotrichosis in two dogs. Jourmal of
from dilute mutant mice exhibit dendritic morphology and
the American Veterinary Medical Association 185:84-85.
altered melanosome distribution. Proceedings of the National
Laffort-Dassot C, Beco L, Carlotti D. 2002. Follicular dysplasia in
Acadermy of Sciernces of the United States of America 93:14554-
five Weimaraners. Veterinary Dermatoflogy 13:253.
14558.
Laukner A. 1998. Coat color in dogs. l: Basics of coat color genesis.
 Rest JR, Davies JBA. 1994. Black hair follicular dysplasia. Veterirnary
Tierarztliche Praxis Ausgabe Klientiere und Heimtiere 26:49-54.
Record135:607.
Lemus-Flores C, Ulloa-Arvizu R, Ramos-Kuri M, Estrada FJ, Alonso
Rieck GW. 1985. Hypotrichie-hypodontie syndrom beim Rind.
RA. 2001. Genetic analysis of Mexican hairless pig populations.
Deutsche Tierirztliche Wochenschrift 92:328-329.
Jourmal of Animal Sciences 79:3021-3026.
Roberts E, Carroll WE. 1931. The inheritance of hairlessness in
Lewis CJ. 1995. Black hair follicular dysplasia in UK bred salukis.
swine. Jourmal of Heredity 22:125.
Veterinmary Record 137:294-295.
Robinson R.1985. Chinese crested dog. Journal of Heredity 76:217-
Mackie JT, Mcintyre B. 1992. Congenital hypotrichosis in Poll
218.
Dorset sheep. Austrafiam Veterinary fourmnal 69:146-147.
Rodionov VI, Hope AJ, Svitkina TM, Borisy GG. 1998. Functional
Malik R, France MP. 1991. Hyperpigmentation and symmetrical
coordination of microtubule-based and actin-based motility in
alopecia in three silky terriers. Australian Veterinary Practitioner
melanophores. Curremt Biofogy 8:165-168.
21:135-138.
 Rogers SL, Gelfand VI. 1998. Myosin cooperates with microtubule
McGavin MD, Alexander GI. 1961. Viable hypotrichosis in a Jersey
motors during organelle transport in melanophores. Qurrent Bi-
Calf. Queensland Jourmal of Agricuftural Science I8:105.
ofogy8:161-164.
McKeever PJ. 1992. Spiculosis. Jourmal of the Americam Anirmal Hos-
Roperto F, Cerundolo R, Restucci B, Vincensi MR, de Capraris D,
pital Association 28:257.
De Vico G, Maiolino P. 1995. Colour dilution alopecia (CDA) in
Ménasché G, Ho CH, Sanal O, Feldmann J, Tezcan I, Ersoy F,
10 Yorkshire terriers. Veterinary Dermatology 6:17l-178.
Houdusse A, Fischer A, de Saint Basile G. 2003. Griscelli syndrome
 Rose R, Smith JE, Leipold HW. 1983. Increased solubility of hair
restricted to hypopigmentation results from a melanophilin de-
from hypotrichotic Herefords. Zentraiblatt fir Veterinarmedizin
fect (GS3) or a MYO5A F-exon deletion (GS1). Jourmal of Clinical
A 30:363.
Investigation 112:450-456.
Sander P, Drogemiller C, Cadieu E, André C, Leeb T. 2005. Analysis
Mecklenburg L. 2006. An overview on congenital alopecia in do-
of the canine EDAR gene and exclusion as a candidate for the
mestic animals. Veterinary Dermatology 17(6):393-410.
hairless phenotype in the Chinese crested dog. Animal Genetics
Meyer VH, Drommer W. 1968. Erbliche hypotrichie beim Schwein.
36:168-171.
Deutsche Tierirztliche Wochenschrift 75:13.
Schleger AV. 1967.Histopathology of hypotrichosis in calves. Aus-
 Miller WH. 1990a. Color dilution alopecia in Doberman pinschers
tralian Journal of Biology Science 20:661.
with blue or fawn coat colours: a study on the incidence and histo-
Schmutz SM, Moker JS, Clark EG, Shewfelt R. 1998. Black hair
pathology of this disorder. Veterinary Dermatology l:l13-122.
follicular dysplasia, an autosomal recessive condition in dogs.
Miller WH. 1990b. Follicular dysplasia in adult black and red Dober-
Canadian Veterinary fourmal 39:644-646.
man pinschers. Veterimary Dermatology l:181-187.
Seeliger F, Drogemiller C, Tegtmeier P, Baumgartner W, Distl O,
Miller WH. 1991. Alopecia associated with coat color dilution in two
Leeb T. 2005. Ectodysplasin-1 deficiency in a German Holstein
Yorkshire terriers, one saluki, and one mix-breed dog. Jourmal of
bull associated with loss of respiratory mucous glands and chronic
the American Amimal Hospital Association 27:3943.
rhinotracheitis. Jourmal of Comparative Pathology 132:346-349.
Miller WH, Scott DW. 1990. Black-hair follicular dysplasia in a
Selmanowitz VJ, Kramer KM, Orentreich N. 1970b. Congenital ec-
Holstein cow. The Cormell Veterinarian 80:273-277.
todermal defect in miniature poodles. Jourmal of Heredity 61:
 Mohr OL, Wreidt C. 1928. Hairless, a new recessive lethal in cattle.
196199.
Jourmal of Genetics 19:315.
Selmanowitz VJ, Kramer KM, Orentreich N. 1972. Canine heredj-
 Moura E, Cirio SM. 2004. Clinical and genetic aspects of X-linked
tary black hair follicular dysplasia. Jourmal of Heredity 63:4344.
ectodermal dysplasia in the dog—a review including three new
Selmanowitz VJ, Markofsky J, Orentreich N. 1977a. Black-hair fol-
spontaneous cases. Veterimnary Dermatology 15:269-277.
licle dysplasia in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Muller GH, Kirk RW (eds). 1976. Small Animal Dermatology, 2nd
Association 171:1079-1081.
edn, pp. 495-496. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Selmanowitz VJ, Markofsky J, Orentreich N. 1977b. Heritability
Nagashima K, Tori S, Yi Z, Igarashi M, Okamoto K, Takeuchi T,
of an ectodermal defect—a study of affected dogs. Jourmal of
Izumi T. 2002. Melanophilin directly links Rab27a and myosin Va
Dermatologic Surgery and Oncology 3:623-626.
through its distinct coiled-coil regions. FEBS Letters 517:233-238.
Selmanowitz VJ, Kramer KM, Orentreich N, Hyman AB. 1970a.
Nel JA. 1964. Hypotrichosis congenita in Karakul sheep. South
Congenital ectodermal dysplasia in male miniature poodle sib-
African fournal of Agricuftural Science 7:875-877.
lings. Archives of Dermatology 101:613-615.
Neuber AE, Van Den Broek AH, Rhind SM, Hill PB, Thoday KL.
Silvers WK (ed.). 1979. The Coat Colors of Mice: A Model for
2006. Generalized alopecic and cystic dermatosis in a cat: a coun-
Mammalian Gene Action and Interaction, Pp. 83-90. New York:
terpart to the hairless mouse phenotype or a unique congenital
Springer.
dermatosis? Veterinary Dermatology 17(1):63-69.
Steffen DJ, Elliott GS, Leipold HW, Smith JE. 1992a. Congenital
Ojo SA. 1987. The characteristics of bovine congenital hypodontia.
dyserythropoiesis and progressive alopecia in polled Hereford
Veterinary Medicine 82:192.
calves: hematologic, biochemical, bone marrow cytologic, elec-
Philipp U, Hamann H, Mecklenburg L, Nishino S, Mignot E,
trophoretic, and flow cytometric findings. Journal of Veterinary
Ginzel-Apel AR, Schmutz SM, Leeb T. 2005. Polymorphisms
Diagnostic Imvestigation 4:31-37.
Congenital alopecia113
Steffen DJ, Leipold HW, Elliott GS, Smith JE. 1992b. Utrastruc-
Westbroek W, Lambert J, Naeyaert JM. 2001. The dilute locus and
tural findings in congenital anemia, dyskeratosis, and progressive
Griscelli syndrome: gateways towards a better understanding of
alopecia in polled Hereford calves. Veterinary Pathology 29:203-
melanosome transport. Pigment Cefl Research 14:320-327.
209.
Wijeratne WVS, O'Toole D, Wood L, Harkness IW. 1988. A genetic,
Steffen DJ, Leipold HW, Gibb J, Smith JE. 1991. Congenital anemia,
pathological and virological study of congenital hypotrichosis
dyskeratosis, and progressive alopecia in polled Hereford calves.
and incisor anodontia in cattle. Veterimary Record 122:149-152.
Veterinary Pathology 28:234-240.
Wilson SM, Yip R, Swing DA, O'Sullivan TN, Zhang Y, Novak
Steffen DJ, Leipold HW, Schalles R, Kemp K, Smith JE. 1993. Epi-
EK, Swank RT, Russell LB, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA. 2000. A
demiologic findings in congenital anemia, dyserythropoiesis, and
mutation in Rab27a causes the vesicle transport defects observed
dyskeratosis in polled Hereford calves. Jourmal of Heredity 84:
in ashen mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
263-265.
the United States of America 97:7933-7938.
Surrarrer TC. 1943. Bulldog and hairless calves. Jourmal of Heredity
 Yankell SL, Khemani L, Dolan MM. 1970a. Sunscreen recovery stud-
34:175.
jes in the Mexican hairless dog. Jourmal of Investigative Dermatof-
Thomsett LR. 196l. Congenital hypotrichia in the dog. Veterinary
ogy 55:31-33.
Record 73:915-917.
Yankell SL, Schwartzman RM, Resnick B. 1970b. Care and breeding
Valentine BA, Hedstrom OR, Miller WH Jr, Scott DW, Mathies S.
of the Mexican hairless dog. Laboratory Anirmal Care 20:940-945.
2001. Congenital hypotrichosis in a Percheron draught horse.
Young JB. 1953. A note on the occurrence of an epithelial defect in
Veterinury Dermatofogy 12:215-217.
a grade Hereford herd. Australian Veterinary fournal9:298.
Trichomalacia
Lars Mecklenburg
Trichomalacia describes a form of alopecia where hair
hair follicle matrix cells and will thus result in struc-
follicles are normal but hair shafts show subtle ab-
turally normal hair shafts of less quality and less dura-
normalities that lead to increased fragility and finally
bility. Hair fibers become brittle and break off easily.
breaking of hair fibers. The value of histopathology to
 If malnutrition is severe, it is conceivable that anagen
diagnose trichomalacia is limited, since no morpho-
hair follicles may actually cease proliferation, which
logical abnormalities in hair follicles are found. These
means that they will undergo catagen development
conditions are best diagnosed clinically and by the use
and may remain in telogen until proper nutrition is
of plucked hair shafts that are investigated under a
restored. Therefore, both effects on hair shaft synthe-
light microscope (see Section 2.1.4.2).
sis and hair folicle cycling are possible. Effects on hair
Trichomalacia can occur very early in life and there
shaft synthesis, however, will become clinically appar-
fore may be confused with congenital alopecia. In fact,
ent much earlier.
some forms of congenital alopecia may actually be re-
On the basis of the clinical phenotype of alope-
stricted to subtle hair fiber malformations, and thus a
cia, it is impossible to specifically determine the de-
clear distinction between these two conditions may not
ficient nutrient. Several nutritional deficiencies have
always be possible. Some forms of trichomalacia may
been described to cause alopecia: Copper deficiency
occur with a familial predisposition, although they are
in ruminants occurs either as a primary disease or is
 not monogenetically inherited. Most trichomalacias,
secondary to molybdenosis, as molybdenum impairs
arsnoueods rnono pue painbe ai are raaamou
intestinal absorption of copper. Copper deficiency re-
in single animals of any age. Defining the underlying
sults in alopecia associated with anorexia, diarrhea,
etiology may be difficult, and often there is sponta-
osteoporosis, and heart failure (Frank 1998). Non-
neous remission without further treatment.
alopecic areas often show a decrease in pigmenta-
tion of hair, due to a depression of tyrosinase activ.
3.2.1 Trichomalacia due to nutritional
ity (Whitelaw et al. 1979). Trichomalacia is known
deficiencies
in humans with hereditary copper deficiency (due to
 defects in a copper transport protein), where the dis-
Trichomalacia is rare in domestic animal species. It
ease is called “kinky hair syndrome” or “Menkes syn-
can be associated with nutritional deficiencies, partic-
drome. Zinc deficiency in ruminants results in alopecia
ularly in young individuals suffering from infectious
and parakeratotic hyperkeratosis. In addition, hoofs
intestinal diseases or in old animals suffering from any
grow abnormally and most animals show anorexia.
kind of serious chronic disease. Malnutrition may be
Alopecia is due to malformed hair fibers that become
caused by insufficient dietary intake, malabsorption,
distorted within the follicular infundibulum (Nelson
poor utilization of nutrients, or increased catabolism.
et al. 1984; Masters et al. 1985). Hypovitaminosis can
Chronic indigestion can result in alopecia, and the
also be a cause of trichomalacia and alopecia. Such an
mechanism of alopecia is most likely due to the lack
example is folic acid deficiency that has been described
of minerals and vitamins (Stocker et al. 1999). Pro-
 in a 3-week-old male Charolais calf that had a history
tein/calorie deficiency will impact the growth rate of
of progressive hair loss (Bouvet et al. 1988). Folic acid
116  Non-inflammatory alopecias
is required for cellular turnover, and its lack will likely
humans, classified as monilethrix, pili torti, or tri-
impair proliferation of hair matrix cells. Daily oral ad-
chorrhexis nodosa. Most of these diseases have not
ministration of folic acid (1 mg/kg/day) resulted in
been described in domestic animals so far. Famil-
a steady regrowth of hair within 2 months. Vitarmir
ial pili torti have once been described in a cat litter.
A and biotin deficiencies are other examples of tri-
Kittens presented with generalized hair loss associ-
chomalacia and alopecia caused by hypovitaminosis
ated with periocular and pedal dermatitis. Hair fibers
(Colomb et al. 1970; Rubisz-Brzezinska 1974; Nyhan
showed flattening and rotation. Only a subset of hairs
1987; Mock 1991; Fujimoto et al. 2005).
(i.e., secondary hairs) was involved whereas others
were normal. Biopsies showed normal hair follicles,
3.2.2 Trichomalacia due to intoxications
except for some infundibular hyperkeratosis and dila-
tion (Gearyand Baker 1986). Familial trichorrhexis no-
Several toxicoses can be associated with trichomalacia
dosa has been described in Abyssinian cats ( Wilkinson
and alopecia. Selenium intoxication in ruminants re-
and Kristensen 1989). Trichorrhexis nodosa is defined
sults in alopecia and cracking and enlargement of the
as one or multiple thickenings along the hair fber
hoof. Selenium induces oxidative stress and hampers
(nodes). In affected Abyssinian cats, hair shafts exhibit
hair shaft synthesis. In addition to alopecia, there is
an onion-shaped swelling at the tip. This swelling is
often gangrene at the tip of the tail of calves (Kaur
due to a focally enlarged hair shaft medulla. The hair
et al. 2003). Hypervitaminosis A, D, and E have been
coat feels lusterless and rough. The disease is inherited
described as causes of alopecia in calves, associated
 in an autosomal recessive trait. Trichoptilosis is charac-
with cranial chondrodysplasia ( Yamamoto et al. 2003).
terized by a splitting of hair fibers at the tip (the term
Sheep experimentally intoxicated with thallium will
derives from the Greek root “tricho" meaning hair
also develop alopecia (Spikermann 1981), eventually
"sua a yo ino su, su sisod, pu
associated with hair follicle dystrophy (see Chapter
A familial form of trichoptilosis has been described in
3.4). Similarly, alopecia has been described as a con-
Golden Retrievers (Miller 2004). Familial trichomala-
sequence of chronic thallium intoxication in dogs
cia in Gerrman Shepherds has been described with mul-
(Thomas and McKeever 1993; Gassner et al. 2000).
tifocal alopecia affecting the dorsolateral trunk (Fig.
3.2.1a). Affected dogs are otherwise healthy. Micro-
3.2.3 Familial feline and canine
scopic examination of hair shafts revealed focal areas
trichomalacias
of medullary swelling, followed by longitudinal split-
ting and breakage of the hair shaft (Fig. 3.2.1b). The
Familial trichomalacias with increased hair shaft
disease recovers spontaneously but relapses may occur
fragility are rare but well-characterized diseases in
(Tieghi et al. 2003).
(b)
Fig. 3.2.1 Medullary trichomalacia in German Shepherd. (a) Broken hair shafts on the dorsum; (b) trichogram showing split hair
shafts.
Trichomalacia  117
3.2.4 Trichomalacia caused by external
toxicosis on lipid peroxidation, glutathione redoc cycle and an-
damage to the hair fiber
tioxidant enzymes in calves. Veterinary and Human Toxicology
45:190-192.
Masters DG, Chapman RE, Vaughan JD. 1985. Effects of zinc-
Hair shaft abnormalities morphologically similar to
defciency on the wool growth, skin and wool follicles of pre-
those described above can occur spontaneously as a
ruminant lambs. Austrafian fournal of Biological Sciences 38:355-
sequela of solar, chemical, or physical trauma to the
364.
Miller WH. 2004. Structural follicular dysplasia. Proceedings of 29th
hair shaff. Most cases will present with trichoptilosis,
Worild Congress of the Worild Small Animal Veterinary Association.
that is, splitting of the tip of hair fibers. Spontaneous
Available at www.vin.com\proceedings.
trichorrhexis nodosa has been described in a cat (Al-
Mock DM. 1991. Skin manifestations of biotin defciency. Seminars
haidari et al. 1996) and in dogs (Scott et al. 2001).
in Dermatology 10:296-302.
Nelson DR, Wolff WA, Blodgett DJ, Luecke B, Ely RW, Zachary JF.
 Small regularlyspaced nodular swellings occur along
1984. Zinc defciency in sheep and goats: three feld cases. fournal
the hair shaft that are associated with cuticular defects.
of the American Veterinary Medicai Association 184:1480-1485.
Nyhan WL. 1987. Inborn errors of biotin metabolism. Archives of
Dermatology 123:1696.
References
 Rubisz-Brzezinska J. 1974. Effect of vitamin A deficiency on hair
growth in rats. Przegiad Dermatoflogiczny 6l:19.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE (eds). 2001. Small Animal Der-
Alhaidari Z, Olivry T, Ortonne JP. 1996. Acquired feline hair shaft
matology, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
 abnormality resembling trichorrhexis nodosa in humans. Veteri-
Spikermann AR. 1981. Loss of wool in sheep following experimental
nary Dermatology 7:235-238.
thallium poisoning. Deutsche Terarztliche Wochenschrift 88:252-
Bouvet A, Baired JD, Basrur PK. 1988. Folic acid therapy for alopecia
253.
 in a Charolais calf. Veterinary Record 123:533-536.
Stocker H, Lutz H, Ruesch P. 1999. Clinical, hematological and
Colomb D, Cretin J, Vibert J, Steiner HG. 1970. Trichorrhexis nodosa
biochemical fndings in milk-fed calves with chronic indigestion.
in a hypothrepsic child with hypovitaminosis A. Lyon Medical
Veterinary Record 145:307-311.
223:337.
Thomas ML, McKeever PJ. 1993. Chronic thallium toxicosis in a
Frank A. 1998. Mysterious moose disease in Sweden. Similarities to
dog. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 29:211.
copper deficiency and/or molybdenosis in cattle and sheep. Bio-
Tieghi C, Miller WH, Scott DW, Pasquinelli G. 2003. Medullary
chemical background of clinical signs and organ lesions. Science
a u s ayays ua gu ee
of the Total Environment 208:17-26.
Jourma 44:132136.
Fujimoto W, Inaoki M, Fukui T, Inoue Y, Kuhara T. 2005. Biotin.
Whitelaw A, Armstrong RH, Evans CC, Fawcett AR. 1979. A study
deficiency in an infant fed with amino acid formula. Journal of
of the effects of copper deficiency in Scottish blackface lambs on
Dermatology 32:256.
improved hill pasture. Veterinary Record 104:455-460.
Gassner G, Tholen V, Ternes W. 2000. Chronic thallium intoxication
Wilkinson GT, Kristensen TS. 1989. A hair abnormality in
in five German pointers of one litter. Berliner und Munchener
Abyssinian cats. Journal of Small Anirmal Practice 30:27.
Tierarztliche Wochenschrift 113:295-298.
 Yamamoto K, Sasahito K, Yoshikawa M, Nobuyuki O, Mikami O,
Geary MR, Baker KP. 1986. The occurrence of pili torti in a litter of 
 Yamada M, Nakamura K, Yasuyuki N. 2003. Hyena disease (pre-
kittens in England. Journal of Small Animal Practice 27:85.
mature physeal closure) in calves due to overdose of vitamins A,
Kaur R, Sharma S, Rampal S. 2003. Effect of sub-chronic selenium
D3, E. Veterinary and Human Toxicology 45:85-87.
3.3
Disorders of hair follicle cyo
3.3.1 Hypothyroidism
T4 (fT4) can enter cells in the periphery. In the cell,
80% of fT4 is then deiodinated to free T3 (fT3), which
Monika Linek
then mediates its biological activity. During phases of
fasting or nonthyroidal diseases, fT4 can also be deio-
dinated to reverse T3 (rT3), a metabolically inactive
The thyroid gland lies on the lateral aspect of the
form (Mason and Wilkinson 1973; Kallfelz 1977; Feld-
 trachea, and physiologically it is often not palpable
man and Nelson 2004).
(Rijnberk 1996). The functional units of the gland
 The thyroid function is mainly regulated by thy-
are follicles composed of a single-layered epithelium
rotropin (also named thyroid-stimulating hormone,
surrounding a central lumen filled with colloid. The
TSH), a glycoprotein that is secreted by the anterior
colloid consists of thyroglobulin (Tg), a large glyco-
lobe of the pituitary. TSH secretion from the pitu-
 protein that binds to and stores the actual thyroid hor-
 itary is inhibited by fT3 (within the pituitary produced
mones. Thyroid hormone biosynthesis includes the
from fT4). A second modulation derives from the hy-
active transport of iodide (the main element of thy-
pothalamus that secretes both thyreotropin-releasing
roid hormones) from the blood into the thyroid ep-
hormone (TRH, stimulating TSH secretion from the
ithelial cel, oxidation of iodine by the enzyme thyroid
 peroxydase, and transfer to tyrosine residues of the Tg
tides that inhibit TSH release. A third autoregulatory
molecule. These iodotyrosines can then combine with
system enables the thyroid to adapt to insufficient or
monoiodotyrosine (MIT) or diiodotyrosine (DIT),
excessive concentrations of iodine. Iodine deficiency
and thus can form the thyroid hormones thyroxin
will cause increased thyroid function and goiter devel-
(T4, composed of two DIT) or triodothyronine (T3,
opment, whereas long-term excessive iodine uptake
composed of one MIT and one DIT). For secretion of
-a pe ai ixd yo uor un ns 
thyroid hormones into the circulatory system, Tg with
pothyroidism (Feldman and Nelson 2004).
its bound thyroid hormones reenters into the follicle
As mentioned above, only free thyroid hormones
epithelial cell where Tg is hydrolyzed in phagolyso-
(fT3/fT4) will diffuse across cell membranes and pro-
somes and thyroid hormones secreted (Feldman and
 duce biological effects. fT3 enters cells more rapidly,
Nelson 2004).
 has a more rapid onset of action, and is three to five
Although most of the metabolic activity of thyroid
times more potent than fT4. Both thyroid hormones
hormones can be ascribed to T3, T4 secretion from
bind to intranuclear receptors and activate the tran-
the thyroid gland is four times higher than that of T3.
scription of a variety of regulatory enzymes, resulting
 In the blood, thyroid hormones are primarily bound
in increased oxygen consumption and an increased
to proteins (thyroid binding globulin and some low-
 metabolic rate of mitochondria. Thyroid hormones
affinity albumins like the thyroxin-binding prealbu-
are essential for skeletal and neurological develop-
min transthyretin). Less than 0.05% of T4 and less
ment. They have a positive inotropic and chronotropic
than 0.5% of T3 are not protein bound (Larsen and
 effect on the heart, increase the number and affinity of
Berry 1995). Protein binding acts as a reservoir and
 beta-adrenergic receptors, and enhance the response
maintains a steady thyroid hormone concentration,
to catecholamines. They elicit catabolic effects on adi-
regulated by a feedback mechanism. The free form of
pose tissue and muscle. Due to this wide variety of
120 Non-inflammatory alopecias
physiological effects, a deficiency in thyroid hormones
clinical signs such as goiter, growth retardation, or
will produce variable and profound clinical changes
other signs of pituitary dysfunction are present.
(Greenspan 2001).
With regard to hair follicles, thyroid hormones in-
3.3.1.1.1.1 Primary hypothyroidism
fluence cell cycle kinetics of hair bulbs. Dissected
Adult onset primary hypothyroidism is the most com-
human scalp hair follicle bulbs from hypothyroid pa-
mon dysfunction of the thyroid gland in the dog. In
tients show a significant decrease in proliferative ac-
95% of cases, hypothyroidism in the dog is caused by a
tivity compared to normal controls. In hyperthyroid
successive irreversible destruction of the thyroid gland.
patients a significant increase was found (Schell et al.
This destruction can be histologically divided into
1991; Kiesewetter and Schell 1994). In hypothyroid
two main pathologic categories. First, an autoaggres-
dogs, hair regrows slower after clipping (Credille et al.
2001). Furthermore, there are more telogen hair fol-
 phocytic thyroiditis or, second, an idiopathic thyroid
licles in hypothyroid dogs than in euthyroid controls.
degeneration without an inflammatory infiltrate but
This suggests that both a slower elongation of hair
with replacement of the thyroid parenchyma by adi-
shafts and a hair cycle arrest contribute to the devel-
pose or fibrous tissue (Benjamin et al. 1996; Graham
opment of alopecia in hypothyroid dogs.
et al. 2001b). Distinction between these two pro-
cesses, however, may be artificial, as some of the non-
inflammatory cases are considered as an end stage
3.3.1.1 Canine hypothyroidism
of the autoaggressive damage. Autoimmune thyroidi-
tis is usually associated with the occurrence of aul-
3.3.1.1.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
toantibodies against the Tg protein (TgAA). A large
Hypothyroidism may result from a dysfunction of
research database at the Michigan State University
any part of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis
found an overall average of 50% TgAA-positive (sug-
and may be acquired or congenital. In general, three 
 gestive of autoimmune thyroiditis) and 50% TgAA-
pathogenetic groups can be differentiated: Primary
negative (suggestive of noninflammatory thyroid at-
hypothyroidism is defined as the absence or loss of
rophy) cases of hypothyroidism (Graham et al. 2007).
thyroid function and is the most common cause of hy-
However, the distribution of the two types differed be-
pothyroidism in the dog. Secondary hypothyroidism
tween breeds. Whereas, for example, 80% of hypothy-
or central hypothyroidism is the deprivation of stim-
roid cases in the English Setter were TgAA positive,
ulation by TSH followed by inactivity of the thyroid
less than 30% of Doberman Pinschers showed TgAA
glands. Tertiary hypothyroidism is caused by a con-
(Nachreiner et al. 1998; Graham et al. 2007).
genital malformation or acquired destruction of the
TgAA and less often other thyroid colloidal and
hypothalamus, which so far has not been recognized
microsomal antigens have been identified in dogs
in animals.
with lymphocytic thyroiditis with and without man-
Canine hypothyroidism in most cases is acquired.
ifest hypothyroidism and irrespectively of the thy-
Congenital hypothyroidism can occur in almost any
roid hormone status (Table 3.3.1). It is believed that
mammalian species. Congenital primary hypothy-
these autoantibodies initiate an antibody-dependent,
roidism results from dysgenesis of the thyroid gland or
complement-mediated lymphocytic infiltration and
from cellular defects in iodine uptake. Congenital sec-
may eventually destroy the thyroid gland. However,
ondary hypothyroidism has been described in the gi-
the mechanisms that lead to the formation of au-
ant schnauzer, the Scottish Deerhound, and boxer with
toantibodies have not yet been characterized. The
a TSH production defect and in German Shepherds as-
high prevalence of TgAA among certain breeds sug-
sociated with cyst formation and pituitary hypoplasia
 gests some heritability. Several heritability studies in
leading to proportional dwarfism (Kooistra et al. 2000;
Beagles, Doberman Pinschers, English Setters, and
Graham et al. 2007). Independently of the underlying
Rhodesian Ridgebacks confirm an association with
 pathogenesis the clinical consequences are a sequela
of the decreased production of thyroid hormones and
type (Kennedy et al. 2006, 2007). The causes for au-
therefore similar. In some forms, however, additional
toimmunity are most likely multifactorial. Antigenic
Hypothyroidism   121
Stage of thyroiditis
 Clinical signs
tT4, fT4
TSH
TgAA
Subclinical thyroiditis
Negative
Normal
Normal
Positive
Subclinical hypothyroidism
Negative
Normal
Increased
Positive
Overt hypothyroidism
Present 
Decreased
Increased
 Positive or negative
 Atrophic hypothyroidism
Present
Decreased
Increased
Negative
tT4, total thyroxine; fT4, free thyroxine; TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone; TgAA, thyroglobuline autoantibodies. Adapted from
Graham et al. (2001b).
mimicry of thyroid antigens by viral or bacterial anti-
it can significantly impair iodine uptake and thyroid
gens has been suggested in human thyroiditis (Tomer
hormone production with a subsequent increase in
and Davies 1993). An association between routine vac-
TSH secretion (Castillo et al. 2001).
cinations and canine thyroiditis, however, has not been
confirmed (Scott-Moncrieff et al. 2006). Some veteri-
3.3.1.1.1.2 Secondary hypothyroidism
narians report a geographical difference in the preva-
lence of thyroiditis; others report a seasonal influence
a congenital pituitary hypoplasia (see below). In the
(Graham et al. 2007).
 adult dog, acquired defects in the pituitary thyrotropic
The mere presence of TgAA antibodies is not predic-
 cells are very rare, and destruction by a pituitary neo-
tive for thyroid dysfunction. In a 12-month prospec-
plasm is uncommon. Most pituitary neoplasms are
tive study in 234 TgAA-positive dogs, 1 out of 5 had
accompanied by additional endocrinopathies such as
 progressive dysfunction within 1 year and only 1 out
Addison's disease, diabetes insipidus, and reproduc-
of 20 became hypothyroid (Graham et al. 200la). The
tive dysfunctions. The most common pituitary tumor
detection of TgAA is, therefore, not an appropriate
in the dog is an ACTH-producing adenoma of the
tool to diagnose hypothyroidism. However, TgAA can
 pars distalis, resulting in hyperadrenocorticism. This
interfere with the T3/T4 measurements (see Section
tumor rarely destroys the thyrotropic cells, but rather
3.3.1.1.2.3).
suppresses TSH production by the excessive activity
Autoantibodies to T3 (T3AA) are recognized in less
 of glucocorticoids. Secondary hypothyroidism due to
than 1% of all laboratory samples and even rarer are
the suppression of pituitary thyrotrophic cells is most
T4 autoantibodies (T4AA). The relative absence of
commonly caused by concurrent illness (i.e., euthy-
T3AA/T4AA can be explained by the small molecu-
roid sick syndrome), drugs, or hormones (steroids).
lar size of T3 and T4. Only when attached to Tg do
In secondary forms of hypothyroidism, TSH levels are
they provide an antigenic stimulus (Nachreiner et al.
low or even undetectable.
2002). If present, T3AA and T4AA can interfere with
T3/T4 measurements in serum, falsely increasing or
3.3.1.1.1.3 Congenital hypothyroidism
decreasing their levels.
 Congenital hypothyroidism due to agenesis of the
Iodine deficiency as a cause of primary hypothy-
thyroid gland is rare and most often results in early
n  q sho  a aa si 
 postnatal death. If affected animals survive, they will 
ments are low in this species. Even when dietary iodine
show mental retardation, hypoactivity, impaired skele.
is restricted, fT4 concentrations remain in the normal
tal maturation, and retarded growth. Congenital hy-
range (Feldman and Nelson 2004).
pothyroidism due to pituitary malformations has been
There are rare cases of hypothyroidism in the dog
recognized in many dog breeds and has been stud-
where follicular hyperplasia develops without iodine
ied most thoroughly in the German Shepherd Dog.
deficiency and without the presence of circulating au-
Hypoplasia of the anterior pituitary in these dogs re-
toantibodies. The etiology of the hypothyroidism in
sults in impaired TSH, growth hormone, follicle stim-
these cases could not be determined. Excessive dietary
ulating hormone, luteotropic hormone, and prolactin
iodine uptake has been suggested in some cases, since
production. This leads to proportionate dwarfism,
122  Non-inflammatory alopecias
opposed to disproportionate dwarfism that is caused
of general medical diagnostic tests. The clinical pic-
by a selective deficiency of growth hormone ( Kooistra
ture reflects the multisystemic character of the dis-
et al. 2000).
ease, is unspecific, and can vary from mild to severe.
Inherited defects in thyroid hormone synthesis as
Although, in general, hypothyroidism is more com-
known in the sheep, cattle, and goat (congenital dys-
 mon in large breeds than in small breeds, reports of
hormonogenetic goiter) are very rare in dogs (Wilson
breed incidence must be interpreted with great cau-
1975; Dolling and Good 1976). In most of theses cases
tion because they can be biased by the tests that were
hypothyroidism is associated with high TSH levels and
used to confirm the diagnosis and by breed popular-
 goiter formation.
ity. Age of onset is usually between 4 and 6 years of
vary between 2 and 9 years. There is
 no apparent gender predisposition. As thyroid hor-
3.3.1.1.2 Diagnosis
required to maintain cellular metabolism,
mones are
Correctly diagnosing hypothyroidism is a very diffi-
a deficiency
 affects many organs. Clinical signs may
cult task for the clinical veterinarian. Several assays
vary depending on age at onset, stage of disease, and
exist that are more or less appropriate to assist in
breed (Panciera 200l; Scott-Moncrieff 2007) (Table
diagnosis, but regardless of the chosen combination
3.3.3). The most common, although very unspecific,
of assays, all results have to be interpreted in con-
clinical observations in the dog are reduced activity,
text with the clinical presentation and general clinical
lethargy, mental dullness, and weight gain. Dermato-
findings. Best screening tests for hypothyroidism are
logical changes are reported in 60-80% of hypothyroid
assays with a high sensitivity. They allow exclusion of
dogs (Panciera 1994b; Dixon et al. 1999). The initial
hypothyroidism, if the measured hormone is within
abnormality is a dull, dry, and brittle hair coat with
the normal range (Table 3.3.2).
some degree of nonpruritic, noninflammatory, and
symmetrical truncal alopecia (Fig. 3.3.1). Clipped hair
3.3.1.1.2.1 Clinical presentation
fails to regrow properly, and telogen hairs are lost at
Clinical features of canine hypothyroidism are very
friction areas where they are not replaced (Credille
important for the diagnosis, since no single endocrine
et al.2
2001). Some dogs may show alopecia at the
assay can confirm the diagnosis on its own. The pre-
bridge of the nose. In some breeds such as the Irish set-
dictive values of thyroid function tests are greatly en-
ter, hair fails to shed normally, leading to temporary
hanced when combined with clinical signs and results
hypertrichosis. In boxers and Doberman Pinschers,
Table 3.3.2 Diagnostic value of screening tests for canine hypothyroidism
Test
Abnormality
Sensitivity
Specificity
Remarks
tT4
Decreased
89-100% (normal
75-82% (influenced
Inexpensive
values exclude
by euthyroid sick
hypothyroidism)
 syndrome and by
many drugs)
fT4*
Decreased
80-90%
~93%(more
Not readily available in
reliable than tT4)
all countries
TSH
Increased
63-87% (1/4 of all
82-100%
Inexpensive; can be
hypothyroid dogs
used in combination
have normal values)
with tT4 or fT4*
Combination of
tT4 decreased,
63-91% (inconclusive
92-100%
Inexpensive
tT4 and TSH
TSH increased
results are possible)
Combination of
fT4* decreased,
74-80% (inconclusive
97-98 %
fT4* and TSH
TSH increased
results are possible)
rhTSH-stimulation
Insufficient
High
High
Expensive; needs
test
stimulation
4-6 h
Ferguson (2005) and Daminet (2005).)
Hypothyroidism 123
Table 3.3.3 Clinical signs of hypothyroidism in the adult dog
chemical screen, and urinalysis. Most consistent find-
ings with hypothyroidism are mild nonregenerative
Affected organ systerm
 Clinical sign
anemia and elevated cholesterol levels. Fructosamine
General condition
Lethargy*
levels have been reported to be increased ( Reusch et al.
Weight gain*
2002).
Mental dullness*
Cardiovascular
Bradycardia
3.3.1.1.2.2 Histopathology
Arrhythmia
Anemia (normochromic,
Skin biopsies are often performed in animals with hair
Hematology
normocytic)*
coat changes or with suspected endocrine alopecias.
Skin
Alopecia, symmetric*
However, histopathological findings in skin biopsies
Loss of hair regrowth after
from hypothyroid dogs reveal nondiagnostic unspe-
dipping*
cifc changes such as orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis,
"Rat" tail (alopecia of the tail)*
follicular inactivity, and telogenization. Dermal mu-
Thin, dry, brittle hair coat*
Hyperpigmentation
cinosis or hypertrophic and vacuolated arrector pili
Pyoderma*
muscles, if present, may support the diagnosis of hy-
Otitis externa
pothyroidism, but again are not conclusive to allow
Seborrhea
a final diagnosis to be made. Many biopsy specimens
Facial myxedema
from hypothyroid dogs will show some degree of py-
Clinical chemistry
Hyperlipidemia
 Slightly elevated liver enzymes
oderma.
(ALT, ALP)
Coagulopathy
3.3.1.1.2.3 Laboratory tests
Eye
Corneal lipidosis
Endocrine laboratory tests are indispensable to diag-
Uveitis
nose hypothyroidism, but need to be interpreted with
Reproductive system
 Persistent anestrus
Prolonged estrus
 great caution. Thyroid hormone levels are not only de-
Gynecomastia
creased in hypothyroidism but also in numerous other
Behavior
Aggressiveness
diseases and with several drugs. In addition, measure-
Neuromuscular system
Exercise intolerance*
ments ofthyroid hormone levels and ofTSH need to be
performed with sufficient skills, since assays that were
 Peripheral and central vestibular
dysfunctiont
 developed for humans cannot be used in veterinary
 Facial nerve paralysis (N. facialis,
medicine without proper adaptations.
N. trigeminus)
Hypothyroidism should be associated with low lev-
Seizures
els of circulating thyroid hormone and high levels
 of TSH. In humans, the diagnostic accuracy of con-
*Common.
+Peripheral vestibular dysfunction—ataxia, loss of balance, nys-
current measurements of fT4 and endogenous TSH
tagmus; central vestibular dysfunction—ataxia, loss of balance,
is almost 100% (Wiesli and Schmid 2001). In dogs,
nystagmus, and loss of proprioception
however, only about 50% of hypothyroid dogs will
show a classical test result that will allow a straight-
focal hair retention rather than hair loss may pre-
forward diagnosis of hypothyroidism. Unfortunately,
 dominate (Feldman and Nelson 2004), giving the coat
the diagnostic accuracy of thyroid hormone measure-
a very dense, brush-like appearance with different
 ments in dogs, particularly that for fT4 levels, is not
color shades (Fig. 3.3.2). In addition to alopecia (or hy-
comparable to that in humans. This is mostly due to
 pertrichosis), the skin may show seborrhea and hyper-
differences in the protein-binding capacity between
pigmentation. Many dogs with hypothyroidism have
canine and human thyroid hormone. Dogs have less
 an increased susceptibility to develop recurrent skin
thyroxine-binding globuline (TBG) and a lower affin-
infections (pyoderma) after a reasonable course of an-
ity of thyroid hormone to bind to TBG. This results
timicrobial therapy. Facial myxedema (i.e., cutaneous
in higher concentrations of fT4 in animals. However,
mucinosis), often referred to as the *tragic face," is rare.
most commercial radioimmunoassay (RIA) fT4 as-
Clinical workup for dogs with suspected hypothy-
 s   a   
roidism should include a complete blood count, a bio-
much depend on TBG concentrations. Therefore, they
124  Non-inflammatory alopecias
(a)
b
Hg. 3.3.1 Hypothyroidism in a golden retriever. (a) "Tragic" face and the dull appearance of the hair coat; (b) closer inspection of
the hair coat reveals extensive scaling.
frequently produce inappropriately low fT4 results in
is reported to be less sensitive to TgAA interference.
animals, and are less useful for assisting in the diag-
Snap T4 test kits are available but their accuracy and
nosis of canine hypothyroidism (Witherspoon et al.
usefulness in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism has not
1988; Ferguson 1995; Nelson et al. 2004).
been elucidated sufficiently yet (Lurye et al. 2002; Pe-
terson et al. 2003).
The main diagnostic value of measuring fT4 is the
Total T4
Most veterinary laboratories measure total T4 (fT4),
fact that hypothyroidism can be ruled out, if tT4 val-
ues are within the normal limits. Less than 10% of
the sum of protein-bound and free T4. Either a RIA or 
hypothyroid dogs may show normal tT4 levels due
an enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) can be used.
Although the RIA is considered the gold standard, its
to the interference with TgAA (Peterson et al. 1997).
sensitivity has to be evaluated by each laboratory, par-
These patients represent a particular diagnostic chal-
lenge and require further workup such as determina-
ficularly for detecting low T4 levels, and it can be in-
tion of TgAA (see below). Once again, this emphasizes
fluenced by autoantibodies to Tg (TgAA). The ELISA
the importance of clinical findings being considered
for the diagnosis of hypothyroidism. Low fT4 levels
 a e n ns  o  
pothyroidism. Although most hypothyroid dogs will
have low fT4 levels, other diseases or drug interference
can cause low fT4 levels that are not due to impaired
thyroid function.
Free T4
The measurement of free T4 would allow a more pre-
cise evaluation of the thyroid hormone fraction that is
actually available to the cells. However, as it has been
mentioned before, the commercial fT4 radioimmune-
assay is severely influenced by the TBG concentra-
tion, producing falsely low measurements and over-
 estimating hypothyroidism. Therefore, there is no
Fig. 3.3.2 Boxer with hypothyroidism and extensive patchy hy-
advantage to measuring free T4 in lieu of total T4. A
pertrichosis. Note variety in hair length and color.
new assay technique, that is, equilibrium dialysis, uses
Hypothyroidism 125
a dialysis step to separate free T4 from protein-bound
tion with decreased tT4 and fT4 levels. Additionally,
T4. This measurement is not affected by circulating
TSH- and TRH-stimulation tests will be influenced by
autoantibodies and seems to be less influenced by non-
the euthyroid sick syndrome, further complicating the
thyroidal illnes than fT4. Some studies found a high
accurate diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
specificity (93%), high sensitivity (98%), and a high
In dogs with endocrine alopecia, a diagnostic
diagnostic accuracy (90%) (Peterson et al. 1997; Dixon
dilemma may exist in the differentiation of hyper
and Mooney 1999; Ferguson 2007). Others, however,
adrenocorticism and hypothyroidism, particularly if
conclude that fT4 (measured by equilibrium dialysis)
clinical signs and results of routine blood and urine
adds only minimal supplementary information com-
tests are not diagnostic for the one or the other dis-
pared to total T4 determination(Schachter etal. 2004).
ease. Glucocorticoids reduce baseline serum fT4 and
The equilibrium dialysis assay is far more laborious
fT4 concentrations in 60% of cases (Peterson et al.
and expensive than the conventional RIA. Whereas
1984; Ferguson and Peterson 1992). This is most likely
many U.S. laboratories perform fT4 measurements
mediated by suppression of TSH secretion, since 75%
with equilibrium dialysis, this technique is only offered
of hypercortisolemic dogs have low TSH levels. There-
by a few European veterinary diagnostic laboratories.
fore, dogs with naturally acquired hyperadrenocorti
cism can develop secondary hypothyroidism due to
Effects of nonthyroida! illness or drugs on T4
TSH deficiency. On the other hand, about 25% of
A low fT4 (or a low fT4 measured by equilibrium
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have low fT4 lev-
dialysis) is not diagnostic for hypothyroidism. Many
els and high TSH levels over 0.6 ng/mL. Although
other causes may provoke low fT4 and fT4 levels. First
these dogs mimic primary hypothyroidism, they ac-
of all, there are normal random fluctuations as T4
tually do not need any therapy. To accurately di-
is secreted pulsatile and not constantly. Nelson et al.
agnose hypothyroidism, it is therefore very impor-
(1991) reported, that the range of fT4 concentration in
tant to rule out hyperadrenocorticism, firstly by a
healthy dogs is 1.0-3.3 μg/dL, overlapping with 0-1.5
thorough history and physical examination, and sec-
μg'dL in hypothyroid dogs. Breed, age, body weight,
ondly by additional tests such as ultrasound, urine
and reproductive stage of females may influence the
cortisol/creatinine ratio, low-dose dexamethasone
hormone level. Sighthounds such as Salukis, Whippet
suppression test, or ACTH stimulation test (see
and Greyhounds have lower tT4 and fT4 levels than
3.3.2.1.2). It cannot be overemphasized that high
other breeds (Hill et al. 2001; van Geffen et al. 2006).
 dosages and even short-term administration of exoge-
Therefore, breed-specific reference ranges are urgently
nous glucocorticoids have the same effect on thyroid
needed. Serum analysis of healthy sled dogs revealed
testing as spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism, result-
a significant decrease in tT4 and fT4 concentrations
ing in falsely low tT4 levels and a frequent misdiagno-
and a significant increase in TSH concentration in
sis of hypothyroidism (Daminet et al. 1999). Ideally,
dogs that were in the peak training state (Evason et al.
 glucocorticoids should be discontinued for 4-8 weeks
2004).
before thyroid hormones are measured.
 In any severe illness, the body physiologically adapts
Except for exogenous glucocorticoids, other drugs
with reduced cellular metabolism by decreasing T4
can affect serum thyroid hormone levels as well
synthesis, reducing conversion of T4 to T3, and sub-
(Daminet and Ferguson 2003). Of particular impor-
sequently decreasing T4 and T3 levels. This is referred
tance are phenobarbital and sulfonamides (Gookin
to as the “euthyroid sick syndrome” (Kantrowitz et
et al. 1999; Kantrowitz et al. 1999; Gieger et al. 2000;
al. 2001; Mooney et al. 2008). The severity of the ill-
Muller et al. 2000; Williamson et al. 2002; Frank et
 ness is reflected by the suppression of serum thyroid
al. 2005). It may take up to 8 weeks or even longer
hormones. Furthermore, nonthyroidal diseases with
after cessation of treatment, until normal thyroid hor-
hypoproteinemia, or production of hormone-binding
mone levels are reestablished. Some NSAIDs influence
inhibitors, or administration of drugs that are highly
thyroid function tests, too. For example, treatment
protein bound, may inhibit protein binding of thy.
with caprofen for 5 weeks causes a significant decrease
 roxin and thus can increase fT4. This temporary in-
in tT4 levels. The knowledge about the interferences
crease in fT4 will subsequently lead to a decreased
between drugs and thyroid hormones is still sparse
TSH secretion and reduced thyroid hormone produc-
(Table 3.3.4). Therefore, until proven otherwise, any
126 Non-inflammatory alopecias
Table 3.3.4 Drug influences on tT4, fT4, and TSH
and Behrend 2001). Most laboratories use immuno-
radiometric or chemiluminescence assays to measure
Drugs
tT4
fT4
TSH
TSH. Normal values for serum TSH concentrations
Glucocorticoids
↓/-
are up to 0.6 ng/mL. Levels below 0.03 ng/mL cannot
↑
 Sulfonamides
↑
be detected by most assays. Since abnormally low TSH
Phenobarbital
↑
↑/-
levels cannot be detected in dogs, there is no use of
 Propranolol
一
nd
一
TSH measurements for the diagnosis of secondary hy-
Potassium bromide
nd
Clomipramin
↑
↑
pothyroidism or thyrotoxicosis under levothyroxine
一
Ketoprofen
↓/-
treatment.
Carprofen
↓/-
↓/-
-/↑
concentrations should always be inter-
Etodolac
preted in cor
njunction with tT4 levels (or fT4 measured
 Furosemid
↑
nd
nd
in equilibriur
 A low tT4 level together with a
Cephalexine
lodine
↑
↑
Propythiouracil
and history
port the diagnosis of primary hypothy
个
个
Methimazol
→
roidism. Normal fT4 levels
: combined with a normal
TSH concentration rule out hypothyroidism (Scott-
↓. decreased; ↑. increased; -, no effect; nd, no data available.
Moncrieff et al. 1998; Dixon and Mooney 1999). Any
 other combination, however, is difficult to interpret
and represents a diagnostic dilemma. High TSH con-
drug should be suspected to have an influence on thy-
centrations and normal T4 levels may suggest an early
roid hormone test results.
stage of hypothyroidism, but should not be associated
with clinical signs of hypothyroidism. High TSH con-
Total T3 and free T3
centrations can also be found in dogs with euthyroid
T3 is secreted in very low amounts by the thyroid
sick syndrome (see above).
gland. Most T3 is produced within the target cells by
For differentiating between hypothyroidism and eu-
deiodination from fT4. Either fT3 or rT3 is formed.
thyroid sick syndrome and other nonthyroidal low T4
The latter is a metabolically inactive form that is
level, endocrine function tests are required.
used to counteract thyroid hormone activity in cer-
tain metabolic states such as illness or starvation. The
TRH stimulation test
accuracy of tT3 or fT3 measurements for the diagnosis
The TSH-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test
of hypothyroidism is low and thus both are generally
evaluates the responsiveness of the pituitary gland to
considered as poor screening tests for hypothyroidism
TRH and the responsiveness of the thyroid gland to
(Ferguson 2007).
TSH. Different protocols have been described (Scott-
Moncrieff and Nelson 1998; Feldman and Nelson
TSH
2004). After blood is obtained for baseline fT4 and
In humans, serum TSH levels have a high sensitiv-
TSH levels, TRH is administered intravenously. Blood
ity for hypothyroidism, correlate well with the disease
samples for measuring TSH are taken after 20 min
status, and can be used as a screening test. In the dog,
 and those for measuring T4 are taken after 2 and/or
serum TSH levels also have a high specificity, but their
3 h. The TSH and T4 increase is often low, and the
sensitivity is only 63-82%. One-fourth of all hypothy-
interpretation of the results can be difficult. In an eu-
roid dogs have normal TSH levels (Boretti and Reusch
thyroid dog, the post-TRH serum fT4 levels should
2004). Possible reasons for this may be a pulsatile re-
be greater than 2.0 ng/mL and should increase at least
lease of TSH, a concurrent drug administration that
 0.5 ng/mL over the baseline level. Levels between 1.0
interferes with thyroid hormone metabolism, a con-
and 2.0 ng/mL are not diagnostic for hypothyroidism
current illness that suppresses pituitary TSH release,
(Frank 1996). Serum TSH levels should increase by
an exhaustion of pituitary TSH release, or inability
 100%. But even then, the diagnostic accuracy to diag-
of the assays to detect all isoforms of circulating TSH
nose euthyroidism is only about 90%. Furthermore,
(Peterson et al. 1997; Ramsey et al. 1997; Kemppainen
the plasma TSH concentration at 30 min after TRH
Hypothyroidism   127
administration does not differ significantly between
indicating autoimmune thyroiditis (Ferguson 2007).
primary hypothyroidism and nonthyroidal illness
Some breeds show a higher prevalence of thyroid hor-
(Diaz Espineira et al. 2007). Thus, the TRH stimu-
mone autoantibodies, such as Pointer, English Set-
lation test does not offer any additional diagnostic
ter, English Pointer, Skye Terrier, German Wirehaired
benefit over the TSH stimulation test.
Pointer, Old English Sheepdog, Boxer, Maltese, Ku-
vasz, and Petit Basset Griffon Vendeen. Measuring
TSH stimulation test
T4AA or T3AA does not add information on the
The TSH stimulation test evaluates the responsiveness 
severity or the progression of thyroiditis, nor is it an
of the thyroid gland to exogenous TSH administra-
indicator of thyroid gland function. Measurement of
fion, and is regarded as the gold standard for differen- T3AA and T4AA is therefore only indicated, if un-
tiating hypothyroidism from euthyroid sick syndrome
 expectedly high or low serum T4 levels have to be
or nonthyroidal illness. Bovine TSH, which has been
explained.
used for decades, has been removed from the market.
Therefore, recombinant human TSH (rhTSH) has to
Thyroid ultrasonography
be used (Sauve and Paradis 2000; Boretti et al. 2006a).
The recommended dose of rhTSH for testing is 50-75
Ultrasonography with high resolution can effectively
evaluate the size, shape, capsule delineation, volume,
ug/dog administered intravenously. A peak increase
echogenicity, and homogenicity of the thyroid gland.
in T4 levels is expected at 6 h after TSH administra-
Recent studies have shown that determination of thy-
tion. rhTSH is quite expensive and one vial contains
roid volume and mean cross-sectional surface area
1.1 mg of lyophilized rhTSH that can be used for 12
by ultrasonography can accurately differentiate be-
tests. To lower costs, aliquots can be frozen at 20°C
tween euthyroid and hypothyroid dogs (Reese et al.
for 8 weeks without loosing its biological activity (De
 2005; Bromel et al. 2006). When all five parameters
 Roover et al. 2006). Interpretation of the test needs to
(size, shape, volume, echogenicity, and homogenic-
be based on a comparison of T4 levels before and after
ity) are combined, ultrasonography has an overall
TSH stimulation. In general, any increase larger than
diagnostic sensitivity of 94.1% (Taeymans et al. 2007).
1.5 times is considered euthyroid and excludes hy-
pothyroidism. Two recent studies, however, revealed
substantial overlap in hypothyroid and nonhypothy-
pothyroidism from euthyroid sick syndrome. How-
roid dogs (Boretti et al. 2006b; Diaz-Espineira et al.
ever, breed-specific reference ranges for thyroid size
and volume have not been elaborated yet.
2007).
Autoantibodies
3.3.1.1.3 Therapy and monitoring
As discussed before, detection of TgAA supports a
diagnosis of lymphocytic thyroiditis, but it is by no
The initial treatment of choice is synthetic levothy-
 means a diagnostic criterion for hypothyroidism. Dogs
roxine at a dosage of 0.02 mg/kg body weight every
with hypothyroidism can be TgAA negative and eu-
12 h. The twice-daily dosage leads to a more constant
thyroid dogs can be TgAA positive. One study in 234
 level of thyroxin concentration closer to the physio-
dogs confirmed that only 20% of TgAA-positive dogs
logical range. As intestinal absorption is influenced by
develop hypothyroidism (Graham et al. 2001a).
dietary factors and proteins that bind levothyroxine,
Recently, autoantibodies against thyroid peroxidase
 it is best administered without food. The high dosage
have been identified in hypothyroid dogs with TgAA,
 in dogs compared with humans can be explained by
but the value of antithyroid peroxidase autoantibodies
the overall low absorption. Some authors recommend
as a diagnostic tool for hypothyroidism has yet to be
the dosing of levothyroxine be based on body surface
evaluated in further studies (Skopek et al. 2006).
area (0.5 mg/m²), as the body surface area is more
Autoantibodies to T3 (T3AA) and T4 (T4AA) are
closely related to the metabolic rate than the body
very rare. In a large survey, autoantibodies against T4
weight (Feldman and Nelson 2004). Lowering the ini-
or T3 were only found in 6.3% (Nachreiner etal. 2002).
tial dose of levothyroxine is indicated in dogs with
T4AA and T3AA are always associated with TgAA, thus
concurrent cardiomyopathy, since a sudden increase
128 Non-inflammatory alopecias
of metabolism and oxygen demand may result in heart
cases, treatment with liothyronine sodium (T3) is
failure (Panciera 1994a).
indicated.
An increase in mental alertness and activity usu-
ally occurs within the first weeks after levothyroxine
3.3.1.2 Feline hypothyroidism
supplementation, whereas complete resolution of der-
matological and neurological changes may take sev.
 In the cat, spontaneous hypothyroidism is very rare,
eral months (Dixon et al. 2002; Feldman and Nelson
whereas the iatrogenic form occurring due to radioio-
2004).
dine therapy of hyperthyroidism, thyroidectomy, or
Response to treatment should be evaluated 6-8
overdosing of antithyroid drugs is seen frequently in
weeks after initiating therapy. Total T4 and TSH are
this species. The risk to develop hypothyroidism after
measured 4-6 h after administration of levothyrox-
treatment with iodine 131 is about 30.3% and is twice
ine. Serum T4 levels should be in the high normal
as likely with a bilateral scintigraphic pattern than
range or above the reference range, and TSH levels
a unilateral scintigraphic pattern (Meric and Rubin
should have returned to the normal range. In prin-
1990; Nykamp et al. 2005).
ciple, tT4 levels should be higher than 1.5 ng/mL at
Causes of spontaneous feline hypothyroidism in-
any time point after levothyroxine administration. A
clude congenital hypothyroidism that has been rec-
6-h postpill level above the reference range does not
 ognized in domestic shorthair cats and in Abyssinian
require a dose reduction as long as there are no signs of
cats (Arnold et al. 1984; Sjollema et al. 1991; Jones
thyrotoxicosis, such as panting, nervousness, polypha-
et al. 1992). In the latter, it is autosomal recessive.
gia, weight loss, and diarrhea. Thyrotoxicosis is rare
Long-term prognosis for cats with congenital hy-
in the dog and most commonly occurs in euthyroid
pothyroidism is poorly documented. Clinical signs
patients that have been misdiagnosed as being hy-
may resolve without treatment, but frequently pa-
 pothyroid due to nonthyroidal illness. Discontinua-
tients show continued musculoskeletal abnormalities,
tion for a few days should resolve the clinical signs of
 mental dullness, and gastrointestinal motility prob-
thyrotoxicosis
lems (Tobias and Lobato 2001).
A response to levothyroxine administration is by no
Spontaneous lymphocytic thyroiditis was recorded
means specific for hypothyroidism. Other conditions
in one cat only (Rand et al. 1993). Thyroid gland atro.
with poor coat quality, such as canine recurrent flank
phy, cystic follicles, amyloidosis, and goiter have been
alopecia may appear to be levothyroxine responsive,
     
even in euthyroid patients. Therefore, trial levothyrox-
son 2004).
ine therapy without confirmed diagnosis of hypothy-
The clinical signs of feline hypothyroidism are simi-
roidism should not be conducted.
lar to those reported for dogs, with lethargy and obesity
Short-term treatment of healthy dogs with levothy-
being most prominent. In contrast to dogs, cats can de-
roxine will decrease T4 and T3 responses to TSH-
velop a severe inappetence. Bradycardia and hypother-
stimulation for more than 4 weeks (Panciera et
mia can additional
occur. Hypercholesterolemia and
al. 1990). Therefore, levothyroxine should be dis-
normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia
continued for at least 6 weeks if thyroid function
have been found in iatrogenic hypothyroid cats (Scott-
is to be evaluated by TRH or TSH stimulation
Moncrieff 2007). Dermatological signs are variable
tests.
 and often represent a sequela to decreased grooming.
Failures to respond to levothyroxin therapycan have
Easily epilated hairs and poor regrowth of hair may
several possible reasons. The most common cause
be seen at pressure points and at the dorsal and lateral
is an inappropriate diagnosis of hypothyroidism, es-
tail base. An asymmetric or symmetric alopecia may
 pecially if hyperadrenocorticism has not been suffi-
involve the neck, thorax, and abdomen.
ciently ruled out. Concurrent illnesses such as al-
Initial screening tests and their limitations are sim-
lergic dermatitis or medications may interfere with
ilar to those in the dog. A low serum concentration
the efficacy of levothyroxine therapy. Insufficient
of tT4 in an adult cat is almost always caused by eu-
owner compliance and improper tablet administra-
thyroid sick syndrome (Mooney et al. 1996; Peterson
tion should also be considered. Impaired absorp-
et al. 2001). fT4 in dialysis is presumably more sen-
tion of levothyroxine is extremely rare. In confirmed
sitive and specific for assessing thyroid function, but
Hypothyroidism  129
most research is done on hyperthyroid cats. Assays for
dogs suspected of having hypothyroidism. Amerian Jfourmal of
a Aq paradey uaaq aaeu sieo u Hsi snouahopua
Veterinary Research 67(12):2012-2016.
Boretti FS, Sieber-Ruckstuhl NS, Willi B, Lutz H, Hofmann-
lack of feline-specific TSH and standards (Graham et
Lehmann R, Reusch CE. 2006b. Comparison of the biological
al. 2000). Tests for autoantibodies have not been es-
activity of recombinant human thyroid-stimulating hormone
tablished in cats.
with bovine thyroid-stimulating hormone and evaluation of
The TRH stimulation test is limited due to common
recombinant human thyroid-stimulating hormone in healthy
dogs of different breeds. American fourmal of Veterinary Research
adverse reactions to TRH administration in cats. Fur-
67(7):1169-1172.
thermore, interpretation of results is difficult ( Tomsa
Breuhaus BA. 2002. Thyroid-stimulating hormone in adult eu-
thyroid and hypothyroid horses. Journal of Veterinary Intermal
et al. 2001). Since bovine TSH is no longer available,
Medicine 16:109-115.
rhTSH must be used for stimulation tests. The TSH
Breuhaus BA, Refsal KR, Beyerlein SL. 2006. Measurement of free
stimulation test has been evaluated in euthyroid cats
thyroxine concentration in horses by equilibrium dialysis. fourmaf
of Veterinary Internal Medicine 20:371-376.
 and can be performed by intravenous administration
Bromel C, Pollard RE, Kass PH, Sami VF, Davidson AP, Nelson
of 0.025-0.2 mg of rhTSH. The serum fT4 concentra-
RW. 2006. Comparison of ultrasonographic characteristics of the
tion is measured at the time of TSH administration
thyroid gland in healthy small, medium, and large-breed dogs.
and 6 h later (Stegeman et al. 2003). However, data on
American fournal of Veterinary Research 67(1):70-77.
Castillo VA, Pisarev MA, Lalia JC, Rodriguez MS, Cabrini RL, Mar-
results of hypothyroid cats are not available at the time
quez G. 2001. Commercial diet induced hypothyroidism due to
of writing. The treatment is similar as for dogs.
high iodine. A histological and radiological analysis. Veterinary
Quarterly 23(4):218-223.
Credille KM, Slater MR, Moriello KA, Nachreiner RF, Tucker KA,
Dunstan Rw. 2001. The effects of thyroid hormones on the skin
3.3.1.3 Equine hypothyroidism
of beagle dogs. Journal of Veterinury Internal Medicine 15(6):539-
546.
Equine hypothyroidism remains a controversial en-
Daminet S. 2005. Proceedings of the ESVD Workshop on Endocrinof-
docrine disorder, because extrathyroidal factors, in-
ogy, Spa, Belgium, Pp. 2445.
Daminet S, Ferguson DC.2003. Influence of drugs on thyroid func-
cluding the administration of drugs and systemic dis-
tion in dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 17(4):463-
eases, affect serum thyroid hormone concentrations
472.
Daminet S, Paradis M, Refsal KR, Price C. 1999. Short-term
in horses (Sojka et al. 1993; Frank et al. 2002; Reed
influence of prednisone and phenobarbital on thyroid func-
et al. 2003). Major cause of hypothyroidism in the foal
tion in euthyroid dogs. Canadian Veterinary Jourmal 40(6):411-
is inadequate or excessive iodine uptake with goiter
415.
formation (Allen et al. 1996). There is only one report
De Roover K, Duchateau L, Carmichael N, van Geffen C, Daminet
S. 2006. Effect of storage of reconstituted recombinant human
 on idiopathic primary hypothyroidism and alopecia
thyroid-stimulating hormone (rhTSH) on thyroid-stimulating
in the horse (Stanley and Hillidge 1982). Diagnosis of
hormone (TSH) response testing in euthyroid dogs. Jourmal of
equine hypothyroidism is currently limited to clini-
Veterinary Internal Medicine 20(4):812-817.
Diaz Espineira MM, Mol JA, Peeters ME, Pollak YW, Iversen L,
cal signs, low thyroxine hormone levels, and the TRH
van Dijk JE, Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS. 2007. Assessment of thy-
response test (Breuhaus 2002; Breuhaus et al. 2006).
roid function in dogs with low plasma thyroxine concentration.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 21(1):25-32.
Dixon RM, Mooney CT. 1999. Evaluation of serum free thy-
roxine and thyrotropin concentrations in the diagnosis of ca-
References
nine hypothyroidism. Jourmal of Smalf Animal Practice 40(2):
72-78.
Allen AL, Townsend HG, Doige CE, Fretz PB. 1996. A case-control
Dixon RM, Reid SW, Mooney CT. 1999. Epidemiological, clini-
study of the congenital hypothyroidism and dysmaturity syn-
cal, haematological and biochemical characteristics of canine hy-
drome of foals. Canadian Veterimary Jourrmal 37:349-351.
pothyroidism.Veterinary Record 145:481-487.
Arnold U, Opitz M, Grossier I, Bader R, Eigenmann JE. 1984.
 Dixon RM, Reid SW, Mooney CT. 2002. Treatment and therapeutic
Goitrous hypothyroidism and dwarfism in a kitten. Jourmar of
monitoring of canine hypothyroidism. Jourmal of Smalfl Animaf
the American Animal Hospital Association 20:753-758.
Practice 43(8):334-340.
Benjamin SA, Stephens LC, Hamilton BF, Saunders WJ, Lee AC, An-
Dolling CE, Good BF. 1976. Congenital goitre in sheep: isolation
gleton GM, Mallinckrodt CH. 1996. Associations between lym-
of the iodoproteins which replace thyroglobulin. Jourmal of En-
phocytic thyroiditis, hypothyroidism, and thyroid neoplasia in
docrinology 71:179-192.
beagles. Veterinary Pathology 33(5):486-494.
Evason MD, Carr AP, Taylor SM, Waldner CL. 2004. Alterations
Boretti FS, Reusch CE. 2004. Endogenous TSH in the diagnosis
in thyroid hormone concentrations in healthy sled dogs before
of hypothyroidism in dogs. Schweizer Archiv Fur Tierheikunde
and after athletic conditioning. American Journal of Veterinary
146(4):183-188.
Research 65(3):333-337.
Boretti FS, Sieber-Ruckstuhl NS, Favrot C, Lutz H, Hofmann-
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. 2004. Hypothyroidism. In: Feldman EC,
Lehmann R, Reusch CE. 2006a. Evaluation of recombinant hu-
Nelson RW (eds), Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Repro-
man thyroid-stimulating hormone to test thyroid function in
ductiom, 3rd edn, Pp. 88-155. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
130 Non-inflammatory alopecias
Ferguson DC. 1995. Free Thyroid hormone measurements in the di-
Kemppainen RJ, Behrend EN. 2001. Diagnosis of canine hypothy-
agnosis of thyroid disease. In: Bonagura J, Kirk RW (eds), Current
roidism. Perspectives from a testing laboratory. Veterinary Clinics
Veterinary Therapy XIl, Pp. 360-364. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
of North America Smafl Animal Practice 31(5):951-962, vii.
Ferguson DC. 2005. Proceedings of the 20th Annual Congressof the
Kennedy LJ, Barnes A, Short A, Brown J, Seddon J, Fleeman L, Brkl-
ESVD/ECVD, Chalkidiki, Greece, Pp. 48-51.
jacic M, Happ GM, Catchpole B, Ollier WE. 2007. Canine DLA
 Ferguson DC. 2007. Testing for hypothyroidism in dogs. Veterinary
diversity: 3. Disease studies. Tissue Amtigens 69(1 Suppl):292-
Clinics of North America Small Amimal Practice 37(4):647-669.
296.
Ferguson DC, Peterson ME. 1992. Serum free and total iodothyro-
Kennedy LJ, Quarmby S, Happ GM, Barnes A, Ramsey IK, Dixon
nine concentrations in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. Ameri-
 RM, Catchpole B, Rusbridge C, Graham PA, Hillbertz NS, Roethel
an Jourmal of Veterimary Research 53(9):1636-1640.
C, Dodds WJ, Carmichael NG, Ollier WE. 2006. Association of
Frank LA. 1996. Comparison of thyrotropin-releasing hormone
canine hypothyroidism with a common major histocompatibility
(TRH) to thyrotropin (TSH) stimulation for evaluating thyroid
complex DLA class I alle. Tissue Antigens 68(1):82-86.
function in dogs. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Asso-
Kiesewetter H, Schell H. 1994. Cell kinetics of anagen scalp hairs un-
ciation 32(6):481-487.
der physiological and pathological conditions. Skin Pharmacofogy
Frank LA, Hnilica KA, May ER, Sargent SJ, Davis JA. 2005. Effects
7:55-60.
of sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim on thyroid function in dogs.
Kooistra HS, Voorhout G, Mol JA, Rijnberk A. 2000. Combined
American Jourrnal of Veterinary Research 66(2):256-259.
pituitary hormone deficiency in German shepherd dogs with
Frank N, Sojka J, Messer NT. 2002. Equine thyroid dysfunction.
dwarfism. Dommestic Animal Endocrirology 19(3):177-190.
Veterinary Clinics of North America Equine Practice 18(2):305-
Larsen PR, MJ Berry. 1995. Nutritional and hormonal regulation
319, vii.
of thyroid hormone deiodinases. Annual Review of Nutrition
Gieger TL, Hosgood G, Taboada J, Wolfsheimer KJ, Mueller PB.
15:323-352.
2000. Thyroid function and serum hepatic enzyme activity in
Lurye JC, Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ. 2002. Evaluation of an
dogs after phenobarbital administration. Jourmal of Veterinary
in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for quantitative
IntermalMedicine14(3):277-281.
measurement of serum total thyroxine concentration in dogs
Gookin JL, Trepanier LA, Bunch SE. 1999. Clinical hypothyroidism
and cats. Jourrnal of the Armerican Veterinary Medical Association
associated with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine administration in a
221(2):243-249.
dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Mason R, Wilkinson JS. 1973. The thyroid gland—a review. Aus-
214(7):1028-1031, 1021.
tralian Veterimary Jourrnal 49(1):4449
Graham P, Refsal K, Nachreiner R, Provencher AL. 2000. The mea-
Meric SM, Rubin SI. 1990. Serum thyroxine concentrations follow-
surementoffelinethyrotropinusing acommercial canine-specifc
ing fixed-dose radioactive iodine treatment in hyperthyroid cats:
immunoradiometric assay (abstract). Jourma of Veterinary Inter-
62cases (1986-1989).fournal of the American Veterinary Medical
naI Medicine 14:342.
Association 197(5):621-623.
Graham PA, Lundquist RB, Refsal KR. 200la. 12-Month prospective
Mooney CT, Little CJ, Macrae AW. 1996. Effect of illness not asso-
study of 234 thyroglobulin antibody positive dogs which had no
ciated with the thyroid gland on serum total and free thyroxine
laboratory evidence of thyroid dysfunction. Journaf of Veterinary
concentrations in cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
nternal Medicine14:298.
Association 208(12):2004-2008.
Graham PA, Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Provencher-Bolliger AL.
Mooney CT, Shiel RE, Dixon RM. 2008. Thyroid hormone abnor-
2001b. Lymphocytic thyroiditis. Veterinary Clinics of North Amer-
 malities and outcome in dogs with non-thyroidal illness. Jouma!
ica Smalf AnimaiPractice 31(5):915.
of Small Animal Practice 49(1):11-16.
Graham PA,RefsalKR,NachreinerRF.2007.Etiopathologic fndings
 Muller PB, Wolfsheimer KJ, Taboada J, Hosgood G, Partington BP,
of canine hypothyroidism. Veterinary Clinics of North America
Gaschen FP 2000. Effects of long-term phenobarbital treatment
Small Animal Practice 37(4):17-31, v.
on the thyroidand adrenal axis and adrenal function tests in dogs.
Greenspan FS. 2001. The thyroid gland. In: Greenspan FS, Gardner
Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 14(2):157-164.
(eds), Basic and Clinicai Endocrinology, 6th edn, Pp. 201-205.
 Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Graham PA, Bowman MM. 2002. Preva-
New York: Lange Medical Books/McGraw Hill.
lence of serum thyroid hormone autoantibodies in dogs with
Hill RC, Fox LE, Lewis DD, Beale KM, Nachreiner RF, Scott KC,
clinical signs of hypothyroidism. Jourmal of the American Veteri-
Sundstrom DA, Jones GL, Butterwick RF 200l. Effects of rac-
rary Medical Association 220(4):466-471.
ing and training on serum thyroid hormone concentrations
Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Graham PA, Hauptman J, Watson GL.
in racing Greyhounds. American Journal of Veterinary Research
1998. Prevalence of autoantibodies to thyroglobulin in dogs with
62(12):1969-1972.
nonthyroidal illness. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research
 Jones, BR, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Sparkes AH, Lucke VM. 1992. Pre-
59(8):951-955.
liminary studies on congenital hypothyroidism in a family of
Nelson JC, Wang R, Asher DT, Wilcox RB. 2004. The nature of
Abyssinian cats. Veterinary Record 131(7):145-148.
analogue-based free thyroxine estimates. Thyroid 14(12):1030-
Kallfelz FA.1977. Thyroid function in the dog. Veterinary Clinics of
1036.
North America 7(3):497-512.
 Nelson RW, Ihle SL, Feldman EC, Bottoms GD. 1991. Serum free thy-
Kantrowitz LB, Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R. 2001. Serum total
roxine concentration in healthy dogs, dogs with hypothyroidism,
thyroxine, total triodothyronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotropin
and euthyroid dogs with concurrent illness. Jourmal of the Amer-
concentrations in dogs with nonthyroidal disease. Jourmal of the
itan Veterinary Medical Association 198(8):1401-1407.
American Veterinary Medical Association 219(6):765-769.
Nykamp SG, Dykes NL, Zarfoss MK, Scarlett JM. 2005. Association
Kantrowitz LB, Peterson ME, Trepanier LA, Melian C, Nichols R.
of the risk of development of hypothyroidism after iodine 131
1999. Serum total thyroxine, total triodothyronine, free thyrox-
treatment with the pretreatment pattern of sodium pertechnetate
ine, and thyrotropin concentrations in epileptic dogs treated with
Tc 99m uptake in the thyroid gland in cats with hyperthyroidism:
anticonvulsants. Jourmal of the Armerican Veterinary Medical As-
165 cases (1990-2002). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
sociation 214(12):1804-1808.
Association 226(10):1671-1675.
Hypothyroidism  131
Panciera DL. 1994a. An echocardiographic and electrocardio-
Scott-Moncrieff JC. 2007. Clinical signs and concurrent diseases
graphic study of cardiovascular function in hypothyroid
of hypothyroidism in dogs and cats. Veterinary Clinics of North
dogs.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
America Smafl Amimal Practice 37(4):709-722, vi.
205(7):996-1000.
Scott-Moncrieff JC, Glickman NW, Glickman LT, HogenEsch H.
Panciera DL. 1994b. Hypothyroidism in dogs: 66 cases (1987-1992).
2006. Lack of association between repeated vaccination and
Journal of the American Veterirnury Medical Association 204:761-
thyroiditis in laboratory Beagles. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal
767.
Medicine 20(4):818-821.
Panciera DL. 2001. Conditions associated with canine hypothy-
Scott-Moncrieff JC, Nelson RW. 1998. Change in serum thyroid-
roidism. Veterinary Clinics of North America Smalf Animal Practice
stimulating hormone concentration in response to adminis-
31(5):935-950.
tration of thyrotropin-releasing hormone to healthy dogs, hy-
Panciera DL, MacEwen EG, Atkins CE, Bosu WT, Refsal KR,
pothyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs with concurrent disease.
Nachreiner RF. 1990. Thyroid function tests in euthyroid dogs
Journal of the American Veterirary Medical Association 213(10):
treated with L-thyroxine. Americar Jourmal of Veterinary Research
1435-1438.
51(1):22-26.
Scott-Moncrieff JC, Nelson RW, Bruner JM, Williams DA. 1998.
Peterson, ME, Ferguson DC, Kintzer PP, Drucker WD. 1984. Ef-
Comparison of serum concentrations ofthyroid-stimulating hor-
fects of spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism on serum thyroid
moneinhealthydogs,hypothyroiddogs, andeuthyroiddogs with
hormone concentrations in the dog. American Journal of Vet-
concurrent disease. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
erinary Research 45(10):2034-2038.
Association 212(3):387-391.
Peterson, ME, Melian C, Nichols R. 1997. Measurement of serum to-
Sjollema BE, den Hartog MT, de Vijlder JI, van Dijk JE, Rijnberk
tal thyroxine, triodothyronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotropin
A. 1991. Congenital hypothyroidism in two cats due to defective
concentrations for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in dogs. Jour-
organification: data suggesting loosely anchored thyroperoxidase.
nal of the American Veterinary Medical Association21l{11):1396-
Acta Endocrinologica 125(4):435-440.
1402.
Skopek E, Patzl M, Nachreiner RF. 2006. Detection of autoantibodies
 Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R. 2001. Measurement of serum
against thyroid peroxidase in serum samples of hypothyroid dogs.
concentrations of free thyroxine, total thyroxine, and total tri-
American Journal of Veterimary Research 67(5):809-814.
jodothyronine in cats with hyperthyroidism and cats with non-
Sojka JE, Johnson MA, Bottoms GD. 1993. Serum triodothyro-
thyroidal disease. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical As-
nine, total thyroxine, and free thyroxine concentrations in horses.
sociation218(4):529-536.
American Jourmal of Veterinary Resenrch 54(1):52-55.
Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R. 2003. Total thyroxine testing:
Stanley O, Hillidge CJ. 1982. Alopecia associated with hypothy-
comparison of an in-house test kid with radioimmuno- and
roidism in a horse. Equine Veterinary Jourmal 14(2):165-
chemiluminescent assay (abstract). Veterinary Intermal Medicine
167.
17:396.
 Stegeman JR, Graham PA, Hauptman JG. 2003. Use of recom-
Ramsey IK, Evans H, Herrtage ME. 1997. Thyroid-stimulating hor-
 binant human thyroid-stimulating hormone for thyrotropin-
 mone and total thyroxine concentrations in euthyroid, sick eu-
stimulation testing of euthyroid cats. American Journal of Vet-
thyroid and hypothyroid dogs. Jourmal of Smafl Animal Practice
erinary Research 64(2):149-152.
38(12):540-545.
Taeymans O, Daminet S, Duchateau L, Saunders JH. 2007. Pre- and
Rand JS, Levine J, Best SJ, Parker W. 1993. Spontaneous adult-onset
post-treatment ultrasonography in hypothyroid dogs. Veterinary
hypothyroidism in a cat.Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Radiology and Ultrasoumd 48(3):262-269.
7(5):272-276.
Tobias S, Labato MA. 2001. Identifying and managing feline con-
Reed MS, Bayly WM, Sella DC. 2003. Hypothyroidism. In: Reed
genital hypothyroidism.Veterinary Medicine96:719-726.
MS, Bayly WM, Sella DC (eds), Equine Intermal Medicine, 2nd
Tomer Y, Davies TF. 1993. Infection, thyroid disease, and autoim-
edn, Pp. 1349-1351. New York: WB Saunders.
munity.Endocrine Reviews 14(1):107-120.
Reese S, Breyer U, Deeg C, Kraft W, Kaspers B. 2005. Thyroid sonog-
Tomsa K, Glaus TM, Kacl GM, Pospischil A, Reusch CE. 2001.
raphy as an effective tool to discriminate between euthyroid sick
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulation test to assess thy-
and hypothyroid dogs. Jourmnal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine
roid function in severely sick cats.Jourmal of Veterinary Internal
19(4):491-498.
Medicine 15(2):89-93.
Reusch CE, Gerber B, Boretti FS. 2002. Serum fructosamine con-
van Geffen C, Bavegems V, Duchateau L, De Roover K, Daminet S.
centrations in dogs with hypothyroidism. Veterinary Research
 2006. Serum thyroid hormone concentrations and thyroglobu-
Commumications 26(7):531-536.
lin autoantibodies in trained and non-trained healthy whippets.
Rijnberk A. 1996. Thyroids. In: Rijnberk A (ed.), Clinical Endocrinof-
Veterinary Jourmal 172(1):135-140.
ogy of Dogs and Cats, Pp. 35-55. Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Wiesli P, Schmid C. 2001. Hyper- and hypothyroidism: which tests
Publishers.
are reliable in general practice? Schweizerische Rundschau Fur
Sauve F, Paradis M. 2000. Use of recombinant human thyroid-
Medizin Praxis 90:877-881.
stimulating hormone for thyrotropin stimulation test in euthy-
Williamson NL, Frank LA, Hnilica KA. 2002. Effects of short-term
roid dogs. Camadian Veterinary Journal 41{3):215-219.
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole administration on thyroid func-
Schachter S, Nelson RW, Scott-Moncrieff C, Ferguson DC, Mont-
tion in dogs. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Associa-
gomery T, Feldman EC, Neal L, Kass PH. 2004. Comparison
tion 221(6):802-806.
of serum-free thyroxine concentrations determined by standard
Wilson JG. 1975. Hypothyroidism in ruminants with special refer-
equilibrium dialysis, modifed equilibrium dialysis, and 5 ra-
ence to foetal goitre. Veterirary Record 97:161-164.
dioimmunoassays in dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermaf Medicine
Witherspoon LR, el Shami AS, Shuler SE, Neely H, Sonnemaker R,
18(3):259-264.
Gilbert SS, Alyea K. 1988. Chemically blocked analog assays for
Schell H, Kiesewetter F, Seidel C, von Hintzenstern J. 1991. Cell cycle
free thyronines.I.The effect of chemical blockers onT4 analog
kinetics of human anagen scalp hair bulbs in thyroid disorders
and T4 binding by albumin and by thyroxin-binding globulin.
determined by DANN flow cytometry. Dermatologica 182:23-26.
Clinical Chemmistry 34(1):9-16.
132 Non-inflammatory alopecias
3.3.2 Hyperadrenocorticism
3.3.2.1.2 Diagnosis
Several laboratory tests have been described for con-
Rosario Cerundolo
firming a diagnosis of canine hyperadrenocorticism.
However, it is crucial to understand that all of these
diagnostic tests have limitations and all can give both
The pilosebaceous unit is a major independent,
false-negative and false-positive results. The diagno.
 peripheral endocrine organ (an equivalent of the
sis should therefore not just rely upon the results of
hypothalamic-pituitary axis). Hair follicles respond
hormonal or diagnostic imaging tests, but also needs
to stimulation with corticotrophin-releasing hormone
to be based on the clinical history, physical examina-
by changes in hair growth, pigmentation, cortisol pro-
tion, and routine laboratory tests including hematol-
duction, and regulatory feedback (Ito et al. 2005). Even
 ogy, biochemical profile, and urinalysis.
local application of steroids may induce suppression
of the local intrafollicular endocrine axis. The cellu-
lar response to glucocorticoids is mediated via specific
intracellular receptors that are present in the interfol-
3.3.2.1.2.1 Clinical presentation
licular epidermis, hair follicle bulge keratinocytes, and
All  clinical features of hyperadrenocorticism are
hair follicle matrix cells both of rodents and humans
caused by excessive circulating glucocorticoids. Clin-
(Beato et al. 1995). Glucocorticoids affect the expres-
ical signs can vary considerably between individual
animals. The most common clinical signs include
sion ofestrogen receptors (ER) byincreasing ER-β and
decreasing ER-α (Thornton et al. 2006). Glucocorti-
polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, lethargy, muscle
coids have been reported to be potent suppressors of
weakness, pot belly, excessive panting, and, in some
murine hair growth (Paus et al. 1994). However, the
cases, neurological signs secondary to a pituitary tu-
molecular mechanisms leading to hair loss in hyper-
mor (Feldman and Nelson 2004; Wood et al. 2007).
adrenocorticism, particularly in dogs, have not been
Less common are stiff hindlimb gait (resulting from
studied yet. Certain growth factors may play an im-
pseudomyotonia) and dyspnea (caused by pulmonary
 portant role as is suggested from in vitro and in vivo
thromboembolism). The reader should refer to text-
experiments (Stenn et al. 1993; Okada et al. 2006).
books of internal veterinary medicine for more in-
formation about the systemic changes occurring in
hyperadrenocorticism.
The most common dermatological signs are gener-
3.3.2.1 Canine hyperadrenocorticism
alized alopecia, thin skin, bruising, and comedones.
 Less common are hair color change, phlebectasia, cu-
3.3.2.1.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
taneous hyperpigmentation, calcinosis cutis, chronic
Spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism is a common clin-
infections, or nonhealing wounds (Fig. 3.3.3).
ical syndrome in dogs, resulting from an exces-
Differential diagnoses include other endocrino-
sive circulating cortisol concentration. This is caused
pathies such as hyperestrogenism (see Section 3.3.3),
by an ACTH-secreting pituitary tumor
(pituitary-
hypothyroidism (see Section 3.3.1), and other hair cy-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism, PDH, or *Cushing's
cle abnormalities such as alopecia X (see Section 3.3.4).
disease") in 85% of cases, but occasionally results from
Hematology frequently shows a stress leukogram
 an adrenal gland tumor (adrenal-dependent hyper-
that is characterized by neutrophilia, monocyto-
adrenocorticism, ADH). The two types of hypera-
sis, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia. Neutrophilia and
drenocorticism are indistinguishable clinically (Feld-
 monocytosis occur due to demargination of these cells
 man and Nelson 2004). Hyperadrenocorticism occurs
within capillaries and the prevention of egress of these
 in middle-aged to older dogs. PDH is seen most fre-
cells from the vascular system. Lymphopenia occurs
quently in smaller breeds and there is no
sexpre-
due to lympholysis, and eosinopenia occurs due to
disposition. ADH is more common in larger breeds
bone marrow sequestration of eosinophils. Throm-
and two-thirds of cases are female. Very rarely hyper-
bocytosis may be common and together with other
adrenocorticism is caused by an ectopic secretion of
coagulation abnormalities may predispose to the de-
ACTH (Galac et al. 2005, 2007).
velopment of pulmonary thromboembolism.
Hyperadrenocorticism 133
adrenocorticism. Some dogs may have proteinuria
[a]
caused by hypertension. Glucosuria and urinary tract
infections are further common findings in urinalysis.
Therefore, urine samples in dogs with hyperadreno-
corticism should routinely be cultured for bacteria.
3.3.2.1.2.2 Histopathology
Skin biopsies are frequently used to determine the
cause of alopecia. Skin biopsy should be taken from
 the center of alopecia rather than the junctional zone
of normal and alopecic skin. If there are plaques sug-
gestive of calcinosis cutis, these should be biopsied as
well. In canine hyperadrenocorticism, epidermis and
the epithelium of the follicular infundibulum are fre-
b
quently atrophic. Hair follicles are mostly in the tel-
Ogen stage. Hair follicles in late stages of catagen are
also frequently found. Sebaceous glands are often at-
rophic. Follicular hyperkeratosis is moderate to severe
(Fig. 3.3.4). Comedones are frequently seen, but they
corticoidism that often also present with marked cal-
cinosis cutis. Phlebectasia (i.e., dilated and congested
vessels in the superficial dermis) is a common find-
ing in dogs that received topical corticosteroids ( Gross
2005).
3.3.2.1.2.3 Laboratory tests
Dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have consistently
Fig. 3.3.3 HyperadrenocorticisminaYorkshireTerrier.
higher levels of serum cortisol than normal patients.
(a) Alopecia of the trunk and tail with pendulous abdomen;
However, as the blood cortisol level fluctuates during
(b) generalized alopecia.
the day, a single measurement of the serum cortisol
level is inappropriate for diagnosing hyperadrenocor-
ticism. Several endocrine tests have been developed
Common abnormalities in the biochemical pro-
that are discussed in more detail below. The uri-
file that are found in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism
nary cortisol/creatinine ratio (UCCR), the low-dose
are elevated liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase
 dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST), and the
(AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phos-
ACTH stimulation test are the most commonly used
phatase), hypercholesterolemia (resulting from in-
screening tests for diagnosing canine hyperadrenocor-
creased fat catabolism), and mild hyperglycemia (due
ticism. However, chronic stress from any disease pro-
to an increase in gluconeogenesis and antagonism of
cess may result in adrenal hyperplasia and subsequent
insulin activity). Some cases may have a concurrent
false-positive results in those screening assays. For this
diabetes mellitus. Low blood urea nitrogen occurs due
reason, hyperadrenocorticism should never be diag-
 nosed on the basis of laboratory tests alone. The pa-
corticoids promote phosphorus excretion in the urine,
tient must also be exhibiting hallmark clinical signs of
and electrolyte abnormalities such as mild hyperna-
hyperadrenocorticism (see above). In dogs with non-
 tremia, hyperchloremia, and hypokalemia may be seen
adrenal illness, false-positive results are highest with
as well.
the UCCR and lowest with the ACTH stimulation test.
Urinalysis will reveal a low urine specific gravity
The most useful screening test for diagnosing canine
- a po sis o u (od aq pas)
hyperadrenocorticism is the LDDST. More detailed
134 Non-inflammatory alopecias
(a)
D
Fig. 3.3.4 Skin histology of canine hyperadrenocorticism.
(a) Dilated follicular infundibulum with hyperkeratosis and hair
follicles in late catagen with epithelial strands; note nodular
mineralization of the connective tissue in the subcutis below;
(b) atrophy of the dermis and epidermis.
information can be obtained from endocrinology text-
this test. Its specificity, however, is very poor, since
books (Rijnberk 1996; Feldman and Nelson 2004).
many other chronic diseases or stress will cause ab-
Differentiating between PDH and ADH can be dif-
normal results.
ficult. The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test
(HDDST) is more often used for differentiation. In ad-
Urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio with
dition, ultrasonography or other imaging techniques
dexamethasone suppression (oral LDDST)
can be used by an experienced investigator.
A variant of the LDDST can be performed using oral
dexamethasone administration (Vaessen et al. 2004).
Urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio
The oral LDDST requires a urine sample being taken
The consistently high serum cortisol concentration
for UCCR measurement. After the urine sample is col-
in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism results in a pro-
lected, 0.01 mg/kg dexamethasone sodium phosphate
portionately higher amount of cortisol in the urine.
is administered per os. Thereafter, two more urine
Therefore, the cortisol concentration in the urine can
samples are collected at 4 and 8 h after dexamethasone
be used as a screening test for canine hyperadreno-
administration. The test is not used for the “routine?
corticism (Galac et al. 1997; Jensen et al. 1997). For
diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism. It can be used to
exact quantification, cortisol levels are compared with
investigate the sensitivity to glucocorticoid feedback
creatinine levels in the urine. To minimize the impact
in cases in which the UCCR is not elevated, but the
of stress-induced endogenous cortisol production, a
 physical and biochemical changes still point to hyper-
single urine sample should be collected in the morn-
adrenocorticism.
ing by the dog owner at home. The UCCR test is
very sensitive. Although original reports claim a 100%
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
sensitivity, it is known that some patients with hyper-
 In normal dogs, administration of exogenous dex-
adrenocorticism may show false-negative results with
amethasone will cause a feedback inhibition of
Hyperadrenocorticism   135
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and ACTH
60% of dogs with ADH will show an increased cortisol
secretion, resulting in a suppression of endogenous
level upon ACTH stimulation. Thus, a normal ACTH
levels of cortisol for 24 to 48 h. In dogs with hyper-
test does not rule out hyperadrenocorticism. Animals
adrenocorticism, low levels of exogenous dexametha-
with chronic nonadrenal disease or severe stress may
sone will not suppress cortisol levels, or will suppress
have falsely positive test results suggestive of hypera
them for a short time only. A blood sample for
drenocorticism.
basal cortisol measurement is collected in the morn-
ing. Thereafter 0.01 mg/kg dexamethasone sodium
17-Hydroxyprogesterone
phosphate is administered intravenously, and an-
Determination of serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone ( 17-
 other blood sample for determination of cortisol lev-
OHP) levels (a precursor of cortisol) has newly been
els is collected 4 and 8 h after dexamethasone ad-
introduced into the diagnosis of canine hyperadreno-
 ministration. Normal dogs will exhibit suppressed
corticism (Norman et al. 1999; Chapman et al. 2003;
 post-dexamethasone cortisol levels. Animals with hy-
Behrend et al. 2005). It is used in patients that have
clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism, but negative
dexamethasone cortisol levels at the 8 h time point.
results with the LDDST and the ACTH stimulation
Some dogs may have unusual test results (Mueller
test. In rare cases, 17-OHP is produced excessively and
et al. 2006). The LDDST is more sensitive than the
results in clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism (also
ACTH stimulation test, and will identify about 95%
termed “atypical hyperadrenocorticism"). 17-OHP is
of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. It is the most
measured in serum samples that are taken while per-
reliable screening test for this disease. Animals with
forming an ACTH stimulation test (see above). Exag-
chronic stress or severe nonadrenal disease, however,
gerated levels of 17-OHP following ACTH adminis-
 may have test results suggestive of hyperadrenocor-
tration are diagnostic for hyperadrenocorticism.
ticism and need diagnostic imaging techniques (see
below) for further workup.
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
The LDDST can also be used to differentiate be-
As discussed above, dogs with PDH will show a tem-
tween PDH and ADH. PDH is likely, if cortisol levels
 porary suppression of cortisol in the LDDST 4 h af-
are suppressed to less than 50% of the baseline level
ter dexamethasone administration, but cortisol levels
4 h after dexamethasone administration, followed by
will rise again at 8 h. Administering a higher dose of
high (equal to pre-suppression) cortisol levels 8 h after
dexamethasone will overcome this resistance to the
 dexamethasone administration. If there is no suppres-
negative feedback mechanism. Therefore, a HDDST
sion of cortisol levels at both 4 and 8 h, ADH can be
can be used to differentiate between PDH and ADH.
suspected.
As in the LDDST, 0.1 mg/kg dexamethasone sodium
phosphate is used instead of 0.01 mg/kg, otherwise
ACTH stimulation test
the test protocol is identical. Dogs with ADH will not
The ACTH stimulation test is very useful to confirm
show a suppression of cortisol levels, whereas most
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism (see Section 3.3.2.2),
dogs with PDH (approximately 75%) will exhibit a
but it is not the best test to detect and confirm sponta-
 greater than 50% suppression of post-dexamethasone
neous hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. The ACTH stim-
cortisol levels at both 4 and 8 h.
ulation test determines the capacity of the adrenal cor-
tex to secrete cortisol in response to ACTH. Dogs with
ACTH
both PDH and with ADH will show an exaggerated
About 25% of dogs with PDH will still not show a
secretion of cortisol. Overnight fastening of the pa-
marked suppression of cortisol levels affter HDDST
tient is recommended in order to avoid lipidemia. In
(see above). In these dogs, determination of the en-
the morning, a blood sample for measuring the base-
 dogenous ACTH concentration can differentiate be-
line serum cortisol level is taken. Thereafter, synthetic
 tween PDH and ADH. Therefore, onlythe endogenous
ACTH is administered intravenously at a dose of 5
ACTH levels are measured, once a diagnosis of hy.
μg/kg (with a maximum dose of 250 μg). A poststim-
 peradrenocorticism has been made. Dogs with PDH
ulation sample is collected 1 h later and cortisol levels
 will have abnormally high levels of ACTH, whereas
are measured. About 85% of dogs with PDH and about
 dogs with ADH will have abnormally low ACTH levels.
136 Non-inflammatory alopecias
Samples for measuring ACTH levels should be taken
Medical options for canine hyperadrenocorticism
 in the morning (ideally after the dog has been hospi-
include mitotane, trilostane, and retinoic acid; other
talized overnight to minimize stress). Sample handling
drugs (ketoconazole, L-deprenyl, aminoglutethimide)
requires special care, and instructions from the diag-
have also been suggested but are less effective (Reusch
 nostic laboratory should be followed carefully.
et al. 1999). Homeopathy has also been reported to
be useful in 67% of the treated cases (Elliott 2001).
imaging techniques
Among the above-mentioned drugs, mitotane has
Abdominal radiographs may reveal hepatomegaly,
most extensively been used in the treatment of ca-
dystrophic calcification (in kidneys, large vessels, and
 50% of adrenal tumors), or an adrenal tumor (if large
nine hyperadrenocorticism. Trilostane has gained in
enough). Thoracic radiographs may reveal ectopic cal-
creased popularity among veterinarians during the last
cification and evidence of metastatic neoplasia.
few years (Reine 2007), and the use of retinoic acid
(isotretinoin) is a rather new but interesting option.
Abdominal sonography is a reliable method to diag-
 In dogs well controlled with medical therapy, the
       n
clinical signs resolve within a few weeks. Hair re-
Chronic stress, however, may result in findings similar
growth will occur within 4-8 weeks. Calcinosis cutis
to that of PDH hyperadrenocorticism. Adrenal glands
may take a few months to resolve. ACTH stimula-
should be symmetric and enlarged. Differentiation be-
tion tests should be carried out repeatedly to moni-
tween focal nodular hyperplasia and a neoplasm can
be challenging.
tor adrenal function. Biochemistry screens including
electrolytes should also be performed to check for any
Computed tomography (CT) is helpful in the di-
evidence of hypoadrenocorticism.
agnosis of adrenal and pituitary tumors (Kooistra et
al. 1997). However, it requires general anesthesia and
3.3.2.1.3.1 Mitotane
an experienced interpreter. CT is not as sensitive as
Mitotane (o,p'-dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane) cau-
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, see below), but
 ses severe progressive necrosis of the adrenocortical
is adequate for detection of pituitary masses that are
zona fasciculata and reticularis, but usually spares the
larger than 8 mm in diameter.
zona glomerulosa (Kintzer and Peterson 1991). The
MRI provides a superior soft-tissue contrast com-
 treatment needs to be monitored carefully, as pro-
 pared to CT. It is therefore more accurate for visual-
longed treatment will cause Addison's disease. Ap-
ization of small pituitary tumors.
petite and water intake are excellent parameters to
Similar to measuring endogenous ACTH levels, ab-
monitor therapeutic efficacy of mitotane. Thus, before
dominal imaging techniques are not used to diagnose
initiating therapy appetite and water intake should
hyperadrenocorticism but rather to differentiate be-
be carefully evaluated by the owner. Most of the dogs
6
firmed hyperadrenocorticism.
change during the loading dose period is important.
87
3.3.2.1.3 Therapy
As dogs reach the end of the loading dose phase,
their appetite changes from ravenous to normal. If
 Before treating any dog with hyperadrenocorticism,
the loading dose goes beyond this point, the appetite
it is worthwhile having a detailed discussion with the
changes from normal to poor or absent. Mitotane
owner about the costs, benefits, and potential compli-
should be administered with a meal (preferably fatty),
cations of the available therapies.
   or  s  
 Routine ACTH stimulation tests should be carried
totane dose can be split to twice a day. Similar to the
 out to evaluate the adrenal reserve and adjusting the
 appetite, the patient's water intake will normalize un-
 therapy. CBC and biochemistry screenings including
der mitotane treatment.
 electrolytes should also be done to evaluate the re-
Mitotane treatment should be split into a loading
 sponse to the therapy, and to check for changes that
phase and a maintenance phase. Every dog is different,
may suggest the occurrence of hypoadrenocorticism.
and it will depend on several factors (reduced appetite
Survival time may vary from patient to patient de-
and water consumption, lethargy, duration, and dose
pending on the type of tumor and the drug used
of mitotane given) to determine when the end of the
(Barker et al. 2005).
loading dose phase is reached. It is recommended to
Hyperadrenocorticism  137
begin the dosage of mitotane on a Sunday so that
aldosterone (Fig. 3.3.11). This competitive inhibition
the owner can maintain contact with the veterinarian
is reversible and seems to be dose related. In many
during the entire week. Mitotane can be started at 25-
European countries, trilostane is the only drug that is
50 mg/kg twice daily. Prednisone (5 mg/kg) should
 approved for the treatment of canine hyperadrenocor-
be available to mitigate any adverse effects that may
ticism.
occur during treatment. The owner should stop mi-
It is recommended that trilostane be administered
totane and call the veterinarian immediately, if any
with food to enhance absorption. The currently sug-
of the following signs are noted: lethargy, reduction
 gested starting dose for dogs with hyperadrenocorti-
 in appetite, reduction in water intake (tell the owner
cism is 3-5 mg/kg twice daily. The dose is adjusted
what the average normal water intake should be), vom.
according to clinical signs and serum cortisol values
iting, or diarrhea. If one of the above signs is present,
(Neiger et al. 2002; Ruckstuhl et al. 2002; Braddock
an ACTH stimulation test should be conducted, oth-
et al. 2003; Alenza et al. 2006). Side effects are un-
erwise it will be performed on the 8th day of treat-
common. A few days after starting therapy, some pa-
 ment. The test should show adequate suppression of
tients may show mild lethargy, decreased appetite (po-
the adrenal function. Most dogs will respond during
tentially due to corticosteroid withdrawal), and mild
the first 9 days of mitotane therapy, but some will not.
electrolyte changes. In one study of 78 dogs with con-
If the ACTH stimulation test reveals high basal and/or
firmed PDH, 2 dogs developed signs and biochemical
 post-ACTH cortisol concentrations, the loading dose
evidence of hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease);
phase is continued. In this case, another ACTH stim-
with appropriate treatment, one dog recovered and
ulation test is performed after 7 days. All dogs should
the other died. In a single case report, a dog receiving
have responded by then, and the maintenance dose
trilostane developed signs of hypoadrenocorticism,
phase is started.
and histopathological evaluation of adrenal glands
The dosage of mitotane during maintenance de-
showed adrenal cortical necrosis with reactive inflam-
pends on the response to the loading dose phase and
mation and fibrosis (Chapman et al. 2004). Trilostane
the cortisol levels measured in the ACTH stimulation
should not be used in pregnant animals, since it ter-
test. The maintenance dose of mitotane (25-50 mg/kg)
 minates pregnancy in monkeys. Trilostane appears to
will be given once or twice a week, divided into a morn-
be safe with long-term (up to 3 years) daily adminis-
ing and evening dose. Prednisone should be always
tration.
available for any emergencies. ACTH stimulation tests
Most dogs show resolution of polydipsia, polyuria,
will be performed after 1 month and after 3 months of
and polyphagia within 4 weeks of starting therapy. The
maintenance treatment. Whenever the mitotane dose
skin problems resolve within 3 months of treatment in
is adapted, an ACTH stimulation test should be per-
62% of the dogs. Many biochemical changes, includ-
formed after 1 month. Every dog's maintenance dose
ing elevated ALP and ALT activities, may resolve with
requirement will change over time. Therefore, regular
treatment. The adrenal glands of dogs with PDH on
clinical rechecks and ACTH stimulation tests need to
this therapy may increase in size due to the continu-
be performed every 3-6 months.
ous production of ACTH by the pituitary neoplasm
In PDH patients that are poorly controlled with
(Mantis et al. 2003; Reusch et al. 2007).
 mitotane, therapy can be switched to trilostane. It is
It is currently recommended to perform an ACTH
recommended to follow the guidelines for monitor-
stimulation test after 10, 30, and 90 days of treatment
 ing trilostane therapy as mentioned below. However,
and every 4-6 months thereafter. The ACTH stimu-
since mitotane destroys most of the adrenal cortex, it
lation test needs to be conducted between 4 and 6 h
is recommended to perform an ACTH stimulation test
after trilostane administration. If the post-ACTH cor-
before switching therapy.
tisol concentration is less than 20 nmol/L (0.7 μg/dL),
trilostane is stopped for 48 h and then re-introduced at
3.3.2.1.3.2 Trilostane
a lower dose. If the post-ACTH cortisol concentration
Trilostane is a synthetic, orally administered, ac-
is larger than 120 nmol/L (4.3 μg/dL), the trilostane
tive steroid analogue that competitively inhibits 3β-
dose is increased. If the post-ACTH cortisol concen-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and hence reduces
 tration is between 20 and 120 nmol/L, and if the pa-
synthesis of several steroids, including cortisol and
tients clinical signs have resolved, the trilostane dose
138 Non-inflammatory alopecias
is not altered. However, if clinical signs persist despite
hemorrhagic. Primary wound healing is delayed, but
post-ACTH cortisol concentration in the range of 20
and 120 nmol/L, the trilostane dose should be ad-
justed.
Some patients may not respond adequately to
intensive care
trilostane therapy or the drug may cause side effects.
In these cases, therapy can be switched from trilostane
ities, perioperative mortality rates can be as high as
to mitotane. Experience with switching therapies is
30%. Medical treatment (trilostane) before sending
limited. Cortisol values are expected to rise within less
dogs to surgery is mandatory to reduce such risks,
than 24 h iftrilostane treatment is stopped, and the pa-
although this has not been studied thoroughly yet.
fient may start to show signs of hyperadrenocorticism
Previous mitotane therapy may be disadvantageous
within a few days. An ACTH stimulation test is recom-
as tumors may become more friable. Adrenalectomy
mended before mitotane is started. Mitotane should
       
only be started if post-ACTH cortisol concentrations
The contralateral adrenal gland should be assessed for
are compatible with hyperadrenocorticism.
bilateral disease, and other abdominal organs should
be checked for metastases. The renal vessels and cau-
3.3.2.1.3.3 Retinoic acid
dal vena cava should be carefully examined for the
Retinoic acid has been shown to decrease corticotropin
presence of neoplasms. If there is local invasion, de-
secretion in rodent models. Thus, it has recently
 bulking surgery is still worthwhile, providing this can
been introduced into the therapy of canine hypera-
be accomplished safely. If not, a small biopsy should
drenocorticism. One study investigated the efficacy of
be taken for histopathological examination.
isotretinoin (2 mg/kg) in PDH. Isotretinoin was ad-
ministered daily per os. Clinical signs, plasma ACTH
3.3.2.2 Canine iatrogenic
levels, and UCCR improved upon treatment, while
corticosteroid-induced alopecia
the size of pituitary adenomas decreased. No adverse
events or signs of hepatotoxicity were observed, but
Glucocorticoid hormones are potent inhibitors of
further studies are needed to elucidate the use of
keratinocyte proliferation and effective anti-inflam-
isotretinoin in the therapy of canine hyperadrenocor-
matory drugs, which have been widely used for the
ticism (Castillo et al. 2006).
treatment of inflammatory skin disorders such as
atopic dermatitis. However, their chronic use is ac-
3.3.2.1.3.4 Surgical therapy
companied by adverse effects. The most prominent
Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy has been described
side effects of glucocorticoid therapy are alopecia
for the treatment of pituitary tumors in dogs with
 and skin atrophy that affects different skin compo-
PDH. However, this surgical technique requires an
nents and compromises the barrier function of the
experienced surgeon and suitable facilities. Thesuccess
skin. The skin atrophy is characterized by a reduc-
rate is acceptable, but serious complications may occur
tion in epidermal thickness, a decreased number of
(Hanson et al. 2007).
 keratinocytes, diminished intercellular lipids in the
Unilateral adrenalectomy is indicated in canine
stratum corneum, loss of extracellular matrix, altered
ADH, but owner counseling is important, since
orientation and packing of collagen and elastic fibers
this form of hyperadrenocorticism could be man-
combined with a decreased cellularity in the dermis,
aged medically. The extent of any local invasion
atrophy ofthe subcutaneous fat, and a decreased num-
or metastatic spread should be investigated before
ber of dermal mast cells.
surgery is performed. Animals with untreated ADH
The frequency of iatrogenic alopecia may be more
 represent difficult surgical candidates because of the
common among colleagues who use and abuse corti-
increased anesthetic risk (due to poor respiratory and
costeroids than among veterinary specialists. Alopecia
hepatic function), hypercoagulability (leading to an
may be multifocal to generalized after corticosteroids
increased risk of pulmonary thromboembolism), and
have been given systemically, or focally at the adminis
poor vascular tone (leading to poor hemostasis). Fur-
tration site if given topically. Some dogs may be more
thermore, many adrenal tumors are quite friable and
sensitive than others.
Hyperadrenocorticism 139
tration to control the clinical signs of allergy (Schaer
and Ginn 1999; Ferasin 2001).
3.3.2.3.1 Diagnosis
3.3.2.3.1.1 Clinical presentation
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH) is
usually a disease of the middle-aged to older cat in the
range of 5-16 years (with a median age of 10 years).
No breed predilection has been found. There is a slight 
difference in sex distribution in feline hyperadreno-
corticism; female cats are slightly more (60%) likely to
develop the disease than males (Nelson et al. 1988).
 In 80% of cases, feline hyperadrenocorticism is
Hg. 3.3.5 Corticosteroid-induced alopecia in a Miniature
accompanied by diabetes mellitus (Nichols 1997).
Poodle following injection of a long-acting corticosteroid.
(Courtesy of L. Beco.)
The most common clinical signs associated with
hyperadrenocorticism in cats are insulin-resistance,
 polydypsia, polyuria, polyphagia, lethargy, abdominal
The changes at the skin level after topical application
enlargement, panting, obesity, muscle weakness, and
of corticosteroids or following a subcutaneous injec-
  r  s n 
tion are similar to those seen with naturally occurring
tions. Lethargy (dullness) has been reported due to
hyperglucocorticoidism. They occur 2-4 months after
the application. There may be fragile and thin skin
 logical clinical signs are cutaneous atrophy and alope-
with alopecia and presence of comedones (Fig. 3.3.5).
cia (Fig. 3.3.6).
The ACTH stimulation test is the only assay that
Differential diagnoses include diabetes mellitus,
identifies this condition reliably. The histological
acromegaly, liver or renal diseases, sex hormone-
changes occurring in affected dogs are similar to those
 secreting adrenal tumors, pancreatic paraneoplastic
with the spontaneous disease.
alopecia, and hyperthyroidism.
Treatment other than discontinuation of steroid ad-
Serum alkaline phosphatase is usually elevated, not
ministration is not required. Hairs may take months
because of the hypercortisolemia but rather as a re-
ep 1o iauai aq Ae sie pue moiai o eaa e 01
sult of the poorly regulated concomitant diabetes mel.
than normal when regrown. Surgical excision is an
litus. This occurs because cats lack the glucocorti
option for dogs with permanent focal alopecia. If cal-
coid-induced isoenzyme for alkaline phosphatase.
cinosis cutis has developed, it will resolve within a few
months depending on the severity of this condition.
Treatment with DMSO gel may hasten the resolution
of the lesions.
3.3.2.3 Feline hyperadrenocorticism
Feline hyperadrenocorticism or *feline Cushing's syn-
drome” is a disorder most often caused by a pituitary
adenoma with excess adrenal cortisol secretion (Nel-
son et al. 1988; Watson and Herrtage 1998; Boord
and Griffin 1999; Rossmeisl et al. 2000). Functioning
benign adenomas or malignant adrenal carcinomas
have also been reported in cats ( Watson and Herrtage
1998). Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism is common
Fig. 3.3.6 Feline hyperadrenocorticism. Note extensive alopecia
in cats following prolonged glucocorticoid adminis-
on the abdomen and proximal hindlegs. (Courtesy of M. Linek.)
140 Non-inflammatory alopecias
High serum alanine amino, transferase activity, hyper-
ACTH stimulation test
cholesterolemia, hyperglycemia, and low blood urea
Similar to dogs, the ACTH stimulation test is mainly
nitrogen are also common findings. The hemogram
 a test to evaluate the adrenal reserve capacity to pro-
may reveal a mild erythrocytosis as well as a classical
duce cortisol. It can be used to verify iatrogenic hy.
stress leukogram.
peradrenocorticism. Only 50-60% of cats with hyper-
Cats often show increased urine specific gravity
adrenocorticism will show an exaggerated response
d pe dd pnd asp (o)
to ACTH administration. The preferred method for
resulting from the concurrent diabetes mellitus. Many
ACTH stimulation testing in cats is to determine
cats with hyperadrenocorticism have evidence of uri-
serum cortisol concentrations 30 min before and 1
nary tract infection.
h after the intravenous or intramuscular injection of
synthetic ACTH (0.125 mg/cat). Excess progesterone
3.3.2.3.1.2 Laboratory tests
levels after ACTH stimulation have also been reported
Adequate screening tests for feline hyperadrenocor-
in cats with hyperadrenocorticism ( Watson and Her
rtage 1998; Boord and Griffin 1999).
ticism are UCCR, LDDT test, and ACTH stimulation
test. The HDDT test, the plasma ACTH concentration,
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
and imaging techniques can be used to differentiate
The HDDST is performed by administering a high
between PDH and ADH.
dose of dexamethasone (1 mg/kg) in a protocol iden-
tical to the LDDST.
Urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio
The UCCR is a simple and valuable screening test for
Plasma ACTH
hyperadrenocorticism in cats (Goossens et al. 1995).
 Endogenous ACTH concentrations are normal to high
To perform this test, the owner is instructed to collect
in cats with PDH, whereas ACTH concentrations are
urine at home. To reduce stress, morning urine sam-
usually low or undetectable in cats with adrenal tumors
ples are collected from an empty litter box at the same
or with iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. As with
time of day on two to three consecutive days. A mean
dogs, samples must be collected in EDTA tubes and
value should be calculated from the two to three sam-
centrifuged immediately. The plasma is then stored in
ples. A high mean UCCR is found in most cats with
a plastic container (ACTH will stick to glass) and is
hyperadrenocorticism. To rule out a false-positive re-
immediately frozen until the assay is performed.
sult in cats with nonadrenal illness, LDDST should be
performed.
imaging techniques
 Ultrasonography can be used to detect PDH and ADH
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
hyperadrenocorticism (Widmer and Guptill 1995).
The LDDST is considered to be the test of choice for
 Symmetric adrenal glands of normal or enlarged size
the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in cats. It re-
are suggestive of PDH, whereas unilateral enlarge-
quires 10 times the dose used in dogs (0.1 mg/kg).
ment supports ADH. With abdominal ultrasonogra-
Plasma is obtained for cortisol concentrations before,
phy, small or noncalcified unilateral adrenal tumors
4 and 8 h after intravenous dexamethasone admin-
can usually be detected, whereas bilateral adrenal en-
istration. If this dose of dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg)
largement can be visualized in cats with PDH. The
fails to adequately suppress circulating cortisol con-
contralateral adrenal gland would be expected to be
centrations in a cat with compatible clinical signs, this
smallin cats with a unilateral cortisol-secreting tumor
is consistent with a diagnosis of hyperadrenocorti-
due to the fact that pituitary ACTH secretion has been
cism. Normal cats and cats with nonadrenal illness
chronically suppressed.
will show adequate suppression of serum or plasma
CT and MRI are reliable methods to image either
 the adrenals or the pituitaryglands ( Mauldin and Burk
tion. However, in contrast to dogs with PDH, many
 1990). Similar to dogs, bilateral adrenal enlargement
cats with PDH will not suppress at 4 h and a few cats
 can be differentiated from a unilateral adrenal tumor
will suppress at 8 h affer dexamethasone administra-
in most cats. CT or MRI are the most helpful in the
tion.
diagnosis of pituitary tumors. MRI provides superior
Hyperadrenocorticism  141
soft-tissue contrast compared to CT, and is also more
Boag AK, Neiger R, Church DB. 2004. Trilostane treatment of bj-
accurate for visualization of small pituitary tumors.
lateral adrenal enlargement and excessive sex steroid hormone
production in a cat. Jourmnal of Small Animal Practice 45(5):263-
266.
 Boord M, Griffin C. 1999. Progesterone secreting adrenal mass in a
3.3.2.3.2 Therapy
cat with clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism. Jourmal of Amer-
ican Veterinary Medical Association 214(5):666-669.
Medical therapy has been successful in some cats with
Braddock JA, Church DB, Robertson ID, Watson AD. 2003.
Trilostane treatment in dogs with pituitary-dependent hypera-
hyperadrenocorticism. Mitotane has been extensively
drenocorticism. Austrafian Veterinary Jourmal 8l:600-607.
used in the past (Schwedes 1997), but trilostane seems
Castillo V, Giacomini D, Paez-Pereda M, Stalla J, Labeur M,
to be an effective adrenal steroid inhibitor in cats that
Theodoropoulou M, Holsboer F, Grossman AB, Stalla GK, Arzt
E. 2006. Retinoic acid as a novel medical therapy for Cushing's
is associated with minimal side effects (Skelly et al.
disease in dogs. Endocrinofogy 147(9):4438-4444.
2003; Boag et al. 2004; Neiger et al. 2004). Trilostane is
Chapman PS, Kelly DF, Archer J, Brockman DJ, Neiger R. 2004.
administered at a dose of 30-60 mg/cat/day. Trilostane
Adrenal necrosis in a dog receiving trilostane for the treatment of
therapy is monitored with routine ACTH stimulation
hyperadrenocorticism. Jourmal of Smalfl Animal Practice 45:307-
310.
tests to obtain adequate adrenal suppression.
Chapman PS, Mooney CT, Ede J, Evans H, O'Connor J, Pfeiffer
Surgical treatment of feline hyperadrenocorticism
 DU, Neiger R. 2003. Evaluation of the basal and post-adrenocor-
ticotrophic hormone serum concentrations of 17-hydroxy-
consists of unilateral or, more commonly, bilateral
progesterone for the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs.
adrenalectomy (Duesberg et al. 1995). The reader is
Veterinary Record 153(25):771-775.
referred to surgical texts for an explanation of the sur-
Duesberg CA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Vaden SL, Scott-Moncrieff
gical procedure; however, medical management of the
CR. 1995. Adrenalectomy for treatment of hyperadrenocorticism
in cats: 10 cases (1988-1992). Jourmal of American Veterinury
cat during the operative and postoperative period is
Medical Association 207(8):1066-1070.
essential for a good outcome. Before adrenalectomy,
Elliott M. 2001. Cushing's disease: a new approach to therapy in
the cat should be treated with trilostane until the skin
equine and canine patients. British Homeopathic Jourmal 90:33-
36.
lesions of hyperadrenocorticism have resolved and
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. 2004. Canine and Feline Endocrinology
diabetes mellitus, if present, is reasonably well con-
ad Reproduction, 3rd edn. St. Louis: WB Saunders.
 Ferasin L. 2001. Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in a cat following
trolled. Supplementation with glucocorticoid (10-20
a short therapeutic course of methylprednisolone acetate. Jourma!
mg methylprednisolone acetate) and mineralocorti-
ofFeline Medicine and Surgery 3(2):87-93.
coid (deoxycorticosterone acetate, 12.5 mg given in-
Galac S, Kars VJ, Voorhout G, Mol JA, Kooistra HS. 2007. ACTH-
independent hyperadrenocorticism due to food-dependent hy-
tramuscularly) should be initiated immediately before
 bilateral adrenalectomy and monthly thereafter for the
percortisolemia in a dog: a case report. Veterimary Jourmal 177:
141-143.
 rest of the cat's life. Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy
Galac S, Kooistra HS, Teske E, Rijnberk A. 1997. Urinary corticoid/
for the treatment of feline PDH is a viable alterna-
creatinine ratios in the differentiation between pituitary-
 dependent hyperadrenocorticism and hyperadrenocorticism due
tive to adrenalectomy; however, this procedure is only
to adrenocortical tumour in the dog. Veterinary Quarterly
performed by a few surgeons (Meij et al. 2001).
19(1):17-20.
Galac S, Kooistra HS, Voorhout G, van den Ingh TS, Mol JA, van
den Berg G, Meij BP. 2005. Hyperadrenocorticism in a dog due
to ectopic secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone. Domestic
References
Animal Endocrinology 28:338-348.
Goossens MM, Meyer HP, Voorhout G, Sprang EP. 1995. Urinary
Alenza DP, Arenas C, Lopez ML, Melian C. 2006. Long-term efficacy
excretion of glucocorticoids in the diagnosis of hyperadrenocor-
-Aed ym ssop u Aep atmi paaisurpe auisi jo
ticism in cats. Domestic Amimal Endocrimotogy 12(4):355-362.
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Jourmal of American Animal
Gross TL. 2005. Atrophic diseases of the adnexa. In: Gross TL, Ihrke
Hospital Association 42(4):269-276.
PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK (eds), Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat:
Barker EN, Campbell S, Tebb AJ, Neiger R, Herrtage ME, Reid
Clinical and Histopathotogic Diagnosis, 2nd edn, Pp. 480-517.
SW, Ramsey IK. 2005. A comparison of the survival times of
Oxford: Blackwell Science.
dogs treated with mitotane or trilostane for pituitary-dependent
Hanson JM, Teske E, Voorhout G, Galac S, Kooistra HS, Meij BP.
hyperadrenocorticism.Jourmal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
2007. Prognostic factors for outcome after transsphenoidal hy-
19(6):810815.
Beato M, Herrlich P, Schultz G. 1995. Steroid hormone receptors:
corticism. Jourmal Neurosurgery 107(4):830-840.
many actors in search of a plot. Cell 83:851-857.
Ito N, Ito T, Kromminga A, Bettermann A, Takigawa M, Kees F,
Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, Boozer AL, Whitley EM, Smith AN,
Straub RH, Paus R. 2005. Human hair follicles display a func-
Busch KA. 2005. Serum 17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone and cor-
tional equivalent of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and
ticosterone concentrations in dogs with nonadrenal neoplasia
synthesize cortisol.FASEB Jourmaf19(10):1332-1334.
and dogs with suspected hyperadrenocorticism. Jourmal of the
Jensen AL, Iversen L, Koch J, Hoier R, Petersen TK. 1997. Evalua-
Amerian Veterinary Medical Association 227(11):1762-1767.
tion of the urinary cortisol: creatinine ratio in the diagnosis of
142 Non-inflammatory alopecias
hyperadrenocorticism in dogs.Journal ofSmafl Animal Practice
hyperprogesteronemia jn a cat with an adrenocortical adeno-
38(3):99-102.
carcinoma. Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital Association
 Kintzer PP, Peterson ME. 1991. Mitotane (o,p'-DDD) treatment of
36(6):512-517.
Ruckstuhl NS, Nett CS, Reusch CE. 2002. Results of clinical
nalofVeterinary IntermalMedicine5:182-190.
examinations, laboratory tests, and ultrasonography in dogs
Kooistra HS, Voorhout G, Mol JA, Rijnberk A. 1997. Correlation be-
with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism treated with
tween impairment of glucocorticoid feedback and the size of the
trilostane. American Jourmal of Veterirnury Research 63:506-512.
pituitary gland in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
Schaer M, Ginn PE. 1999. Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome and
corticism. Journal ofEndocrinology 152(3):387-394.
steroid hepatopathy in a cat. Jourmnal of the American Anirmal
Mantis P, Lamb CR, Witt AL, Neiger R. 2003. Changes in ultra-
Hospital Association 35(1):48-51.
-Ateind ym sopu spuel jeuaipe joanueieadde sydeibouos
Schwedes CS.1997.Mitotane(o,p'-DDD) treatmentin acatwith hy-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism treated with trilostane. Veteri-
peradrenocorticism. Jourmal ofSmall Animal Practice38(1l):520-
ruary Radiology and Utrasound 44:682-685.
524.
Mauldin GN, Burk RL. 1990. The use of diagnostic computerized
 Skelly BJ, Petrus D, Nicholls PK. 2003. Use of trilostane for the
tomography and radiation therapy in canine and feline hypera-
treatment of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in a cat.
drenocorticism. Problems in Veterimary Medicine 2(4):557-564.
Journal ofSmall Animal Practice 44(6):269-272.
Meij BP, Voorhout G, Van Den Ingh TS, Rijnberk A. 2001.
Stenn KS, Paus R, Dutton T, Sarba B. 1993. Glucocorticoid effect
Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy for treatment of pituitary-
on hair growth initiation:a reconsideration. Skin Pharmacology
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in 7 cats.Veterinary Surgery
6:125134.
30(1):72-86.
Thornton MJ, Nelson LD, Taylor AH, Birch MP, Laing I, Messenger
Mueller C, Sieber-RuckstuhI N, Wenger M, Kaser-Hotz B, Reusch
AG. 2006. The modulation of aromatase and estrogen receptor
CE. 2006. Low-dose dexamethasone test with “inverse" results:
alpha in cultured human dermal papilla cells by dexamethasone:
a possible new pattern of cortisol response. Veterinary Record
a novel mechanism for selective action of estrogen via estrogen
159(15):489491.
receptor beta? Journal of Investigative Dermatology 126(9):2010-
Neiger R, Ramsey I, O'Connor J, Hurley KJ, Mooney CT. 2002.
2018.
Trilostane treatment of 78 dogs with pituitary dependent hyper-
Vaessen MM, Kooistra HS, Mol JA, Rijnberk A. 2004. Urinary cor-
adrenocorticism. Veterimary Record 150:799-804.
ticoid: creatinine ratios in healthy pet dogs after oral low-dose
Neiger R, Witt AL, Noble A, German AJ. 2004. Trilostane therapy
dexamethasone suppression tests. Veterimary Record 55:518-521.
for treatment of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in 5
Watson PJ, Herrtage ME. 1998. Hyperadrenocorticism in six cats.
cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 18(2):160-164.
Jourmal of Smafl Animal Practice 39(4):175-184.
Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Smith MC. 1988. Hyperadrenocorticism
Widmer WR, Guptill L. 1995. Imaging techniques for facilitating
in cats: seven cases (1978-1987). Jourmat of American Veterinary
diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and cats. Jourmal of
Medical Associatior 193(2):245-250.
American Veterinary Medical Association 206(12):1857-1864.
Nichols R. 1997. Complications and concurrent disease associ-
Wood FD, Pollard RE, Uerling MR, Feldman EC. 2007. Diagnostic
ated with diabetes mellitus. Seminar in Veterinary Medicine and
imaging findings and endocrine test results in dogs with pituitary-
Surgery (Small Animals) 12(4):263-267.
dependent hyperadrenocorticism that did or did not have neuro-
Norman EJ, Thompson H, Mooney CT. 1999. Dynamic adrenal
logic abnormalities: 157 cases(1989-2005).Journal of the Amer-
function testing in eight dogs with hyperadrenocorticism asso-
ican Veterimary Medical Association 231(7):1081-1085.
ciated with adrenocortical neoplasia. Veterinary Record 144:551-
554.
Okada T, Ishi Y, Masujin K, Yasoshima A, Matsuda J, Ogura A,
Nakayama H, Kunieda T, Doi K. 2006. The critical roles of
serum/glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 3 (SGK3) in the hair fol-
licle morphogenesis and homeostasis: the allelic difference pro-
3.3.3 Canine
yidesnovelinsightsintohairfolllebiology.Americanfourmalof
Pathology 168(4):1119-1133.
hyperestrogenism
Paus R, Handjiski B, Czarnetzki BM, Eichmiller S. 1994. A murine
uorssarar ap rey sunndruu pue surnpu ro apou
Lars Mecklenburg
(catagen): effects of dexamethasone and cyclosporin A. Jourmal of
Investigative Dermatology 103(2):143-147.
 Reine NJ. 2007. Medical management of pituitary-dependent hyper-
adrenocorticism: mitotane versus trilostane.Clinical Techmique in
Smalf Animal Practice 22(1):18-25.
 Estrogens are potent modulators of hair growth. It is
Reusch CE, Sieber-Ruckstuhl N, Wenger M, Lutz H, Perren A,
long known that injections of large doses of estradiol
 Pospischil A. 2007. Histological evaluation of the adrenal glands
of seven dogs with hyperadrenocorticism treated with trilostane.
reduce hair growth in mice, rats, guinea pigs, and dogs
Veterinary Record 160(7):219-224.
(Hooker and Pfeiffer 1943; Trentin et al. 1952; John-
Reusch CE, Steffen T, Hoerauf A. 1999. The efficacy of L-Deprenyl
son 1958; Jackson and Ebling 1972). Independent of
in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Jourmaf
of Veterimary Intermnal Medicine 13:291-301.
the gender, estrogens can delay initiation of anagen
Rijnberk A. 1996. Adrenals. In: Rijnberk A (ed.), Clinical Endocrinof-
and thus are able to arrest hair follicles in the telo-
ogy of Dogs and Cats, Pp. 6l-88. Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
gen phase (Oh and Smart 1996; Smart et al.1999).
Publishers.
Rossmeisl JH Jr, Scott-Moncrieff JC, Siems J, Snyder PW, Wells A,
Furthermore, estrogens can reduce the growth rate of
Anothayanontha L, Oliver IW. 2000. Hyperadrenocorticism and
 anagen hair fibers, thus reducing the actual lengths of
Canine hyperestrogenism 143
hair fibers (reviewed in Ohnemus et al. 2006). There
is the reason why estrogens can prolong the anagen
is also evidence from experiments in mice that estro-
phase in male human scalp hair follicles, whereas they
gens are able to terminate anagen and thus induce hair
inhibit hair growth in female human scalp hair follicles
follicle regression (Ohnemus
s et al. 2004, 2005). This
 and in pelage follicles of most other mammals. Gen
is supported by morphologic evidence from dogs ex-
der differences are also based on different metabolic
perimentally treated with high doses of estradiol that
 capacities of hair follicle subunits (Smart et al. 1999;
also suggest a catagen-inductive (anagen terminating)
 Conrad et al. 2005). Site-dependent differences may be
activity of estrogens (Dow 1960; Jabara 1962).
either caused by variations in the metabolic capacity
Experimental studies in dogs that were treated with
synthetic estrogens have clearly elucidated the estro-
      
genic effects on the canine hair coat. Dailyintramuscu-
et al. 2002; Robia et al. 2003).
lar injections of 1 mg stilbestrol dipropionate to young
 In the female, estrogens are primarily produced in
adult male and female Collies resulted in a dry hair
the ovary. Cells of the theca interna of developing fol-
coat, with thinning of the hair coat over the abdomen,
licles produce androstenedione from cholesterol. An-
at the inner thighs, and in the perianal region (Dow
drostenedione is a substance of moderate androgenic
1960). Alopecia was evident after 100 days oftreatment
activity. This compound crosses the basal membrane
and further progressed to involve the entire ventral
into the surrounding granulosa cells, where it is con-
trunk after 200 days of treatment. If continued, alope
verted to estrone or estradiol, either immediately or
cia further progresses and will only spare head and dis-
through testosterone. The conversion of testosterone
tal extremities. Similar changes were found in male and
to estradiol, and of androstenedione to estrone, is cat-
female dogs receiving subcutaneous depot injections
alyzed by the enzyme aromatase. Estrogen synthesis
of diethylstilbestrol at intervals of 4-6 weeks ( Jabara
in the ovary is controlled by hypothalamic hormones,
1962). They developed alopecia after 11 months of
that is, follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing
treatment, affecting all areas of the trunk, sparing the
hormone. Besides the ovary there are several other
head and distal parts of extremities. Hair regrew 3-7
tissues that can synthesize estrogens, particularly the
months after discontinuation of estrogen application.
adrenal cortex, the liver, and the mammary gland.
Interestingly, hyperestrogenism as a cause of alope-
These secondary sources of estrogens are of particular
cia is only known in the dog. Although ovarian follicu-
 importance in males and in spayed females. The hair
lar cysts and hyperestrogenism are frequently observed
follicle itself also possesses aromatase enzyme activity
in the cat, alopecia has not been described in associa-
and thus is able to convert androgens to estrogens. The
tion with this condition. Hyperestrogenism is rare in
biological significance of this finding, however, is yet
other species including those that may ingest phytoe-
unknown.
strogens, and alopecia is not a consistent phenomenon
Estrogens act via the ER, a member of the nu-
in these cases. This demonstrates once more the differ-
clear hormone family of intracellular receptors, which
ent susceptibility among various species of domestic
mainly acts as a DNA-binding transcription factor
animals.
that regulates gene expression. There are two differ-
ent forms of the ER, usually referred to as α and β,
each encoded by a separate gene. Hormone-activated
3.3.3.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
ERs form dimers, and since the two forms are coex-
The biologic effect that estrogens have on the hair folli-
 pressed in many cell types, the receptors may form
cle is very complex in as far as it shows great differences
between species, genders, and skin sites (Hart 1990).
heterodimers. The different forms of estrogen differ in
In addition, metabolic activity of hair follicles varies
their affinity to the alpha and beta isoforms of the ER.
between species, particularly with regard to androgen
ERs have been demonstrated in the dermal papilla of
 metabolism, clearly separating human scalp hair folli-
hair follicles from various mammalian species ( mouse,
cles from hair follicles of most other mammals ( Bam-
dog, man) (Oh and Smart 1996; Bratka-Robia et al.
berg et al. 2004). In humans, scalp hair follicles are
2002; Frank et al. 2006). Both ER-α and ER-β are ex-
androgen sensitive, and testosterone-mediated effects
 pressed in the hair follicle dermal papilla, but their
can be modulated by administration ofestrogens. This
quantities differ throughout the hair growth cycle.
144 Non-inflammatory alopecias
3.3.3.2 Diagnosis and therapy
lowest in anagen. It is now known from experiments
Hair coat effects of hyperestrogenism comprise a dry
in mice that catagen promotion is mediated via ER-α,
whereas ER-β likely functions as a silencer of ER-α
hair coat and thinning of the hair coat over the ab-
action during anagen (Chanda et al. 2000; Moverare 
domen, at the inner thighs, and in the perianal region.
The head and distal parts of extremities are spared.
et al. 2002; Ohnemus et al. 2005).
Despite the unequivocal effect that estrogens have
Clinical differential diagnoses of canine hyperestro-
on hair follicles, they are not essential for normal hair
 genism are limited as clinical signs are usually not re-
stricted to the skin. With regard to alopecia, differen-
growth. In most cases, ovariectomy and thus signifi-
tial diagnoses include hyperadrenocorticism (see Sec-
cant reduction of circulatory estrogen levels does not
have any influence on the hair coat. In rare cases
tion 3.3.2), canine recurrent flank alopecia (see Section
3.3.5), hypothyroidism (see Section 3.3.1), Alopecia X
(but more frequently in certain breeds such as Set-
ters, long-haired Dachshunds, Small Munsterlander,
(see Section 3.3.4), or other breed-specific hair cycle
and long- and smooth-haired Retrievers) coat quality
abnormalities (see Section 3.3.9).
Skin histology in canine hyperestrogenism is sim-
may change after ovariectomy, but the pathogenesis of
this effect is yet unknown and gonadotropins rather
ilar in male and female dogs and is independent of
its cause. Hair follicles show infundibular orthokera-
than estrogens may represent the major mediators of 
this effect (Welle et al. 2006). Furthermore, estrogenic
 totic hyperkeratosis. There are many hair follicles in
effects on hair follicles must be counteracted physi-
late catagen stages and some in telogen, whereas the
ologically, since all intact females exhibit an increase
number of anagen hair follicles is reduced (Fig. 3.3.7).
Depending on the duration of hyperestrogenism,
in plasma estrogen levels preceding estrus, while only
few ever develop alopecia.
the epidermis and sebaceous glands may eventually
a
b
Fig. 3.3.7 Skin histology of canine hyperestrogenism. (a) All hair
follicles are in late catagen/telogen; mild hyperkeratosis of follic-
eu uabeie buimous uoenyubew laubu (a) :engpunu! yen
follicles with epithelial strand and thickened connective tissue
sheath.
Canine hyperestrogenism 145
become atrophic. Apocrine glands may show dilata-
tion. The dermis appears denser than normal with
thicker, closely packed collagen bundles and fewer
fibrocyte nuclei. As pyoderma is a frequent sequela
of hyperestrogenism, biopsies may show variable de-
grees of purulent inflammation, eventually involving
hair follicles (folliculitis and furunculosis). In general,
histopathology is not sufficiently diagnostic for hyper-
estrogenism but merely suggests an endocrine disease.
3.3.3.2.1 Hyperestrogenism in intact bitches
Hyperestrogenism can occur in intact bitches in con-
junction with ovarian cysts or tumors that derive from
sex-cord stromal tissue of the ovary (mostly granu-
losa cell tumors, rarely thecomas or other sex-cord
stromal neoplasms) (Fiorito 1992). Estrogen produc-
fion by these cysts or tumors is autonomous and is
no longer controlled by hypothalamic gonadotropins.
Plasma estrogen levels may exceed the normal range,
but it is not always possible to demonstrate consistent
Hg. 3.3.8 Hyperestrogenism in an intact bitch with extensive
elevation of estrogen levels.
alopecia of the caudal thighs. Note enlarged vulva.
Besides alopecia, hyperestrogenism in bitches may
result in gynecomastia (eventually with formation of
mammary tumors), cystic endometrial hyperplasia,
etate (once daily, first week: 0.1 mg/kg; second week:
uterine leiomyomas, irregular estrus cycles, or per-
 0.05 mg/kg) with the risk of inducing pyometra. If
sistent estrus, characterized by vulval enlargement,
therapy fails, ovariectomy is warranted. Neoplasms
persistence of sanguinous discharge, vaginal cornifica-
need to be surgically removed. Removal of the estro-
tion, and estrus behavior. Another serious side effect of
 gen source will result in regrowth of hair within 2-4
very high levels of estrogens is myelosuppression with
months.
subsequent nonregenerative anemia, leukopenia, and
thrombocytopenia. In contrast to hyperadrenocorti-
3.3.3.2.2 Hyperestrogenism in neutered females
cism (see Section 3.3.2), no polydypsia and polyuria
develops and liver enzyme activity in serum is within
Hyperestrogenism with alopecia in neutered female
normal limits.
dogs can occur after treatment with diethylstilbestrol
Alopecia caused by hyperestrogenism begins in the
for urinary incontinence (Barsanti et al. 1983). Hy-
genital and perianal region and progresses to the ab-
perestrogenism may also be found in bitches that have
domen, ventral thorax, medial thighs, flanks, and
undergone incomplete ovariectomy with subsequent
proximal extremities (Fig. 3.3.8). The color of re-
 development of ovarian cysts or neoplasms (Pluhar
maining hair may lighten. Over time, alopecic areas
etal. 1995). Remnants ofovarian tissue can be detected
become hyperpigmented with dry seborrhea. Miliary
by the human choriogonadotropin (hCG) stimula
sebaceous cysts may be present. In later stages the skin
tion test. Upon stimulation with hCG a successfully
becomes thin. Secondary pyoderma is not uncommon
ovariectomized dog should not demonstrate an in-
and may change the clinical picture ofthe alopecic skin
crease in estrogen and progesterone concentrations,
to erythema, crusting, and epidermal collarettes.
n so    n   
Ovarian cysts can be treated with GnRH (10 μg/kg),
have been incompletely ovariectomized. Superficial
once or repeatedly, but this does not always resolve the
to intermediate and nucleated as well as enucleated
problem. If the problem persists, estrus can be stopped
superficial cells in vaginal cytology verify estrogenic
by oral administration of low doses of megestrol ac-
activity.
146 Non-inflammatory alopecias
3.3.3.2.3 Hyperestrogenism in males
Hyperestrogenism in intact male dogs is mostly caused
by estrogen-secreting sex-cord stromal tumors of the
testis (mostly Sertoli cell tumor) (Medleau 1989;
Schmeitzel 1990; Kim and Kim 2005). Sertoli cell neo-
plasms in the dog occur frequently in cryptorchids
(the incidence of Sertoli cell tumors is reported to
  o    s  
mal dogs). They are firm, multinodular, and well de-
marcated from the surrounding testicular tissue (Fig.
3.3.9). Most Sertoli celltumors are benign, particularly
when they are less than 2 cm in diameter. A high inci-
dence of Sertoli cell tumors is reported in Boxers, Cairn
Terriers, Collies, Pekingese, Shetland Sheepdogs, and
Fig. 3.3.9 Gross pathology of Sertoli cell tumor in the testis of
adog
Weimaraners. There are rare reports on other testic-
ular neoplasms associated with hyperestrogenism in
the male dog, but their significance and pathogenesis
is yet unknown. Other rare cases of reported hypere-
strogenism in phenotypically male dogs were cases of
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3.3.10 Hyperestrogenism in a male dog with Sertoli cell tumor. (a) Extensive alopecia of caudal thighs: (b) gynecomastia; (c)
linear erythema of the prepuce.
Canine hyperestrogenism 147
female pseudohermaphroditism, where ovarian tissue
Eigenmann JE, Poortman J, Koeman IP. 1984. Estrogen-induced
caused high levels of estrogen. In castrated male dogs,
flank alopecia in the female dog: evidence for local rather than
the adrenal cortex produces significant amounts of es-
systemic hyperestrogenism. Journal of the American Amirmal Hos-
pital Association 20:621.
trogens. Spontaneous hyperestrogenism with alopecia
Fiorito DA. 1992. Hyperestrogenism in bitches. Compendium on
Continuing Education for thePracticing Veterinarian 14:727.
so far.
Frank LA, Donnell RL, Kania SA. 2006. Oestrogen receptor evalu-
ation in Pomeranian dogs with hair cycle arrest (alopecia X) on
Alopecia in male dogs with Sertoli cell tumors fol-
melatonin supplementation. Veterinary Dermatology17:252-258.
lows the same pattern as with hyperestrogenism in
Hart JE. 1990. Endocrine pathology of estrogens: species differences.
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 47:203-218.
 intact bitches. Alopecia begins in the perineum and
Hooker CW, Pfeiffer CA. 1943. Effects of sex hormones on spon-
extends to the abdomen, ventral chest, neck, thighs,
taneous hair growth, skin, hair and sebaceous glands in the rat.
and flanks (Fig. 3.3.10). Beside alopecia, clinical signs 
Endocrinology 32:69.
Jabara AG. 1962. Some tissue changes in the dog following stilboe-
of hyperestrogenism in male dogs are feminization
strol administration. Australian Jourmal of Experimental Biology
(i.e., gynecomastia and attractiveness to male dogs), a
40:293.
 pendulous prepuce, atrophy of the penile sheath, as-
 Jackson D, Ebling FJ. 1972. The activity of hair follicles and their
response to oestradiol in the guinea-pig Cavia porcelusL. Joumal
 permatogenesis, and myelosuppression, resulting in
fAnatomy 111:303.
anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. A lin-
Johnson E. 1958. Quantitative studies of hair growth in the al-
ear erythema along the prepuce is a specific, pathog-
bino rat.II.The effect of sex hormones. Journal of Endocrinology
16:351.
nomonic, clinical finding in male dogs with
hy-
 Kim O, Kim KS. 2005. Seminoma with hyperesterogenemia in a
perestrogenism(
(Fig. 3.3.10). Unilateral
1 testicular
Yorkshire terrier. Jourmal of Veterinary Medical Science 67:121-
neoplasia is mostly associated with enlargement of
123.
Medleau L. 1989. Sex hormone-associated endocrine alopecias in
one testicle and atrophy of the other. Elevated plasma
dogs. Jourmal ofthe American Animal Hospital Association25:689-
levels of estradiol cannot always be demonstrated in
694.
dogs with Sertoli cell tumors. A diminished testos-
Mischke R, Meurer D, Hoppen HO, Ueberschar S, Hewicker-
Trautwein M. 2002. Blood plasma concentrations of oestradiol-
terone/estradiol ratio is more frequently found than a
17beta, testosterone and testosterone/oestradiolratio in dogs with
mere increase in the estradiol concentration ( Mischke
neoplastic and degenerative testicular diseases. Research in Vet-
et al. 2002).
erinary Science73(3):267-272.
Moverare S, Lindberg MK, Faergemann J, Gustafsson JA, Ohlsson
Testicular neoplasms are treated by orchiectomy.
C. 2002. Estrogen receptor alpha, but not estrogen receptor beta,
Clinical signs, including alopecia, usually resolve
isinvolyedintheregulationof theharfolliclecyclingaswellas
within a few months.
the thickness of epidermis in male mice. fourmal of Investigative
Dermatology 119:1053-1059.
 Oh HS, Smart RC. 1996. An estrogen receptor pathway regulates the
References
telogen-anagen hair follicle transition and influences epidermal
cell proliferation.Proceedingsof theNationa AcademyofSciences
Bamberg E, AichingerA,MittereggerG. 2004.Invitro metabolism of
ofthe United States of America 93:12525.
dehydroepiandrosterone and testosterone by canine hair follicle
Ohnemus U, Uenalan M, Conrad F, Handjiski B, Mecklenburg L,
cells. Veterinmary Dermatoflogy 15:19-24.
Nakamura M, Inzunza J, Gustafsson JA, Paus R. 2005. Hair cycle
Barsanti JA, Medleau L, Latimer K. 1983. Diethylstilbestrol-induced
control by estrogens: catagen induction via estrogen receptor
alopecia in a dog. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
(ER)-α is checked by ERβ signaling. Endocrimology 146:1214-
Association 182:63.
1225.
BratkabbachM,HmechM,MitrG,
Ohnemus U, Uenalan M, Handjiski B, Paus R. 2004. Topical estrogen
nesch M, Bamberg E. 2002. Immunohistochemical localization
accelerates hair regrowth in mice after chemotherapy-induced
of androgen and oestrogen receptors in canine hair follicles. Vet-
alopecia by favoring the dystrophic catagen response pathway to
erinary Dermatology 13:113-118.
damage. Jourmnal of Investigative Dermatology 122:7.
ChandaS, Robinette CL, Couse JF, Smart RC. 2000. 17beta-estradiol
 Ohnemus U, Uenalan M, Inzunza J, Gustafsson JA, Paus R. 2006. The
and ICI182780 regulate the hair follicle cycle in mice through an
hair follicle as an estrogen target and source. Endocrine Reviews
odea
27:677-706.
Endocrinology andMetabolism278:E202-E210.
 Pluhar GE, Memon MA, Wheaton LG. 1995. Granulosa cell tumor in
Conrad F, Ohnemus U, Bodo E, Biro T, Tychsen B, Gerstmayer B,
an ovariohysterectomized dog.Jourmal ofthe American Veterinary
Bosio A, Schmidt-Rose T, Altgilbers S, Bettermann A, Saathoff
Medical Association 207:1063.
M, Meyer W, Paus R. 2005. Substantial sex-dependent differences
RobiaCB, Mitteregger G, Aichinger A, Benesch M, Bamberg E. 2003.
in the response of human scalp hair follicles to estrogen stimu-
Effect of testosterone and oestradiol-17beta on canine hair follicle
lation in vitro advocate gender-tailored management of female
culture.Journal of Veterinary Medicine. A,Physiology, Pathotogy
yersusmalepatternbalding.Jourmal ofInvestigativeDermatology.
and Clinical Medicine 50:225-229.
Symposium Proceedings10:243-246.
Schmeitzel LP. 1990. Sex hormone-related and growth hormone-
Dow C. 1960. Oestrogen and skin atrophy. Jourmal of Pathofogy and
related alopecias. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Smalf Ani-
Bacteriology 80:434.
mal Practice 20:1579.
148 Non-inflammatory alopecias
Smart RC, Oh HS, Chanda S, Robinette CL. 1999. Effects of 17-
onset growth hormone deficiency was one of the
beta-estradiol and ICI182780 on hair growth in various strains of
first theories for the alopecia (Eigenmann and Patter-
mice.Journal of Investigative Dermatotogy.Symposium Proceedings
son 1984a; Scott and Walton 1986). This theory was
4:285-289.
Trentin JI, Devita J, Gardner WU. 1952. Effect of moderate doses of
 disproved when various studies showed many dogs
estrogen and progesterone on mammary growth and hair growth
with this condition, including 14/19 Chow Chows
in dogs. Aratommical Record 113:163-177.
Welle M, Reichler I, Barth A, Forster U, Sattler U, Arnold S. 2006.
and 3/4 Keeshonds, to have normal growth hor-
Immunohistochemical localization and quantitative assessment
mone responses to stimulatory factors and normal
of GnRH-, FSH-, and LH-receptor mRNA Expression in canine
skin:apowerful tol tostudythepathogenesisof sideeffects after
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) concentrations
spaying. Histochemistry and Cell Biology 126(5):527-535.
(Eigenmann et al. 1984b; Lothrop 1988). In addition,
castration resulted in hair regrowth in six intact dogs
with hair cycle arrest in spite of continued low growth
hormone concentrations in the four dogs evaluated
3.3.4 Canine alopecia X
(Rosser 1990). Even without true growth hormone
deficiency, growth hormone supplementation did re-
Linda Frank
sult in hair growth in many dogs with this condition
(Lothrop 1988). Growth hormone may induce ana-
gen initiation of the hair follicle, although the exact
Breeders of dogs with a double coat and dense un-
mechanism is not known.
dercoat, such as Pomeranians, Alaskan Malamutes,
In 1990, Schmeitzel and Lothrop suggested that
Chow Chows, and Keeshonds, have long recognized
the alopecia may be attributed to an overproduc-
an alopecic condition in their breeds
Sconsisting
tion of adrenal cortical steroid hormone intermedi-
 of bilaterally symmetrical alopecia with hyperpig-
ates. Adrenal steroid hormones were evaluated before
mentation of the skin that is not caused by hy-
and after ACTH stimulation in 7 intact Pomerani-
 pothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, or hyperestro-
ans with bilateral alopecia and hyperpigmentation
genism. This condition has also been described in
and in 12 normal-coated intact Pomeranians. Both
Miriature and Toy Poodles. In the veterinary litera-
 groups demonstrated abnormal serum concentrations
 ture it has been called pseudo-Cushing's syndrome,
of adrenal steroid intermediates and sex hormones
adult-onset growth hormone deficiency (hyposo-
 -   
matotropism), growth hormone-responsive alope-
pared to 19 mixed-breed control dogs. The authors
cia, castration-responsive alopecia, biopsy-responsive
hypothesized that the dogs had a partial deficiency
alopecia, congenital adrenal hyperplasia-like 
syn-
 of the 21-hydroxylase enzyme (as described in people
drome, and, most recently, “alopecia X." This term
with congenital adrenal hyperplasia) that may account
reflects the mystery behind the cause of the alope-
for the laboratory and clinical findings. This enzyme is
cia, but it fails to reflect what we do know about the
important for cortisol formation and its deficiency re-
condition, that is, that all cases of “alopecia X" show
sults in an increase in serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone,
a disturbance in the hair growth cycle. For the ease
which provides substrate for making additional an-
of classification, the alopecic conditions known under
drostenedione and estradiol (Fig. 3.3.11). In humans
the term “alopecia X" are all mentioned in this chap-
with late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia, clin-
ter, but the reader should keep in mind that it is not
ical signs are attributed to hyperandrogenism and
yet proven that “alopecia X" in the above-mentioned
 may include premature development of testosterone-
breeds is actually a single disease entity with similar
 dependent hairs in children, hirsutism in women, early
etiology and pathogenesis.
fusion of epiphyseal growth plates, and severe acne
may be the only clinical presentation in young women.
3.3.4.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
 It is, however, unlikely that hyperandrogenism is the
-ap isny sem siop paieo-usnd un isanre aso 
cause of the hair cycle arrest in dogs with alopecia
scribed by Siegel in 1977. He referred to the condi-
X. The reason for this is multifactorial. The most
tion as pseudo-Cushing syndrome because the clinical
obvious is that dogs do not have androgen-dependent
appearance resembled dogs with Cushing syndrome
hair follicles. Dogs do not have substantial changes in
but lacked the biochemical abnormalities. Adult-
hair coat upon maturation, nor do they have abrupt
Canine alopecia X 149
Cholesterol
17
17 Hydroxy-
Dehydroepiandrosterone
Pregnenolone
Hydroxylase
17,20Lyase
pregnenolone
sulfate
3βHydroxysteroid
3βHydroxysteroid
3βHydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
dehydrogenase
dehydrogenase
17
Hydroxylase
17 Hydroxy-
17,20Lyase
Progesterone
Androstenedione
progesterone
21Hydroxylase
21Hydroxylase
Aldosterone
Cortisol
Testosterone
Estrogen
Fig. 3.3.11 Schematic demonstration of enzymes involved in steroid hormone production.
hair coat changes associated with castration or ovario-
and no mutations in the gene were identified ( Takada
hysterectomy. In addition, administration of methyl-
et al. 2002). Lastly, the adrenal and pituitary glands of
testosterone has resulted in hair regrowth in some dogs
14 Pomeranian dogs with hair cycle arrest were evalu-
with this condition (Lothrop 1988; Rosser 1990). An-
ated using MRI scanning and found to be no different
other reason that congenital adrenal hyperplasia is an
than controls (Shibata et al. 2005).
unlikely explanation for the hair cycle arrest is that
Hypercortisolemia has been reexamined as a cause
dogs do not have clinical signs other than the coat
of hair loss in dogs with alopecia X (Cerundolo et al.
abnormality associated with this condition.
2007). Miniature Poodles and Pomeranians with hair
To further investigate the role of adrenal steroid
cycle arrest had increased urinary cortisol to creati-
intermediates and sex hormones in the pathogene-
 nine ratios; however, substantial overlap of the ranges
sis of hair cycle arrest, a retrospective evaluation of
occurred among alopecic Pomeranians and Poodles,
hormone concentrations in dogs with this condition
 non-alopecic Pomeranians, and healthy control dogs.
was undertaken (Frank et al. 2003). From this study it
In addition, not all alopecic Pomerania ns and Poodles
was concluded that not all dogs with alopecia X had
had abnormal low-dose dexamethasone suppression
detectable abnormalities in serum concentrations of
(Cerundolo et al. 2007). Since hypercortisolemia is
sex hormones and adrenal steroid hormone interme-
associated with many clinical signs including dilute
diates, and seldom were values substantially greater
urine, polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and urinary
than the upper limits of the reference ranges. In a
tract infections in addition to coat abnormalities, this
prospective study (Frank et al. 2004), sex hormones
explanation seems unlikely. In addition, one of the
and adrenal steroid hormone intermediate concentra-
unique features associated with alopecia X is hair re-
tions were measured from dogs with alopecia X before
growth at a site of trauma such as a biopsy or surgical
and during treatment with melatonin or mitotane. Re-
site. Trauma-induced anagen is a known phenomenon
sults from this study showed hair regrowth not to be as-
of the hair follicle (Argyris 1967) and is inhibited by
sociated with decrease in serum concentrations of sex
corticosteroids (Stenn and Paus 2001).
 or adrenal steroid hormones, and many dogs with hair
Hair regrowth at a site of trauma in dogs with hair
regrowth still had hormonal abnormalities. More re-
cycle arrest implies a local inhibition of anagen at the
cently, the canine 21-hydroxylase gene has been cloned
level of the follicle that can be overridden rather than
and sequenced in Pomeranians with hair cycle arrest
a systemic hormonal inhibition. New theories on the
150 Non-inflammatory alopecias
pathogenesis of hair cycle arrest in plush-coated dogs
are focusing on genetics and hair follicle receptors.
Both extrinsic (hormones) and intrinsic (cytokines,
growth factors, and receptors) factors influence the
hair cycle (Stenn and Paus 2001; Botchkarevand Kishi-
moto 2003) (see Section 1.2.1.5). Anagen initiation
involves complex interactions between estrogen re-
ceptors, bone morphogenic protein 4, sonic hedgehog
signaling, and noggin, among others (Botchkarev and
Kishimoto 2003). A recent study investigated the use
of a pure estrogen receptor antagonist, fulvestrant, in
treating Pomeranian dogs with hair cycle arrest ( Frank
2007). Both a 10 mg/kg dose (Frank 2007) and a 20
mg/kg dose (unpublished observations) were found to
be ineffective in causing hair regrowth in the major-
Fig. 3.3.12 Alopecia X in a 5-year-old intact male Pomeranian
ity of dogs. It is, therefore, likely that hair follicles in
with loss of guard hairs giving the appearance of a puppy coat
dogs with alopecia X require stimulation from multi-
 ple molecules, such as noggin or even IGF, in conjunc-
with alopecia and other coat changes, sparing the head
tion with blocking of the estrogen receptor.
and distal extremities. Initially, there may be preferen-
Recently, the cathepsin L2 (CTSL2) gene was inves-
tial loss of guard hairs resulting in a dull, dry coat.
figated as a potential candidate gene for canine alope-
 Increased matting of the coat may be an early clini-
cia X. However, none of the found polymorphisms
cal complaint. Sometimes a more generalized loss of
affected the coding sequence, and haplotype analysis
guard hairs gives the coat a “puppy” appearance (Fig.
did not reveal an association of one particular CTSL2
 e no iau rade ose a o n i (is
haplotype with the disease phenotype. It was therefore
ferent color with the loss of guard hairs (Fig. 3.3.13).
concluded that the CTSL2 gene is not the causative
 gene for alopecia X (Mausberg et al. 2007).
3.3.4.2 Diagnosis
Alopecia X has been recognized in many plush-
coated breeds, especially Pomeranians, Chow Chows,
Keeshonds, Alaskan Malamutes, Siberian Huskies, and
Samoyeds, with Pomeranians by the far most common
breed affected (Frank etal. 2003). In addition, this con-
dition occurs in Toy and Miniature Poodles that have
a more curly rather than a plush hair coat. While orig-
inally reported to occur in dogs between the ages of 1
and 3 years, coat changes may occur anytime between
1 and 10 years of age (Frank et al. 2004). Both male
and female dogs may be affected regardless of neuter
status. If the hair loss occurs in an intact dog, hair re-
growth may occur following neutering, but a relapse
within 1 to 2 years is likely.
3.3.4.2.1 Clinical presentation
Fig. 3.3.13 Alopecia Xin a young adult spayed, female Siberian
The dermatologic changes in these dogs mimic those
Husky with loss of guard hairs resulting in a change in coat color
of endocrine alopecias such as hyperadrenocorticism,
(Courtesy of University of Florida.)
Canine alopecia X  151
phase naturally that may last for years (Credille 2000).
a
Conversely, the dog could have hair cycle arrest before
guard hair loss or overt alopecia has occurred.
The coat changes seen in dogs with alopecia X are
not accompanied by any systemic signs. These dogs
are otherwise healthy. If signs of systemic disease are
present, then other endocrine diseases such as hyper-
adrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, hyperestrogenism,
 or diabetes mellitus should be investigated.
Diagnosis of alopecia X is by exclusion. The pri-
mary differential diagnoses include hyperadreno-
corticism (see Section 3.3.2), hypothyroidism (see
Section 3.3.1), hyperestrogenism (see Section 3.3.3),
[b)
canine recurrent flank alopecia (see Section 3.3.5.),
and other breed-specific hair cycle abnormalities (see
Section 3.3.9). Inaddition, sebaceous adenitis (see Sec-
tion 4.8) can present with a similar clinical presenta-
tion, especially in breeds such as Samoyeds, known
to develop this condition. Sebaceous adenitis can be
readily excluded by skin biopsy.
3.3.4.2.2 Laboratory tests
Because diagnosis of hair cycle arrest is by exclusion of
Hg. 3.3.14 Alopecia X. (a) 3-year-old male castrated Pomera-
 other diseases, dogs need to be screened with routine
nian with alopecia of the caudal thighs and tail; (b) 2-year-old
laboratory tests (hematology, chemistry panel, urinal-
intact male Chow Chow with alopecia of the neck. (Courtesy
ysis) thatshould be unremarkable. In addition, thyroid
of University of Tennessee.)
 and adrenal function should be assessed with appro-
Hair loss may first be noted on frictional areas such as
 priate tests. Sometimes dogs will have thyroid results
the collar, tail head region, and caudal thighs and these
suggestive of hypothyroidism but hair fails to regrow
areas will become more severely involved with time
 on appropriate supplementation. Once systemic dis-
(Fig. 3.3.14). These early coat changes may be subtle,
ease has been ruled out, a skin biopsy is helpful to
making it difficult to determine the time frame to hair
support the diagnosis of hair cycle arrest and elimi-
loss. From early changes to complete hair loss may take
nate inflammatory disease such as sebaceous adenitis
several years in some dogs (Fig. 3.3.15). The retained
or folliculitis.
secondary hairs are also lost with time, resulting in
complete alopecia of the affected areas (Fig. 3.3.16).
3.3.4.2.3 Histopathology
The exposed skin often becomes intensely hyperpig-
mented (Fig. 3.3.17); however, not all dogs develop hy-
Skin biopsies will not allow final differentiation of
perpigmentation. Likely, the increased pigmentation
alopecia X from most other forms of hair cycle arrest
is a function of sun exposure and can be minimized
such as underlying endocrine disease. Histopathologic
with sun restriction or clothing. These dogs tend to
changes noted are those typical of an endocrinopathy
regrow tufts of hair at sites of surgical trauma such as
 and include orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular
a skin biopsy or surgery site (Fig. 3.3.18).
keratosis, follicular dilatation, epidermal melanosis,
Owners may first become aware of a problem when
and telogenization of hair follicles (Fig. 3.3.19). In ad-
their dog's hair coat fails to regrow after clipping. This
dition, many hair follicles show excessive trichilem-
can be seen with endocrine diseases but can also be a
 mal keratinization ("flame follicles") that is a sign
normal feature of these plush-coated breeds. Nordic
 of late catagen, suggesting that catagen development
breeds have been shown to have a longer haired telogen
is actually delayed. This feature is prominent in
152 Non-inflammatory alopecias
al
b
C
Fig. 3.3.15 Alopecia X in an intact male Pomeranian. ((a)-(c)
Progression of alopecia from 2 to 4 years of age.
alopecia X but is also observed in other hair cycle ab-
mitotane, trilostane, or doing nothing. Recently, treat
 normalities, and is therefore not exclusively diagnos-
ment with an oral antiandrogen was reported to result
tfic for this condition. The presence of "flame follicles"
 in partial (9 dogs) to complete hair regrowth (1 dog)
may simply reflect the specific nature of plush-coated
in 13 alopecic Pomeranians (Paradis and Cerundolo
dogs. Histopathology can also show misshapen telogen
 2005). Unfortunately, the various treatments are not
follicles with abnormal accumulations of melanin in
 always effective. In addition, the new hair is rarely
hair shafts, follicular epithelium, and sebaceous glands
permanent and will often fall out in months to years
(Frank et al. 2006) (Fig. 3.3.20).
 despite continued treatment.
3.3.4.3 Therapy
3.3.4.3.1 Melatonin
In intact dogs neutering is the initial treatment of
First line treatment for dogs with alopecia X following
choice. Many dogs experience hair regrowth for some
neutering is melatonin. Melatonin treatment results
 period of time afer surgery, from months to years.
 in partial to complete hair regrowth in approximately
If the hair loss initially occurred after neutering, re-
 40% of cases and is very safe. It is contraindicated
curred after neutering, or failed to respond to neu-
 in dogs with diabetes because it can cause insulin
tering, treatment options include melatonin, methyl-
 resistance at high doses. Melatonin's mechanism
testosterone, growth hormone supplementation,
of action is not known. Melatonin may influence
Canine alopecia X  153
[a}
Fig. 3.3.18 Alopecia X. Note hair regrowth at site of previous
(b)}
biopsy.
hair growth by altering serum sex hormones in
sexually intact dogs (Ashley et al. 1999); however,
this mechanism is unlikely in neutered dogs (Frank
et al. 2004). Hair follicles do not have melatonin
receptors (Dicks et al. 1996); therefore, melatonin
may influence hair growth through its activity on
estrogen receptors. Estrogen receptors may have a
regulatory role in the hair cycle by stimulating the
expression of bone morphogenic protein (BMP-4)
Fig. 3.3.16 Alopecia X. (a) 7-year-old male castrated Chow
that is associated with downregulation of certain
Chow with alopecia and hyperpigmentation of his trunk; (b)
molecules resulting in inhibition of hair growth
pue eoadoe ym alood aunieu paeds aleuay plo-lea-l
(Oh and Smart 1996; Smart et al. 1999; Botchkarev
hyperpigmentation of her trunk. (Courtesy of University of Ten-
and Kishimoto 2003), and melatonin has been shown
nessee.)
Fig. 3.3.17 Alopecia X in an adult male Pomeranian with hy-
Fig. 3.3.19 Skin histology of alopecia X. Characteristic features
perpigmentation and alopecia of the caudodorsum. (Courtesy
include orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis and presence of flame
of University of Florida.)
follicles.
154  Non-inflammatory alopecias
may work through hormone manipulation since hor-
mones are known to have both stimulatory and in-
hibitory effects on the hair follicle cycle (Stenn and
Paus 2001). In addition, trilostane has been shown to
inhibit estrogen receptors (Puddefoot et al. 2002).
3.3.4.3.2 Mitotane
Mitotane (o,p'-DDD), a chlorinated hydrocarbon
derivative that causes selective necrosis and atrophy
of the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis of the
adrenal cortex, has been used successfully to treat
dogs with hair cycle arrest at daily induction doses
of 15-25 mg/kg followed by twice weekly mainte-
Hg. 3.3.20 Skin histology of alopecia X. Note large deformed
nance (Rosenkrantz and Griffin 1992; Frank et al.
follicles with pigment accumulation in the sebaceous glands
2004). Twelve Chow Chows treated with mitotane had
and ducts.
partial (2 dogs) to complete (10 dogs) hair regrowth
(Rosenkrantz and Griffin 1992). That degree of suc-
to block estrogen receptors in human breast cancer
cess is not always reported. Of six Pomeranians treated
cells (Rato 1999; Kiefer et al. 2002). Estrogen receptors
with mitotane, three had complete hair regrowth, one
 are prominent in the canine telogen hair and dermal
had partial hair regrowth, and two failed to regrow
papilla ofdogs with hair cycle arrest (Frank etal. 2006).
their hair (Frank et al. 2004). Response to treatment
The recommended dose of melatonin is 3 mg BID for
was not related to cortisol or adrenal steroid hor-
small breeds and 6-12 mg BID for large breeds (Frank
mone concentrations. However, ACTH stimulation
et al. 2004). There seems to be an increased efficacy
tests should be performed to monitor cortisol con-
noted in the small breeds. This may be associated with
centrations and prevent hypocortisolemia. Dogs may
a discrepancy in dosing of small versus large breed
subsequently lose hair in spite of good hormonal con-
dogs with the average dosage for Pomeranians and
trol and continued treatment with mitotane. There-
Poodles being 1.4 mg/kg every 12 h as compared to 0.3
fore, it is recommended that dogs be removed from
mg/kg every 12 h for Siberian Huskies and Keeshonds
treatment once a full hair coat is established.
(Frank et al. 2004). Many dogs will subsequently
lose hair even if current treatment is maintained;
3.3.4.3.3 Trilostane
therefore, it is recommended to stop treatment once
hair regrowth is established. This may preserve the
Trilostane, an inhibitor of 3-beta hydroxysteroid de-
usefulness of this treatment again in the future.
hydrogenase, has also been used with success to treat
While growth hormone administration has been
some dogs with hair cycle arrest ( Cerundolo et al. 2004;
effective in causing hair regrowth in a number of
Leone et al. 2005). Dosages used in these studies ranged
dogs (Eigenmann and Patterson 1984a; Lothrop 1988;
from 3.0 to 3.6 mg/kg twice a day in 3 Alaskan Mala-
Bell et al. 1993), growth hormone may induce dia-
mutes (Leone et al. 2005) to 10.8 mg/kg per day in
betes mellitus and is not readily available. Treatment
16 Pomeranians and 8 Miniature Poodles (Cerundolo
with methyltestosterone may result in hair regrowth
et al. 2004). Complete hair regrowth was seen in all 3
(Lothrop 1988; Rosser 1990) but may also be associ-
Alaskan Malamutes, all 8 Miniature Poodles, and 14/16
ated with unwanted side effects including increased
Pomeranians within 6 months. No adverse effects were
aggression and cholangiohepatitis.
observed in those studies; however, two dogs died in
Two drugs used to treat hyperadrenocorticism, mi-
the study although the cause of death was not believed
 totane and trilostane, have been used to manage some
to be related to treatment (Cerundolo et al. 2004). In
        
addition, trilostane has been reported to cause adrenal
which o,p'-DDD or trilostane cause hair regrowth in
necrosis in a dog (Chapman et al. 2004) and, therefore,
dogs with hair cycle arrest are unknown. These drugs
should be used with caution.
Canine recurrent flank alopecia 155
References
cia X in Pomeranians and Keeshonden. Animal Biotechmology
18(4):291-296.
Argyris TS. 1967. Hair growth induced by damage. Advances in.
Oh H-S,Smart RC.1996.Anestrogenreceptorpathway regulates the
Biology of the Skin 9:339-356.
telogen-anagen hair follicle transition and influences epidermal
Ashley PF, Frank LA, Schmeitzel LP, Bailey EM, Oliver IW. 1999. Ef-
cell proliferation. Proceedings of the National Acadery of Sciernces
fect of oral melatonin administration on sex hormone, prolactin,
ofthe United States of America 93:12525-12530.
and thyroid hormone concentrations in adult dogs. Jourmal of the
 Paradis M, Cerundolo R. 2005. Genodermatosis: alopecia and hy-
American Veterinary Medical Association 215(8):i111-1115.
potrichoses.Advamces in VeterinaryDermatology 5:360-364.
Bell AG, Jones BR, Scott MF. 1993. Growth hormone responsive der-
Puddefoot IR, Barker S, Glover HR, Malouitre SDM, Vinson GP.
matosis in three dogs. New Zealand Veterinary fournal41:195-199.
2002. Non-competitive steroid inhibition of oestrogen receptor
Botchkarev VA, Kishimoto J. 2003. Molecular control of epithelial-
functions. Intermatiomal Jourmal of Camcer 10l:17-22.
mesenchymal interactions during hair follicle cycling.Jourmal of
Rato AG. 1999. Melatonin blocks the activation of estrogen receptor
InvestigativeDermatology Symposium Proceedings 8:46-55.
for DNA binding. FASEB Jourmaf 13:857-868.
Cerundolo R, Lloyd DH, Persechino A, Evans H, Cauvin A. 2004.
Rosenkrantz WS, Griffin C. 1992. Lysodren therapy in suspect
Treatment of canine alopecia X with trilostane. Veterinary Der-
adrenal sex hormone dermatosis. Proceedings of the Second
matology15:285-293.
Worid Congressof Veterinary Dermatology, 13-16 May, Montréal,
Cerundolo R, Lloyd DH, Vaessen MM, Mol JA, Kooistra HS,
Quebec, Canada, p. 121.
Rijnberk A. 2007 March 24. Alopecia in Pomeranians and
Rosser EJ. 1990. Castration responsive dermatosis in the dog. In:
miniature poodles in association with high wrinary corti-
von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds), Advamces in Veterinary
coid:creatinine ratios and resistance to glucocorticoid feed-
Dermatology, Vol. I,Pp. 34-42. Philadelphia: Bailliere Tindall.
back. Veterinary Record 160(12):393-397. Erratum in: Veterinary
Schmeitzel LP, Lothrop CD. 1990. Hormonal abnormalities in
Record 2007;160(16):547.
 Pomeranians with normal coat and in Pomeranians with growth
Chapman PS, Kelly DF, Archer J, Brockman DJ, Neiger R. 2004.
hormone-responsive dermatosis. Jourmat of the American Veteri-
Adrenal necrosis in a dog receiving trilostane for the treatment of
nary Medical Association 197:1333-1341.
hyperadrenocorticism. Jourmal of Smalfl Animal Practice 45:307-
Scott Dw, Walton DK. 1986. Hyposomatotropism in the mature
310.
dog:a discussion of 22 cases. Journal of the American Animal
Credille KM.2000.The role of nutrition on the canine hair fol-
Hospital Association 22:467-473.
licle: a preliminary report. In: Reinhart GA, Carey DP (eds),
Shibata K, Koie H, Nagata M. 2005. Clinicopathologic and mor-
Recent Advamces in Camine and Feline Nutrition, Vol. 3, Pp. 37-53.
phologic analysis of the adrenal gland in Pomeranians with
Wilmington: Orange Frazer Press.
non-illness alopecia.Japanese fournatofVeterinary Dermatology
Dicks P, Morgan CI, Morgan PJ, Kelly D, Williams LM. 1996. The
11:115-120.
localization and characterization of insulin-like growth factor-
Siegel ET(ed).1977.Hypofunction of the anterior pituitary gland.
1 receptors and the investigation of melatonin receptors on the
In: EndocrineDiseases oftheDog, Pp.23-32.Philadelphia: Lea &
hair follicles of seasonal and nonseasonal fibre-producing goats.
Febiger.
Journal of Endocrinology 151:55-63.
Smart RC, Oh H-S, Chanda S, Robinette CL. 1999. Effects of 17-
 Eigenmann JE, Patterson DF. 1984a. Growth hormone deficiency in
β-estradiol and ICI 182 780 on hair growth in various strains of
the mature dog. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Associ-
mice.fournalofInvestigativeDermatotogy Symposium Proceedings
ation 20:741-746.
4:285-289.
Eigenmann JE, Patterson DF, Froesch ER. 1984b. Body size paral-
Speiser PW, White PC, New MI. 1992. Congenital adrenal hyper-
lels insulin-like growth factor l levels but not growth hormone
plasia. In: Vivian HT James (ed.), The Adrenal Gland, 2nd edn,
secretory capacity.Acta Endocrinologica 106:448-453.
Pp. 327-371. New York: Raven Press.
Frank LA.2007. Oestrogen receptor antagonist and hair regrowth in
Stenn KS,Paus R.2001.Controls ofhair follicle cycling. Physiological
dogs with hair cycle arrest (alopeciaX).Veterinary Dermatology
Reviews 81:449-494.
18:63-66.
Takada K, Kitamura H, Takiguchi M, Saito M, Hashimoto A. 2002.
Frank LA, Donnell RL, Kania SA. 2006. Oestrogen receptor evalu-
Cloning of canine 21-hydroxylase gene and its polymorphic anal-
ation in Pomeranian dogs with hair cycle arrest (alopecia X) on
ysis as a candidate gene for congenital adrenal hyperplasia-like
melatonin supplementation. Veterinary Dermatology 17:252-258.
syndrome inPomeranians.Research inVeterinary Science73:159-
Frank LA, Hnilica KA, Bohrbach BW, Oliver IW. 2003. Retrospective
163.
evaluation of sex hormones and steroid hormone intermediates 
in dogs with alopecia. Veterimury Dermatoflogy 14:91-97.
Frank LA, Hnilica KA, Oliver IW. 2004. Adrenal steroid hormone
concentrations in dogs with hair cycle arrest (alopecia X) before
and during treatment with melatonin and mitotane. Veterinary
3.3.5 Canine recurrent flank
Dermatology 15:278-284.
KieferT, Ram PT, Yuan L, Hill SM. 2002. Melatonin inhibits estrogen
alopecia
receptor transactivation and cAMP levels in breast cancer cells.
Breast Carcer Research and Trentment 7l:37-45.
Leone F, Cerundolo R, Vercelli A, Lloyd DH. 2005. The use of
Manon Paradis
 trilostane for the treatment of alopecia X in Alaskan malamutes.
Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital Association 41:336-342.
Lothrop CD. 1988. Pathophysiology of canine growth hormone-
responsive alopecia. Compendium of Smalf Animal Practice
Canine recurrent flank alopecia (CRFA) is a skin disor-
10:1346-1349.
Mausberg EM, Drogemuller C, Leeb T, DolfG, RufenachtS, Welle M.
 der of unknown etiopathogenesis that is characterized
2007. Evaluation of the CTSL2 gene as a candidate gene for alope-
by episodes of truncal hair loss that often reoccurs on
156 Non-inflammatory alopecias
an annual basis. This fascinating problem was first re-
natural melatonin production is very low, exhibit an
 ported in the literature in ovariohysterectomized dogs
early onset of autumn molt, and produced precocious
(Scott 1990), although earlier reports of adult onset
prime winter pelage by mid October, 6-8 weeks earlier
hyposomatotropism (Scott and Walton 1986; Shanley
than normal (Rose et al. 1987).
and Miller 1987) most likely included some true cases
 In view of the role of melatonin in molting and
 ofCRFA. Several names for this disorder (e.g-, seasonal
hair growth, it was proposed that photoperiod might
flank alopecia, idiopathic cyclic flank alopecia, cyclic
follicular dysplasia, recurrent flank alopecia were pro-
and that a genetically influenced dysregulation in this
posed in subsequent reports (Cieslowski and Paradis
hormone could be responsible for the clinical signs
1993; Miller and Dunstan 1993; Waldman 1995; Curtis
(Paradis 1995). At high latitude we expect high mela-
et al. 1996; Fontaine et al. 1998). It soon became evi-
tonin secretion in early autumn. However, it is pos
 dent that the disease was not limited to ovariohysterec-
sible that exposure to abnormally long photoperiods
tomized dogs and that none of the proposed names fit
associated with indoor housing, characteristic to dogs
 perfectly (e.g-, hair loss not always confined the flank
living in colder climate, may contribute to the patho-
area, recurrence not a constant feature).
 genesis of CRFA. Increased daily retinal exposure to
artificial light may result in a decrease in endogenous
3.3.5.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
melatonin secretion, resulting in alopecia in geneti-
cally predisposed animals.
The etiology of CRFA remains obscure. To date, un-
derlying causes, such as usual endocrinopathies, have
not been identified (Miller and Dunstan 1993; Curtis
3.3.5.2 Diagnosis
et al. 1996; Daminet and Paradis 2000). The high in-
CRFA is most commonly seen in Boxers, which may
cidence in some breeds and the familial character of
account for approximately half of all cases, but Airedale
CRFA observed in Boxers, Airedales, Affenpinschers,
Terriers and English Bulldogs are also commonly af-
Griffon Korthals, and Bearded Collies suggesta genetic
fected. Other predisposed breeds include Schnauzers
predisposition (Waldman 1995; Fontaine et al. 1998;
(miniature, standard and giant), French Bulldog,
Scott et al. 2001).
 The seasonal nature and annual recurrence suggest
Doberman, Bouvier des Flandres, Bearded Collie,
Griffon Korthals, shorthair and wirehair German
that photoperiod may be involved. The higher inci-
Pointers, Briard, Bullmastiff, Mastiff, Rhodesian
dence of CRFA at higher latitude (around or north
Ridgeback, Affenpinscher, Scottish Terrier, Stafford-
of the 45° parallel) supports the importance of light
shire Terrier, Rottweiler, Labrador Retriever, Golden
exposure to this disorder. Moreover, in Australia and
Retriever, and Dalmatian (Cieslowski and Paradis
New Zealand, the onset of CRFA appears to be the
1993; Miller and Dunstan 1993; Waldman 1995; Cur-
reverse of what we see in the Northern Hemisphere
tis et al. 1996; Fontaine et al. 1998). Although CRFA
(also during their short photoperiod season) (Paradis
appears to affect virtually any breed, this condition
1998).
is rare to absent in the plush-coated Nordic breeds
Melatonin is involved in the neuroendocrine con-
German Shepherd Dogs, and Cocker Spaniels.
trol of photoperiod-dependent molting in several
 mammalian species such as mink and foxes. Called
 the hormone of darkness, melatonin is primarily syn-
3.3.5.2.1 Chinical presentation
thesized by the pineal gland and secreted mainly at
night, with its production directly proportional to the
Mean age at the onset ofthe first episode is 4 years, but
length ofthe dark period. As the length ofphotoperiod
can be quite variable (range: 8 months to 1l years).
decreases in late summer, melatonin concentration in-
The alopecia usually develops during periods of short
creases, initiating autumn molt and growth of winter
daylength with an onset, for the majority of dogs, be-
pelage. Melatonin has been used to manipulate sea-
tween November and March in the Northern Hemi
sonal coat changes in a variety of species including
 sphere. Dogs of either sex and of any reproductive
mink and foxes (Rose et al. 1987; Valtonen et al. 1995).
status can be affected. In addition, the actual month
Mink treated with implants of melatonin in June, when
 of onset does not appear to be affected by breed, age,
Canine recurrent flank alopecia 157
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3.3.21 Canine recurrent flank alopecia. (a) Bullmastif with
hyperpigmentation; (b) Schnauzer with well-demarcated alope-
da; (c) Airedale Terrier with extensive alopecia also affecting the
dorsum.
sex, or sexual status (Paradis 1998; Scott et al. 2001;
in the previously affected areas and some Miniature
Paradis and Cerundolo 2003).
Schnauzers may regrow hair of a golden color (au-
CRFA is characterized by a usually rapidly develop-
rotrichia) (Fig. 3.3.22). Uncommonly, hair regrowth
ing alopecia most often confined to the thoracolumbar
may become less complete following several episodes
region. Lesions are nonpruritic, nonscarring, and typ-
of affliction. Rarely, some cases eventually progress
ically bilaterally symmetric, but on occasion only one
side of the body is affected or one side is more affected
than the other. The visually striking alopecic lesions
have well-demarcated borders conferring a geographic
image (Fig. 3.3.21). Alopecic areas are often markedly
hyperpigmented and range in size from 2 cm in di-
ameter to extensive lesions involving the whole thora-
columbar area with patch of normal coat occasionally
remaining in the alopecic area (Fig. 3.3.21). Whereas
hyperpigmentation is usually prominent in Boxers, it
is usually absent in Wirehaired Pointers (Linek, un-
published observation).
 Spontaneous regrowth of hair usually occurs within
 3-8 months, but it can take much longer in some cases
(range: 1-14 months). New hair growth usually con-
sists of normal pelage quality and density. Some in-
Fig. 3.3.22 Aurotrichia in CRFA. Miniature Schnauzer with re-
dividuals (particularly boxers) may grow darker hair
growth of darker and golden hair.
158 Non-inflammatory alopecias
to a permanent flank alopecia and marked skin hy-
 perpigmentation (Paradis and Cerundolo 2003; Gross
et al. 2005).
The majority of the CRFA cases develop recurrent
%07 oi dn raaamo rieak 1ae ieak saposida sioado
of cases may only have one isolated episode of flank
alopecia during their whole life. Some dogs have an
occasional year when the alopecia does not recur. The
extent of alopecia is variable, with some dogs devel-
oping a virtually identical area and duration of hair
loss year after year, and other dogs developing more
extensive areas and/or longer episodes of hair loss as
years go by (Paradis and Cerundolo 2003).
Rarely, alopecias at the bridge of the nose, the base
of the ears, the base of the tail, and/or the perineum,
Fig. 3.3.23 Skin histology of CRFA. Dilation and hyperkerato-
which also manifest a spontaneous regrowth and re-
sis of the follicular infundibulum. All hair follicles are in late
catagen/telogen with club hairs.
currence, have been observed in conjunction with
thoracolumbar alopecia in some Airedales, Golden
Retrievers, Griffon Korthals, Dobermans, Wirehaired
Pointers, and Giant Schnauzers (Paradis and Cerun-
dolo 2003).
The diagnosis of CRFA is based on history, clinical
signs, exclusion of endocrinopathies such as hypothy-
roidism, and skin biopsies.
3.3.5.2.2 Histopathology
The histopathologic findings are greatly influenced by
the stage of the disease when biopsy specimens are ob-
tained. The fairly distinctive findings in active lesions
are characterized by follicles with marked infundibular
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis extending to secondary
follicles ("witch's feet" or “octopus-like hair follicles").
Most hair follicles are in various stages of catagen;
some may be in telogen (Fig. 3.3.23). Most hair folli-
cles will be in early or late stages of anagen, if biopsies
are taken during the regression phase, shortly before
new hair shafts appear on the skin (Fig. 3.3.24). The
described follicular findings are suggestive of, but not
pathognomonic of, CRFA (Miller and Dunstan 1993;
Yager and Wilcock 1994; Scott et al. 200l; Gross et al.
 2005). These changes are not always present and may
be found occasionally in other alopecic diseases. In
lesions with profound follicular inactivity and hyper-
pigmentation, one might also observe sebaceous gland
hyperpigmentation and melanin aggregates in the fol-
licular lumen (Bagladi et al. 1996; Scott et al. 2001),
suggesting a rapid and premature catagen induction
Fig. 3.3.24 Skin histology of CRFA in remission. Note presence
similar to hair follicle dystrophy.
of dilated follicular infundibula and anagen hair bulbs.
Canine recurrent flank alopecia 159
3.3.5.2.3 Differential diagnoses of CRFA
been reported. These include abnormal melanization
of the pilosebaceous units, prominent apoptosis of
In dogs presented for a first episode, endocrinopathies,
keratinocytes in the inner and outer root sheaths, and
such as hypothyroidism (see Section 3.3.1), hypera-
dissolution of the hair matrix of anagen hair follicles.
drenocorticism (see Section 3.3.2), hyperestrogenism
The Irish Water Spaniel is also inflicted by a similar fol-
(see Section 3.3.3), or breed-specific hair cycle abnor-
licular disease that is often cyclical initially ( Cerundolo
malities (see Section 3.3.9), need to be ruled out. Hy-
 pothyroidism, considering its high incidence in dogs,
CRFA and abnormal melanization (as in color dilu-
is an important differential diagnosis. Some canine
tion alopecia and black hair follicular dysplasia) as well
breeds predisposed to lymphocytic thyroiditis and hy-
 as, occasionally, excessive trichilemmal keratinization
pothyroidism (e.g-, Airedales, Boxers, and German
("flame follicles") as seen in alopecia X.
Pointers) are also at high risk for developing CRFA.
Recently, a puzzling recurrent or persistent flank
Age of onset is also similar for these two disorders. Of
alopecia and interface dermatitis were reported in nine
 note, some cases of CRFA can occur in dogs as young
Boxers (Rachid et al. 2003). The interface dermatitis
as 10 months; however, clinical hypothyroidism is vir-
was characterized by multifocal annular, crusted le-
tually nonexistent in dogs less than 2 years of age. Not
sions confined to the areas of follicular disease. The in-
unexpected, however, hypothyroidism and CRFA can
flammatory lesions were neither pruritic nor painful,
both occur in the same animal (Daminet and Paradis 
 and affected dogs were otherwise healthy. Histopatho-
2000). This can occasionally represent a real diagnos-
logically, the inflammatory lesions were character-
tic and therapeutic challenge. On the other hand, hy-
ized by an interface dermatitis. Immunohistochem-
pothyroidism is not commonly associated with the
ical studies failed to demonstrate immunoglobulins
rapid onset, bilaterally symmetrical, noninflamma-
or complement at the basement membrane zone or
tory alopecia. Instead, cutaneous changes are typically
within blood vessel walls. In dogs with recurrent or
insidious, slowly progressive, and usually begin with a
 persistent disease, the follicular disease and interface
dull brittle hair coat and seborrhea. Hypotrichosis and
dermatitis ran parallel courses of spontaneous re-
eventually alopecia often develop along the bridge of
mission and recurrence, or persistence, respectively.
the nose, tail, and other frictional areas, much before
The relationship between the two histological reac-
the development of flank alopecia. When the latter
tion patterns is not known. It is possible that mild
occurs, metabolic signs (e.g-, lethargy, weight gain)
lesions of erythema ab igne (radiant heat dermatitis)
are generally obvious. Fortunately, results of thyroid
are superimposed on CRFA lesions in some of those
function in cases of CRFA will often be within nor-
cases.
mal reference values and hypothyroidism ruled out in
At last, spontaneous hair regrowth can be observed
 most cases. However, results may occasionally suggest
 in telogen effluvium (see Section 3.3.6), post-clipping
a diagnosis of hypothyroidism and hair regrowth may
alopecia (see Section 3.3.7), erythema ab igne (radi-
coincide with levothyroxine administration. It is only
ant heat dermatitis), and some cases of demodicosis
 several months later, when the hair loss occurs again
(see Section 4.1.3) and dermatophytosis (see Section
in spite of the levothyroxine administration, that the
4.1.2) (Scott et al. 2001; Paradis and Cerundolo 2003).
 puzzled clinician will then realize that the initial hair
However, the distinctive history and clinical features of
growth was coincidental and not related to thyroid
CRFA generally allows easy differentiation from these
hormone supplementation. In any case, due to lack
conditions.
 of sensitivity and specificity of the various diagnos-
tic tests currently available to evaluate canine thyroid
function, one must always be vigilant when interpret-
3.3.5.3 Therapy
ing test results.
The hair cycle abnormality described in Portuguese
Aside for the cosmetic aspect of the disease, dogs
Water Dogs (see Section 3.3.9.2) appears to be a dis-
with CRFA are healthy otherwise. Nonetheless, the ap-
tinct clinical disorder from CRFA, even if the hair
 parent familial implication of CRFA requires caution
loss can spontaneously regress and recur (Miller and
when selecting breeding animals, as it may be prefer-
Scott 1995). Distinctive histopathologic findings have
able not to reproduce dogs affected by this disorder.
160 Non-inflammatory alopecias
3.3.5.3.1 Melatonin
Melatonin is apparently safe but owners should be
informed on the off-label use of this drug. In addi-
The efficacy of melatonin in preventing CRFA was
tion, due to its interaction with reproductive hormone
evaluated in a pilot study of nine dogs who had previ-
it is preferable to avoid its use in breeding animals
 ously suffered at least three consecutive episodes of
(Ashley et al. 1999), although it is not recommended
CRFA (Paradis 1995). They received subcutaneous
to reproduce dogs affected with CRFA.
 melatonin implants around the autumnal equinox,
approximately 2 months before the next anticipated
episode of alopecia. None of them developed alope-
3.3.5.3.2 Minoxidif
cia in the winter following the melatonin treatment.
Minoxidil, a vasodilator used topically in humans with
The unpredictable course of CRFA and the sponta-
 androgenic alopecia, was used orally in dogs with what
 neous regrowth of hair render the evaluation of any
 appears to be CRFA (Scoftt et al. 2001). Some dogs
therapeutic agent difficult, whether used to prevent an
regrew hair; however, this might have been due to the
anticipated episode of alopecia or to shorten an exist-
spontaneous regrowth normally seen in CRFA. In any
ing episode, and all attempts at conducting random-
case, side effects (e.g-, weakness, lethargy, collapses)
ized placebo-controlled trials have failed. Neverthe-
were seen in 50% of the dogs treated; oral minoxidil
less, several veterinary dermatologists have since used
treatment is therefore not recommended.
melatonin in CRFA either to prevent recurrence or,
 more frequently, to shorten the duration of an existing
References
alopecic episode. On the basis of the anecdotal infor-
 mation, apparent successes are obtained in approxi-
Ashley P, Frank LA, Schmietzel LP, Bailey EM, Olivier JW. 1999. Ef-
mately 50-75% of cases, with melatonin administered
fect of oral melatonin administration on sex hormone, prolactin,
either orally or subcutaneously (Paradis 1999, 2002).
and thyroid hormone concentrations in adult dogs. Jourmaf of
AmericanVeterinary MedicalAssociation 215:111l-1115.
Randomized placebo-controlled trials are needed to
 Bagladi MS, Scott Dw, Miller WH. 1996. Sebaceous gland melanosis
corroborate the anecdotal claims of efficacy.
in dogs with endocrine skin disease or follicular dysplasia. A
Although implants commercially available in the
retrospective study.VeterinaryDermatology Journal7:85-90.
Cerundolo R, Lloyd DH, McNeil PE, Evans H. 2000. An analysis
fox fur industry were used in the initial study, oral ad-
of factors underlying hypotrichosis and alopecia in Irish water
ministration of melatonin is currently recommended
Spaniels in the United Kingdom. Veterinary Dermatofogy Jourmal
(Paradis 1999, 2002). Melatonin tablets are sold in ei-
11:107-122.
ther drug stores or health food stores in several coun-
Cieslowski D, Paradis M. 1993. Alopecie saisonniere canine. Medecin
Veterinaire du Quebec 23:98.
tries. Treatment regimen for CRFA consists typically
Curtis CF, Evans H, Lloyd DH. 1996. Investigation of reproductive
of 3-6 mg/dog administered orally every 8-12 h for 1--
and growth hormone status of dogs affected by idiopathic recur-
2 months, although it is becoming apparent that this
rent flank alopecia. Journal of Smafl Animal Practice 37:417422.
Daminet S, Paradis M. 2000. Evaluation of thyroid function in
relatively high dose and/or frequency of administra-
dogs suffering from recurrent flank alopecia. Canadian Veteri-
tion is not always essential. Treatment should be initi-
nary fourmal41:699703.
ated shortly after the onset of alopecia or 1-2 months
 Fontaine J, Beco L, Paradis M. 1998. Alopecie recidivante des flancs:
a propos de 12 cas chez le griffon Korthals. Point Veterinaire
before an anticipated episode. It is unlikely that treat-
29:445-449.
 ment duration beyond 2 months will result in an in-
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. 2005. Skin Diseases of
creased success rate because it was shown in mink that
the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, 2nd edn.
activation of hair follicles by melatonin occurs during
Miller MA, Dunstan RW. 1993. Seasonal flank alopecia in boxers and
 a 4-6 week period and this photoperiodic signal does
Airedale terriers: 24 cases {1985-1992). Jourmal of the Ammericar
 not seem necessary for later pelage growth and mat-
Veterinary Medical Association 203:1567-1572.
Miller WH, Scott DW. 1995. Follicular dysplasia of the Portuguese
uration (Valtonen et al. 1995). Therefore, this treat-
water dogs. Veterinury Dermatology fournal 6:67-74.
 ment regimen would seem appropriate if melatonin
 Paradis M. 1995. Canine recurrent flank alopecia: treatment with
melatonin. Proceedings of the IIth AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Santa
is used as a nonspecific anagen hair cycle inducer. On
Fe, NM, p. 49.
the other hand, a longer duration of treatment and
 Paradis M. 1998. Canine flank alopecia. Derm Dialogue. Bulletin of
   n s r  e ais
the American Academy ofVeterinary Dermatology Summer:1U-13.
Paradis M.199.Melatonin therapyincaninealopeciaIn:Bonadura
needed, if modulation of sex-hormone secretion is
ED (ed.),Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIII, Pp. 546-549.
required.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Telogen effluvium161
Paradis M. 2002. Melatonin. Roundtable summaries. Derm Dialogue
delayed anagen release, (ii) short anagen syndrome,
Winter:12-13.
(iv) immediate telogen release, and (v) delayed tel-
Paradis M, Cerundolo R. 2003. An approach to symmetrical alope-
cia in the dog. In: Foster A, Foil C (eds), BSAVA Mamual of Small
 ogen release. The first two are conditions where the
Animal Dermatology, 2nd edn. Ames, Iowa: Wiley-Blackwell.
 hair growth cycle of many follicles becomes synchro-
Pp. 83-93.
RachidMAauaDcottWMilleWHntDA,M
nized. Immediate anagen release is a short onset efflu-
vium where follicles are stimulated to leave anagen and
S. 2003. Concurrent follicular dysplasia and interface dermatitis
91611  o  spaxog u!
Rose J, Oldfeld J, Stromshak F.1987.Apparent role of melatonin
 hair shedding at the end of telogen approximately
and prolactin in initiating winter fur growth in mink. General
 2-3 months later. It is common after a physiologic
and Comparative Endocrinology 65:212-215.
Scott Dw. i990. Seasonal flank alopecia in ovariohysterectomized
stress such as severe illness, and with drug-induced
dogs. Cormell Veterinarian 80:187-195.
hair loss. Reversal is associated with resumption of the
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE (eds). 200l. Muller and Kirk's
Smafl Animal Dermatofogy, 6th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
normal cycle. Delayed anagen release is the cause of
Scott Dw, Walton DK. 1986. Hyposomatotropism in the mature
postpartum hair loss. During pregnancy, hairs remain
dog:adiscussionof 22 cases.Jourmal ofAmercan Animal Hospital
 in prolonged anagen rather than cycling into telogen.
Association 22:467-473.
Shanley KJ, Miller WH. 1987. Adult onset growth hormone def-
If a large number of follicles are involved, postpartum
ciency in siblings Airedale terriers.Compendium of Continuing
telogen conversion will be accompanied by increased
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian9:1076-1082.
shedding some months later. Short anagen syndrome
Valtonen M, Vakkuri P, Blomsted L. 1995. Autumnal timing of pho-
toperiodic manipulation critical via melatonin to winter pelage
is due to an idiopathic shortening of the duration of
development in mink. Jourmal of Anirmar Sciences 6l:589-596.
anagen and can cause a persistent telogen hair shed-
WaldmanL.1995.Seasonal flank alopeciainaffenpinschers.Joura
ding in some individuals. Immediate telogen release
of Smalfl Animal Practice 36:272-273.
Yager JA, Wilcock BP 1994. Color Atlas and Text of Surgical Pathology
results from a shortening of normal telogen with re-
of the Dog and Cat. London, England: Mosby Year Book.
lease of club hairs as the follicles are stimulated to
reenter anagen. This is common in patients starting
therapy with minoxidil. Discontinuation of minoxidil,
which prolongsthe duration of anagen, will precipitate
3.3.6 Telogen effluvium
telogen release. Delayed telogen release occurs after a
prolonged telogen followed by transition to anagen. It
Rosario Cerundolo
occurs in animals with synchronous hair cycles during
shedding of their winter coats. It may occur in some
humans seasonally.
3.3.6.1 Canine telogen effluvium
A similar subdivision has not been elaborated for
Telogen effluvium (syn. defluxion) is an abnormality
domestic animals yet, and it is unlikely that it would
 of hair follicle cycling, characterized by excessive loss
contribute to a better understanding or management
of telogen hairs. It is the result of synchronization of
of this condition in veterinary medicine. No scientific
the hair follicle cycle that leads all the hair follicles
studies have been published on telogen effluvium in
to undergo simultaneous anagen development. This
 domestic animals. There are only anecdotal reports or
results clinically in simultaneous shedding of the old
 book citations that describe telogen effluvium in dogs
club hair and hence may cause temporary alopecia,
and cats (Scott et al. 2000).
known as “telogen effluvium." This condition is com-
monly associated with stressful events such as preg-
3.3.6.1.2 Diagnosis
nancy, parturition, lactation, severe systemic illness,
marked febrile episodes, shock, surgery, and various
Patchy to diffuse alopecia occurs within a few weeks
drugs (Harrison and Sinclair 2002).
or months and usually affects the trunk. Hairs are
easily epilated (Fig. 3.3.25). Differential diagnoses of
telogen effluvium are chemotherapy-induced alopecia
3.3.6.1.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
and endocrine alopecia such as hypothyroidism, hy-
 In human dermatology, hair follicle effluvium is sub-
 peradrenocorticism, and hyperestrogenism. The his-
divided into five different clinical types (Headington
 tory should help to identify chemotherapy-induced
1993). These are (i) immediate anagen release, (ii)
 alopecia, since histologically, during its late stage, it is
162 Non-inflammatory alopecias
similar to telogen effluvium caused by other mecha-
nisms. Endocrine alopecia can be ruled out by other
clinical signs and laboratory tests.
Diagnosis of telogen effluvium should be based on a
 trichogram that shows telogen hairs, characterized by
minimal or absent pigmentation. Skin biopsies should
be collected from the most severely affected areas in
the early phase of hair loss, because samples collected
late will only show normal anagen hair follicles in-
dicative of the recovery phase. In early lesions, hair
follicles are in telogen, but in the remission phase they
are predominantly in anagen. There is no evidence
of follicular atrophy and there may be diminution of
follicular size compatible with the hair cycle (Gross
2005).
3.3.6.1.3 Therapy
Fig. 3.3.25 Telogen effluvium in a Shar-Pei that developed
4 weeks postpartum. Note extensive alopecia of the face and
Specific therapy is not required as hair regrowth oc-
trunk. (Courtesy of J. Declercq.)
curs completely a few months after the cause of the
underlying stress has been resolved.
(a)
(C)
 o s       
Well-demarcated alopecia on the trunk. ((a,b) Courtesy of
S. Rufenacht; (c) Courtesy of N. Sargison.)
Canine postclipping alopecia  163
3.3.6.2 Ovine telogen effluvium
3.3.7 Canine postclipping
(wool slip)
alopecia
"Wool slip” in sheep is a form of patchy alopecia devel-
Rosario Cerundolo
oping in housed ewes that are shorn in winter (Morgan
et al. 1986). It may, however, also occur in the summer
months (French et al. 1990). The pathogenesis of this
condition is still unknown. It has been suggested that
3.3.7.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
wool slip is due to stressful events such as housing and
Postclipping alopecia (PCA) is a very confusing dis-
shearing. It is likely that stressful shearing may induce
ease for many veterinarians. It is characterized by a
release of high levels of corticosteroids as the hair loss
lack of hair regrowth after close clipping. It usually af-
is similar to the one induced by the use of corticos-
fects Northern breeds that have guard hairs and thick
 are sheared during the summer months. The reason
undercoats, such as the Siberian Husky, Alaskan Mala-
for this discrepancy is unclear. It is possible that other
mute, Samoyed, and the American Eskimo Dog. True
factors such as the low environmental temperature
plush-coated dogs such as Pomeranians and Chow
 combined with shearing may play a role in hair loss.
Chows, which lack guard hairs, are also reported to be
Wool slip occurring during the summer months may
predisposed to true PCA. It has been proposed that
 be triggered by post-lambing early lactation (French
these breeds normally have a hair follicle cycle with
 a prolonged telogen phase, which possibly developed
et al. 1990).
 No breed or sex predisposition has been described.
 as an energy-saving device in extremely cold climates,
 Affected sheep show multifocal areas of alopecia oc-
so they do not have to shed and regrow their coat
(Credille et al. 2001). Possible pathogenetic factors
curring on the back (Fig. 3.3.26). Skin biopsies from
affected areas show early anagen hair follicles. Un-
are a yet unexplained pathological hair cycle arrest or
affected sheep at the same time of the year would
thermal factors such as decreased temperature caused
by shaving, since the undercoat would normally be
normally show telogen hair follicles, thus suggesting
that wool slip is a premature, synchronous shedding of
hair (ie., telogen effluvium), most likely due to high
The geographic region where dogs live might also
levels of corticosteroids that occur as a result of the
 play an important role in this condition. If they are
genetically meant to live in an environment with pro-
combination of housing and shearing (Morgan et al.
longed darkness and low temperature, it may be that
1986).
they become abnormal when they are moved to a dif-
housing and husbandry management may avoid the
ferent environment.
Although there have been studies on hair regrowth
occurrence of this condition.
after clipping in various canine breeds, no scientific
studies or case reports have been published on this
References
topic in Nordic breeds, but there are only anecdotal
French NP, Morgan KL, Fell C. 1990. Wool slip in Wiltshire horns.
 reports or book citations (Scott et al. 2000; Diaz et al.
Veterinary Record 127(10):267.
2004, 2006).
Gross TL. 2005. Atrophic diseases of the adnexa. In: Gross TL, Ihrke
PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK (eds), Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat:
Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, 2nd edn, Pp. 480-517.
3.3.7.2 Diagnosis
Oxford: Blackwell Science.
There is a lack of hair regrowth at the site of the pre-
Harrison S, Sinclair R.2002. Telogen effuvium. Clinical and Exper-
imental Dermatology 27(5):389-385.
vious clipping that may have occurred months before.
Headington IT. 1993. Telogen effluvium. New concepts and review.
Common sites are the one clipped for venipuncture,
Archives in Dermatology 129(3):356-363.
Morgan KL, Brown PJ, Wright AI, Steele FC, Baker AS. 1986. An
surgery, mat removal, or procedures such as myelogra-
investigation into the aetiology of 'wool slip': alopecia in ewes
 phy or epidural anesthesia (Fig. 3.3.27). Mild scaling
which are housed and shorn in winter. Veterinary Record 1l9(25-
may be occasionally seen. Differential diagnoses are
26):621-625
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE. 2000. Muller  Kirk's Small Amima
endocrinopathies such as hypothyroidism (see Section
Dermatology, 6th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
3.3.1) or hyperadrenocorticism (see Section 3.3.2) that
164 Non-inflammatory alopecias
Diaz SF, Torres SM, Dunstan RW, Lekcharoensuk C. 2004. An analy-
sis of canine hair re-growth after clipping fora surgical procedure.
Veterinary Dermatology 15(1):25-30.
Diaz SF, Torres SM, Nogueira SA, Gilbert S, Jessen CR. 2006. The
impact of body site, topical melatonin and brushing on hair
regrowth after clipping normal Siberian husky dogs. Veterinary
Dermatology 17(1):45-50.
Gross TL. 2005. Atrophic diseases of the adnexa. In: Gross TL, Ihrke
PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK (eds), Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat:
Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, 2nd edn, Pp. 480-517.
Oxford: Blackwell Science.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE. 2000. Muller and Kirk's SmafI
Animal Dermatofogy, 6th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Walder EJ. 2005. Genodermatosis: alopecia and hypotrichosis. In:
Hillier A, Foster AP, Kwochka KW (eds), Advarces in Veterinary
Dermatology, Vol. 5, Pp. 360-364. Oxford: Blackwell Science.
oy ainwele uexsev ue ui enadoe buiddpisod /z'e'e by
3.3.8 Canine pattern alopecia
10 months.
Manon Paradis
also often cause lack of hair regrowth after clipping,
and alopecia X (see Section 3.3.4).
Canine pattern alopecia (CPA, syn. canine pattern
 Postclipping alopecia is diagnosed by the signal-
baldness) is a relatively common but poorly studied
 ment, the history, and the clinical presentation. Rou-
skin disorder characterized by an acquired bilaterally
tine blood/urine and hormonal tests should be car-
symmetric hair loss. Different syndromes have been
ried out to rule out an underlying endocrinopathy.
described depending on the body areas involved.
Skin biopsies should be collected from areas of com-
plete alopecia. They will reveal mostly telogen hair
follicles and eventually mild epidermal hyperkerato-
3.3.8.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
sis. Telogen hair shafts are retained. Very few hair fol-
CPA is a breed-specific folliculopathy, somehow simi-
licles in late catagen may be seen (Gross 2005; Walder
lar to but clearly not identical to *human pattern bald-
2005).
ness," that is, human androgenetic alopecia (Kaufman
et al. 1998; Whiting 2001). The term “canine pattern
3.3.7.3 Therapy
baldness," initially used by analogy to the human dis-
ease, should be abandoned and replaced by “canine
If there is no underlying endocrinopathy, the hair re-
Jo pouad 1auoi e si yom suuo Zi-g ui smona
function, as seen in man with androgenic alopecia,
time than the 3-month average recently documented
has not been proven. The pathogenesis of CPA is cur-
in Labrador Retrievers (Diaz et al. 2004). Newly re-
rently not known. A central endocrine disorder has
grown hairs may be initially dark in color, especially
been ruled out, but the involvement of an abnormal-
anis aul se yns siu apaud, ym spaaq 
ity in a hormone receptor on the hair follicle is still
Husky and the Alaskan Malamute (Gross 2005). It is
debatable.
recommended to never shave sled dogs, unless it is
CPA may be an overshoot reaction to artificial se-
absolutely necessary.
lection pressure favoring the fine, delicate coat sought
by breeders who often attempt to manipulate the ap-
References
pearance ofa dog without considering possible genetic
damage (Paradis and Cerundolo 2005). Over the last
Credille KM, Slater MR, Moriello KA, Nachreiner RF, Tucker KA,
Dunstan RW. 2001. The effects of thyroid hormones on the skin of
Beagle dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 15:539-546.
able to significantly decrease the incidence of “ventral
Canine pattern alopecia 165
type" CPA by selective breeding but with the result of
"CPA ventral type" is seen in several breeds of
dogs generally having a coat not as fine.
s qons jeoo nu jo ad cauyos, e ym shop
Dachshund, Chihuahuas, Miniature Pinschers, Whip-
 pets, Greyhound, Italian Greyhound, Boston Terrier,
3.3.8.2 Diagnosis
Manchester Terrier, and Boxer. (Scott et al. 2001; Gross
The diagnosis of CPA is based on history, dermatolog-
et al. 2005; Paradis and Cerundolo 2005). Due to
ical examination, and exclusion of endocrinopathies
awareness of Dachshund breeders and careful breed-
such as hypothyroidism (see Section 3.3.1) and hyper-
ing program, the frequency of occurrence of this syn-
adrenocorticism (see Section 3.3.2) and of inflamma-
 drome has apparently decreased in this breed.
tory diseases such as alopecia areata (see Chapter 4.7).
"Bald thigh syndrome of Greyhound dogs" is a
However, the early onset of CPA and breed predis-
 poorly defined disorder generally described as hair loss
position make it quite distinctive from most of these
 at the caudolateral and/or lateral aspect of the thighs
disorders. Congenital alopecia (see Chapter 3.1) may
of racing Greyhounds (Schoning and Cowan 2000). It
need to be excluded in some cases.
may represent “"CPA ventral type," but could also be
caused by a yet unknown hair cycle abnormality (see
Section 3.3.9.5).
3.3.8.2.1 Cfinical presentation
3.3.8.2.1.1 Ventral-type pattern alopecia
3.3.8.2.1.2 Pinnal-type pattern alopecia
The most common syndrome “CPA ventral type" is
"CPA pinnal type" (syn. “canine pinnal alope-
characterized by a progressive alopecia developing
cia") is another syndrome of CPA, seen much
along the ventral neck, chest and abdomen, the cau-
less commonly than “CPA ventral type." It is ob-
domedial aspect of thighs, perineum, and the postau-
served mainly in Smooth-haired and Wirehaired
ricular regions (base of the ear pinnae). These dogs are
Dachshunds. The dogs are born with a normal
hair coat but develop a characteristic progressive
born with normal coats, but after 6 months of age a
alopecia restricted to the entire convex aspect of
gradually progressing hair loss develops in these body
regions (Fig. 3.3.28). This will progress for one year
pinna (Fig. 3.3.29). It is reported that the alopecia
starts around 6-9 months of age and may progress
or so, leaving the affected areas partially to completely
alopecic. The remaining hairs appear finer than nor-
 over several years to a completely bald and hyper-
mal. It has been reported that this syndrome is seen
pigmented pinna (Scott et al. 2001). However, in
almost exclusively in females (Scott et al. 2001); how-
some cases, the alopecia may be apparent only after
ever, the disease is also seen quite frequently in male
2 years of age and may spontaneously regress with
7
 dogs. The actual prevalence in males and females is
possible recurrences over the years. Some dogs may
79
also develop alopecia on the bridge of the nose.
unknown.
887
UQLIXbVxUmAVqC+H
Fig. 3.3.28 Canine pattern alopecia, ventral type, in a Minia-
Fig. 3.3.29 Canine pattern alopecia, pinnal type, in a
ture Pinscher. Note alopecia of neck, axilla, and abdomen.
dachshund. Multifocal alopecia on ear pinna and nose.
166 Non-inflammatory alopecias
a
(b)
Fig. 3.3.30 Canine pattern alopecia, pinnal type, in a Yorkshire
Terrier. (a) Hyperpigmentation of the nose; (b) hyperpigmenta-
tion of pinnae.
Although it is reported in the literature that males
sites should be selected as pinnal biopsies may lead to
are most commonly affected (Scott et al. 2001), it is
 damaged cartilage, prominent scarring, and distortion
also seen in females. The actual prevalence in males
(Gross et al. 2005).
and females is not known.
The dermatohistopathologic findings in CPA are
"Alopecia and melanoderma of Yorkshire Terrier"
not well defined, and in early cases abnormal features
p an rd v, on rs aa au s
can only be appreciated if a section from an affected
may in fact be a different appellation for the same
skin is compared with a normal one. The changes ob-
disorder. It is characterized by an acquired alopecia
served can be subtle and at low power CPA might look
and progressive hyperpigmentation restricted to the
like an endocrinopathy, so clinicopathologic correla-
convex aspect of pinnae and bridge of the nose (Scott
tion is critical.
et al. 2001) (Fig. 3.3.30). Although most dogs remain
The findings are characterized by miniaturization
affected throughout their lifetime, some may recover
of anagen hair follicles ( Yager and Wilcock 1994; Scott
spontaneously.
et al. 2001; Gross et al. 2005). Since many biopsies
Pinnal alopecia can also be seen in Dachshunds with
are taken in a late stage of the disease, it might be
canine ear margin seborrhea. However, scaling and
difficult to confirm the presence of anagen follicles
crusting is the predominant feature and alopecia is
(Paradis and Cerundolo 2005). Proliferation markers
mostly marginal (Scott et al. 2001; Gross et al. 2005).
such as Ki67 could be used to prove that the cells of
the follicular bulb are cycling, confirming that atten-
3.3.8.2.2 Histopathology
uated anagen follicles are present. Hair follicles are
characterized by moderate to severe decrease in size
Skin biopsies are rarely required to confirm a diagno-
and length with fine residual hair shaft, but overall
sis of CPA, but might be useful in some cases, at least
hair follicle units are present in normal numbers and
to rule out other disorders. Skin biopsies are not fre-
most are in anagen (Yager and Wilcock 1994; Gross
quently performed in CPA, in part due to the biopsy
et al. 2005) (Fig.3.3.31).
sites offten requiring general anesthesia and the possi-
Secondary features of CPA are keratin accumula-
ble permanent visible scarring at biopsy sites. If hair
tion in the small follicles and infundibular melanin
loss is present on regions besides the pinnae, other
clumping caused by shrinkage following apotosis that
Canine pattern alopecia 167
b
and catagen hair follicles occur; hair shafts are small
then drops out and accumulates in macrophages. The 
 istence of this distinct disorder is doubtful since most
epidermis is generally unremarkable except for some
 cases described in the literature were most likely the
cases of “CPA ventral type," or less commonly cases
(Paradis and Cerundolo 2005).
of canine recurrent flank alopecia and canine alopecia
X. Nevertheless, because of serious adverse reactions
3.3.8.3 Therapy
seen with exogenous administration of estrogens, ther-
apeutic trial with this hormone is not recommended
Spontaneous hair regrowth in CPA is uncommon,
for such a benign and purely aesthetic disorder.
but it has been observed, at least in occasional cases
of “CPA pinnal type." Most dogs with CPA are not
treated, because it is a cosmetic problem only and also
3.3.8.3.2 Melatonin
because there is no known effective treatment, aside
In a study evaluating the efficacy of melatonin in ca-
for the possible beneficial effect of melatonin, estro-
nine recurrent flank alopecia, two Boxers with concur
gen, and finasteride.
rent CPA ventral type experienced an impressive hair
growth in the chest and ventral neck areas where hair
3.3.8.3.1 Estrogen
coat was previously sparse to absent (Paradis 1995).
On the basis ofthese unexpected findings, a pilot study
Estrogen is indeed potentially effective if the so-called
was then conducted to evaluate the efficacy of mela-
estrogen-responsive alopecia and “CPA ventral type"
tonin in the treatment of canine CPA (Paradis 1996).
are the same entity (Scott et al. 2001). Indeed, the ex-
 Eleven purebred dogs affected with “"CPA ventraltype"
168  Non-inflammatory alopecias
(a)
(q)
Fig. 3.3.32 Canine pattern alopecia, ventral type, in a Boxer. (a) Before melatonin therapy: (b) after melatonin therapy.
treated with melatonin (subcutaneous implants or oral
type, but again controlled clinical trials are lacking
 tablets) experienced mild to moderate hair growth in
(Paradis and Cerundolo 2005).
the affected areas (Fig. 3.3.32). Hair growth was no-
ticed as early as 6 weeks following initiation of treat-
ment and maximal growth was achieved 3-4 months
References
later.
No controlled studies investigating the efficacy of
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. 2005. Skin Diseases of
the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, 2nd edn.
 melatonin in CPA are yet available. However, in this
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
pilot study, many cases of "CPA ventral type" and
Kaufman KD, Olsen EA, Whiting D, Savin R, DeVillez R, Bergfeld
a few cases of “CPA pinnal type" have been treated
W, Price VH, Van Neste D, Roberts IL, Hordinsky M, Shapiro J,
Binkowitz B, Gormley GJ. 1998. Finasteride in the treatment of
with melatonin by several veterinary dermatologists
men with androgenic alopecia. Jourmal of the American Academy
and good to excellent results have been observed in
ofDermatology 39:578-589.
approximately 50-70% of dogs (Paradis 2000).
 Paradis M. 1995. Canine recurrent flank alopecia: treatment with
melatonin.Proceedings of the 1Ith AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Santa
Fe, NM, p. 49.
3.3.8.3.3 Finasteride
Paradis M. 1996. Melatonin therapy in canine pattern baldness.
ProceedingsoftheThirdWorldCongressofVeternaryDermatology
Finasteride, a 5α-reductase inhibitor preventing the
Edinburgh,Scotland,p.S3.
 Paradis M. 2000. Melatonin therapy in canine alopecia. In: Bonagura
conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, has
JD(ed.),Kurk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIII, Pp. 546-549.
been used with success in some cases of CPA ventral
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Breed-specific canine hair cycle abnormalities 169
Paradis M, Cerundolo R. 2005. Genodermatis: alopecia and hy-
3.3.9. 1.1 Clinicaf presentation
potrichoses. In: Hillier A, Foster AP, Kwochka KW (eds), Advamce
in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 5, Pp. 360-364. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing.
Alopecia in the Irish Water Spaniel is most likely inher-
Schoning PR, Cowan LA. 2000. Bald thigh syndrome of Greyhound
ited in a dominant autosomal trait (Cerundolo et al.
dogs: Gross and microscopic findings. Veterinary Dermatology
1999). In a recent survey, 28% Irish Water Spaniels
11:49-51.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE (eds). 2001. Mulfer and Kirk's
were affected by abnormal hair loss that was dis-
Smalf Animal Dermatology, 6th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
tributed on the laterodorsal neck, flanks, dorsum,
Whiting DA. 2001. Possible mechanisms of miniaturization during
rump, or caudal parts of the thighs, or any combina-
androgenetic alopecia or pattern hair loss. Jourmai of the American
Academy ofDermatology 45:S81-S86.
tion thereof. The rump was most consistently affected,
Yager JA,WilcockBP1994.ColorAtlasand TextofSurgical Pathology
followed by the thighs, neck, and trunk (Fig. 3.3.34).
of the Dog and Cat. London, England: Mosby Year Book.
Remaining hair in affected skin areas shows a brighter
color and is easily epilated. The coat may have a frizzy,
wooly, or puppy-like appearance due to loss of primary
hairs. Pruritus is rare, unless secondary infection is
3.3.9 Breed-specific canine
present.
hair cycle abnormalities
In females, alopecia develops 6-8 weeks after the
first or second estrus cycle with subsequent hair re-
Rosario Cerundolo, Manon
growth 3-4 weeks later. Alopecia may reoccur during
subsequent estrus cycles and may become permanent.
Paradis, and Lars Mecklenburg
 In some dogs, alopecia did not occur when estrus cy-
 cles were suppressed by progestagens, but reoccured
when estrus cycle suppression was discontinued.
Hair cycle disorders that have been discussed so far
In males, alopecia starts later in life, mostly between
are those that can be clearly distinguished on the basis
 5 and 6 years of age. There is usually no variation of
of clinical, morphological, and other parameters. Still,
alopecia with season. Hair loss progresses continu-
there are a variety of alopecic diseases in dogs that are
 ously and finally becomes permanent. Both intact and
frequently referred to as “follicular dysplasia" that have
neutered male dogs can be affected.
not been reviewed so far. Most of these diseases are
No consistent endocrine abnormalities have been
actually hair cycle abnormalities. The term "dysplasia,'
 demonstrated in Irish Water Spaniels with alopecia.
however, is inaccurate to classify these diseases as, first,
Although some patients will show decreased T4 serum
they do not represent a developmental abnormality
concentrations, most dogs had a normal response to
(such as in congenital alopecia) and, second, they do
TSH stimulation, excluding hypothyroidism as the
not represent a specific disease. In fact, the diseases are
primary cause of alopecia. Hyperadrenocorticism had
very different between the breeds. Therefore, it is more
been excluded in all cases, on the basis of a lack of
accurate to talk about a hair cycle abnormality that
 appropriate clinical and biochemical signs and a nor-
occurs in a specific breed where it has characteristic
 mal ACTH stimulation test. Although an estrogenic
features. Although the etiology is not understood so
influence on hair follicles is quite likely in this disease,
far, a marked breed and family predisposition suggests
 estrogen concentrations are usually not significantly
hereditary factors being involved in the pathogenesis.
elevated. Increased 17-OHP concentrations have been
found after ACTH stimulation, but their significance
3.3.9.1 Alopecia in the Irish
has not been elucidated so far (Cerundolo et al. 2000).
Clinical differential diagnoses of Irish Water
Water Spaniel
Spaniel alopecia include endocrinopathies such as
The Irish Water Spaniel is an old Irish dog breed that is
hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, and hypere-
characterized by lack of hair on the throat and the tail
 strogenism. Canine recurrent flank alopecia has not
(Fig. 3.3.33). Beside these “desired" patches of alope-
been described in the Irish Water Dog, but, if present,
cia, unwanted or “pathologic" hair loss has been de-
 may overlap with the breed-specific alopecia described
scribed in the Irish Water Spaniel (Cerundolo et al.
herein. Canine recurrent flank alopecia, however, does
2000).
 not progress to the caudal thighs or the neck.
170 Non-inflammatory alopecias
a
b]
Fig. 3.3.33 Normal alopecia in the lrish Water Spaniel. (a) Lack of hairs on the ventral surface of the neck; (b) alopecia on the tail
(Reprinted with permission from Cerundolo et al. (2000).)
3.3.9.1.2 Histopathology
trichorrhexis nodosa, has been noted in rare cases of
 Irish Water Spaniel alopecia. However, trichorrhexis
Histopathology will show most hair follicles in late
nodosa always resolved within weeks and may have
catagen or telogen, with a markedly dilated follicular
infundibulum, flled with orthokeratotic hyperkerato-
been a sequela of weathering or external trauma to the
hair shaft rather than a sign of follicular dysplasia.
sis (Fig. 3.3.35). Thus, hair follicle morphology resem-
bles that of canine recurrent flank alopecia. In addi-
tion, slight aggregation of pigment may be observed
3.3.9.1.3 Therapy
either within the hair shaft or within the hair follicle
outer root sheath, associated with few perifollicular
Since etiology and pathogenesis of alopecia in Irish
melanophages. Pigmentary clumping is most likely a
Water Dogs are unknown, no specific treatment can be
sequela of premature catagen induction rather than
 initiated. Some cases have well responded to a fish and
a sign of an inherited pigmentary dysplasia. Inflam-
 corn diet. However, even if this treatment improves the
 matory changes suggestive of a secondary superficial
 skin condition and may stimulate temporary growth
pyoderma do frequently occur in alopecic skin from
 of fine hair, in most cases alopecia is progressive and
Irish Water Spaniels. Trichomalacia, characteristic of 1
 usually permanent. Affected dogs are healthy as this
Breed-specific canine hair cycle abnormalities 171
(a)
(b)
Hg. 3.3.34 Hereditary alopecia in an lrish Water Spaniel
(a) Alopecia of the dorsal and lateral trunk; (b) alopecia of
the thighs. (Reprinted with permission from Cerundolo et al
(2000).)
is just an aesthetic condition, but they should not be
3.3.9.2 Alopecia in the Portuguese
bred. Levothyroxine administration does not improve
Water Dog
the condition. Pyoderma, if present, needs to be treated
with systemic antibiotics and mild antiseborrheic or
Portuguese Water Dogs are thought to derive from
antibacterial shampoos (see 4.1.1.3.).
the Standard Poodle. Like Poodles they have a curly
(a)
(b)
with lack of anagen hair follicles; (b) hair follicles in catagen. (Reprinted with permission from Cerundolo et al. (2ooo).)
172 Non-inflammatory alopecias
al
b]
Fig. 3.3.36 Inherited alopecia in the Portuguese Water Dog.
(a) Alopecia of the dorsal and lateral trunk; (b) alopecia of the
rump and thighs. (Reprinted with permission from Miller and
Scott (1995).)
coat. A particular form of alopecia has been described
root sheath have been described, but their significance
 a s iei so rem asod a 
is yet unknown (Miller and Scott 1995).
morphologically similar to the alopecia found in Irish
Water Spaniels (Miller and Scott 1995).
Hair loss occurs in the saddle and flank region at
3.3.9.3 Alopecia in the Chesapeake
a median age of 2 years. Both males and females are
Bay retriever
affected. Periocular skin or caudal thighs may show
e maa ios a  m se eo
The Chesapeake Bay Retriever is a hunting dog that
several months, but in most cases falls out again during
originates from North America by breeding Curly-
subsequent episodes. Regrown hair is reported abnor-
coated and Flat-coated Retrievers with Irish Water
mal, being dull, dry, and fragile (Fig. 3.3.36).
Spaniels and some other breeds. The Chesapeake Bay
Histopathology will reveal a marked infundibu-
Retriever has a dense and short hair coat. Recently, an
lar orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis with hair follicles
 alopecic condition has been described in the Chesa-
mostly being in the catagen and telogen phase. Sim-
 peake Bay Retriever (Cerundolo et al. 2005) that clin-
ilar to Irish Water Spaniels, pigmentary clumping is
ically and morphologically resembles alopecia in the
usually found in hair shafts in the hair follicle outer
Irish Water Spaniel (see above).
root sheath. Misshapen small anagen hair bulbs and
Hair loss can start as early as 5 months of age but
vacuolar alteration in the hair matrix and the inner
usually affects dogs between 1.5 and 4 years of age.
Breed-specific canine hair cycle abnormalities  173
Histopathologyisidentical to the alopecia described
in Irish Water Spaniels and resembles canine recur-
rent flank alopecia, although the disease is distinct
clinically, since alopecia is not confined to the flank
area and alopecia does not show cyclic regression
(Fig. 3.3.38). Miniaturized hair follicles have been de-
scribed, but their significance is yet unknown. As with
the alopecia in Irish Water Spaniels, the alopecia in
Chesapeake Bay Retrievers does not respond to treat-
ment with levothyroxine or melatonin.
3.3.9.4 Alopecia in the curly-coated
retriever
Fig. 3.3.37 Hereditary alopecia in the Chesapeake Bay Re-
The authors are aware of a form of alopecia in
triever. Hair loss affects the lateral side of the body and the
curly-coated retrievers that is clinically and histolog-
thighs.
ically similar to the alopecia described in Irish Water
Alopecia can occur in intact and neutered male and
Spaniels, Portuguese Water Dogs, and the Chesapeake
female individuals, and ranges from sparse hair to
Bay Retrievers. However, no scientific studies have yet
complete baldness. Axillae, ventrum, flanks, rump,
been published on this topic.
latero-ventral thorax, or caudal thighs or any com-
bination thereof are affected (Fig. 3.3.37). Secondary
3.3.9.5 Alopecia in the greyhound
pyoderma may occur. Routine hematological and bio-
chemical investigations are within normal limits, and
Some Greyhounds, particularly male racing dogs, de-
no consistent endocrine abnormalities have been de-
velop a form of alopecia on the lateral and cau-
tected in alopecic Chesapeake Bay Retrievers. Hy-
dal thighs, eventually spreading to the abdomen and
pothyroidism,hyperadrenocorticism, and hyperestro-
ventral thorax (Fig. 3.3.39) (Schoning and Cowan
 genism have been ruled out in all described cases.
2000; Scott et al. 2001; Paradis and Cerundolo 2005).
(a)
Fg. 3.3.38 Skin histology of hereditary alopecia in the Chesapeake Bay Retriever. (a) Pronounced distension of follicular infundibula
Cerundolo et al. (2005).)
174 Non-inflammatory alopecias
3.3.9.6 Alopecia in the Pont Audemer
Spaniel
The Pont Audemer spaniel originates from France and
derives from the Irish Water Spaniel. It has a brown
hair coat. Recently, a specific form of alopecia has been
described in the Pont Audemer spaniel (Guaguere etal.
 2000). Alopecia affected the trunk and ears and firstly
appeared at the age of 7-18 months. Biopsies from
affected skin regions showed infundibular hyperker-
atosis, pigment clumping in hair shafts and outer root
sheath, and some degree of vacuolar degeneration and
apoptosis of keratinocytes from the outer and inner
root sheath. No information on hair cycle stages was
provided in the original report of this disease. En-
docrine tests were all normal, ruling out hypothy-
roidism, hyperadrenocorticism, or hyperestrogenism.
Melatonin treatment has not been effective.
3.3.9.7 Alopecia in the Siberian Husky
and the Alaskan Malamute
Hg. 3.3.39 Alopecia of the thighs in a Greyhound (bald thigh
Nordic dog breeds such as the Siberian Husky and the
syndrome).
Alaskan Malamute normally have a dense hair coat.
These breeds may be affected with alopecia X, that is,
a rather unspecific hair cycle arrest that occurs in many
plush-coated dogs and the Miniature and Toy Poodle
(see Section 3.3.4.). The “follicular dysplasia" that has
The disease is known as *bald thigh syndrome" in grey-
been described in the Siberian Husky and the Alaskan
hounds and it occurs in young adults with an age of
Malamute (Post et al. 1988) is most likely identical to
approximately 2-3 years. Histology shows infundibu-
the disease “alopecia X."
lar hyperkeratosis and a lack of anagen hair follicles.
Most hair follicles are in late catagen or telogen stages.
Bald thigh syndrome shares some aspects with “CPA
References
Cerundolo R, Lloyd DH, Pidduck HG. 1999. Studies on the inher-
genetically related to CPA ventral type as seen in dogs
itance of hair loss in the Irish Water spaniel. Veterimary Record
with a “short/fine" type ofhair coat (see Section 3.3.8).
145:542.
The pathogenesis of this hair cycle abnormality in
Cerundolo R, Mauldin EA, Goldschmidt MH, Beyerlein SL, Refsal
 greyhounds has not been sufficiently investigated yet.
KR, Oliver JW. 2005. Adult-onset hair loss in Chesapeake Bay re-
trievers:as clinical and histological study.Veternary Dermatology
It is possible that a few cases may be due to, or may at
16:39.
least be aggravated by, endogenous testosterone (Par-
Cerundolo R, McEvoy F, MacNeil PE, Evans H. 2000. An analysis
adis and Cerundolo 2005). Low thyroid hormone con-
of factors underlying hypotrichosis and alopecia in Irish Water
Spaniel in the United Kingdom. Veterinary Dermatology 1l:107.
centrations during the racing period could also trigger
Guaguere E, Degorce-Rubiales F, Poujade A, Lecanu J, Petriowski
the disease (Hill et al. 2001). To make a final diagnosis,
M, Prelaud P. 2000. Genetic follicular dysplasia in Pont Aude
mer Spaniel dog: A report of eight cases. Veterinary Dermatology
hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, and hypere-
11(1 Suppl):53.
strogenism have to be ruled out. No treatment has been
Hill RC, Fox LE,
, Lewis DD, Beale KM, Nachreiner RF, Scott
suggested in the literature. Hair generally regrows (at
KC, Sundstrom DA, Jones GL, Butterwick RF. 2001. Effects of
least atthe lateral aspect ofthighs) when racing activity
racing and training on serum thyroid hormone concentrations
in racing Greyhounds. American Journal of Veterinary Research
is stopped (Paradis and Cerundolo 2005).
62(12):1969-1972.
Breed-specific canine hair cycle abnormalities 175
Miller WH, Scott DW. 1995. Follicular dysplasia of the Portuguese 
Siberian husky.fournalofthe American AnimalHospital Associa-
water dog. Veterinary Dermatology 6:67.
tion 24:659-662.
Paradis M, Cerundolo R. 2005. Genodermatis: Alopecia and hy-
Schoning PR, Cowan LA. 2000. Bald thigh syndrome of Greyhound
potrichoses. In: Hillier A, Foster AP, Kwochka KW (eds), Advance
dogs: Gross and microscopic findings. Veterinary Dermatology
in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 5, Pp. 360-364. Blackwell Pub-
11:49.
lishing.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE. 2001. Muller  Kirk's Small Animal
Post K, Dignean MA, Clark EG. 1988. Hair follicle dysplasia in a
Dermatology, 6th edn. Philadelphia: Ed Saunders.
3.4
Hair follicle dystrophy and atrophy
Rosario Cerundolo and Lars Mecklenburg
Hair follicles, as it has been mentioned and exten-
is being seen more frequently in this species nowadays.
sively described in other chapters, lose cells (i.e., ker-
ue, pau uaaq ose s audos au 
atinocytes) when they undergo cyclic regression (cata-
effluvium? emphasizing that affected anagen hair folli-
gen) and rest (telogen). These physiological stages
 cles lose their hair shafts. However, it has been demon-
of hair growth cycling should not be termed “atro-
strated that both a dystrophic anagen and a dystrophic
-od e jussda asssu pou op  aus d
catagen can exist (Hendrix et al. 2005). Therefore, the
logical change (Dunstan et al. 2001). True atrophy
term “dystrophy" is more appropriate. Hair follicle
is represented by a loss of hair follicle cells beyond
the physiological telogen phase. Such atrophy of hair
both conditions may blend into one another.
follicles indeed exists in domestic animals, although
it is comparatively rare. Atrophic hair follicles have
 isda (sa sue, pu uaaq os
3.4.1 Chemotherapy-induced hair follicle
small size compared to the overall size of dermis
dystrophy in dogs and cats
and other cutaneous adnexa. Atrophic hair follicles
are histopathologically characterized by small rem-
Chemotherapy-induced alopecia is a very well-known
nants of keratinocyte strands that are surrounded by a
and widely dreaded adverse event in human cancer
markedly thickened connective tissue sheath (see Sec-
patients. The human hair follicle appears to be par-
tion 2.2.3.5).
ticularly vulnerable for cytotoxic drugs. Chemothera-
 Dystrophy by definition is a degenerative process
 peutic agents that cause alopecia are alkylating agents
odion ueio ue jo uouu, on anp si ie
(e.g-, melphalan, chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide,
logical hallmarks of hair follicle dystrophy are unco-
and cisplatin), antimetabolites (e.g-, methotrexate and
 ordinated vacuolar degeneration or apoptosis of ker-
 5-fluorouracil), vinca alkaloids (e.g., vincristine and
atinocytes that is distinct from apoptosis occurring
vinblastine), topoisomerase inhibitors (e.g-, doxoru-
during catagen (see Section 2.2.3.4). Further charac-
bicin), and antitumoral antibiotics (e.g-, actinomycin
teristics of hair follicle dystrophy are uneven distribu-
D and bleomycin) (Herzberg 1966; Fitzpatrick 2003).
tion of melanin within the hair shafts, perifollicular
Toxic substances (e.g-, selenium, molybdenum, thal.
 melanophages, a wide-open hair canal, distortion of
lium, and arsenic) have also been reported to cause
the entire follicle, and an irregular diameter of hair
alopecia (Yun and Kim 2007).
follicles (Hendrix et al. 2005). The most typical form
Cancer chemotherapy is nowadays more popular in
of hair folicle dystrophy occurs with cytotoxic drugs,
veterinary medicine. Dogs and cats are increasingly
that is, drugs that interfere with mitosis. Although
treated for internal malignancies with drugs such as
hair follicles of domestic animals are much less sensi-
doxorubicin. Therefore, hair loss is being seen in dogs
tive to such a treatment than are human hair follicles,
 and cats as well, although its clinical and morpho-
hair follicle dystrophy may still appear in domestic
logical characteristics are by far less striking than in
animals. Since dogs are increasingly treated with cyto-
humans (Chun et al. 2001; Kisseberth and MacEwen
toxic drugs against malignancies, dystrophic alopecia
2001).
178  Non-inflammatory alopecias
 Doxorubicin and other cytotoxic cancer drugs in-
 terfere with cell division and thus target rapidly pro-
liferating cell populations such as bone marrow stem
cells, gastrointestinal epithelium, and finally hair folli-
cle matrix cells. Impaired mitotic and metabolic pro-
cesses in actively growing hair follicles will lead to
thinning of the hair shaft that becomes fragile and
susceptible to fracture with minimal trauma. Hair loss
in chemotherapy-induced alopecia can be mainly due
pue asuoi) ssot nu ueu iae seyeaiq ieq o
Van Scott 1960). Disruption of proliferation of matrix
cells will also result in uncoordinated cessation of hair
shaft elongation. Melanin pigment will eventually spill
Fig. 3.4.1 Chemotherapy-induced alopecia in a Labrador fol-
out of the hair follicle, which is then taken up by per-
lowing treatment with doxorubicin. Hair loss of the ventral
ifollicular macrophages (melanophages). This results
neck.
 in the typical morphology of dystrophic hair follicles.
Studies in mice have demonstrated that the mor-
phology of hair follicle dystrophy after chemotherapy
Alopecia may begin on the head (Fig. 3.4.1) to be-
is variable and depends on simultaneous stimulation
 come multifocal and then diffuse affecting the trunk,
or inhibition of hair growth (Ohnemus et al. 2004;
 and occasionally the extremities. Hairs are easily epi-
Hendrix et al. 2005). Dystrophic hair follicles can re-
lated. The severity of alopecia may depend on the drug
main in anagen, most likely when the toxic insult still
 as well as the individual predisposition. Dry skin may
allows some proliferation of matrix cells. On the other
be present in animals receiving doxorubicin due to
sebaceous glands degeneration (Van Vleet and Fer-
ture catagen development. This will lead to telogen
rans 1980; Selleri et al. 2006). Clipped areas may show
hair folicles that can recover from the chemotherapy-
 delayed hair regrowth. Beagles receiving weekly stan-
induced insult and can grow normally once treatment
 dard doses of intravenous doxorubicin develop alope-
has been discontinued. In humans, dystrophic ana-
 cia within 4-6, weeks, affecting the head (lips, muzzle,
 gen is a common feature with chemotherapy-induced
 and eyes) and then the thorax, abdomen, and the prox-
 alopecia, whereas this has rarely been observed in dogs.
imal inner areas of the limbs. They may also develop
Most dogs with doxorubicin-induced alopecia reveal
erythema and pruritus in alopecic areas, occasionally
telogen hair follicles, suggesting that they have under-
resulting in dry and scaly skin and ulceration (Van
 gone the dystrophic catagen pathway and await stim-
Vleet and Ferrans 1980). Cats can lose their guard
ulation of a new anagen phase. Therefore, many dogs
hairs and whiskers. Hair regrowth may vary in color
show biopsies that are compatible with telogen efflu-
and texture (Van Vleet and Ferrans 1980; Chun et al.
vium rather than hair follicle dystrophy (Gross et al.
2007).
 2005). However, the description of morphological le-
Diagnosis
 of chemotherapy-induced alopecia
sions in biopsies from dogs and cats treated with
should be straightforward. The history of previous
chemotherapeutic agents is still very sparse.
treatments or possible contact with toxic substances is
suggestive ofthe disease. A trichogram will show both
telogen hairs and fractured hair shafts, often character-
3.4.1.1 Clinical presentation
ized by irregular pigmentation and structural defects.
Clinically, chemotherapy-induced hair loss can be very
 In localized forms of alopecia, causes of folliculitis
variable. The severity of hair loss after chemother-
 should be ruled out.
 apy depends on the route of administration, the dose,
and the treatment schedule. Hair loss usually be-
3.4.1.2 Histopathology
gins 7-10 days following the initiation of chemother-
 apy and becomes most clinically apparent within 1-2
Skin biopsies may reveal changes in the anagen hair
months.
bulbs with the presence of pyknotic and karyorrhectic
Hair follicle dystrophy and atrophy  179
(a)
Hg. 3.4.2 Skin histology of chemotherapy-induced alopecia. (a)
Dog: (b) rat. Note apoptotic keratinocytes in the hair bulb.
nuclei in the hair matrix (Fig. 3.4.2). Keratinization
change in the color, texture, and type of hair ( Yun and.
within the inner and outer root sheath will be dis-
Kim 2007).
turbed and dysplastic hair shafts may be seen within
the hair canal. No inflammation should target the hair
3.4.2 Canine dermatomyositis
bulb. Epidermis and dermis can be normal or may
show signs of atrophy (Van Vleet and Ferrans 1980;
 Dermatomyositis is a well-characterized disease in
Yager 1994).
Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs (Hargis et al. 1984;
 Poodles, Old English Sheepdogs, and Terriers are
Ferguson et al. 2000). It occurs in young dogs less than
reported to be at increased risk (Chun et al. 2007). It is
6 months of age that show a familial predisposition
quite likely that dog breeds with many anagen hair fol-
(familial dermatomyositis). A similar disease that
licles are more susceptible to chemotherapy-induced
is indistinguishable from familial dermatomyositis
alopecia than are dogs with a predominance of telogen
 Occurs spontaneously in other breeds. Again, very
hair follicles, as a lack of cell proliferation will protect
young individuals are affected, but no familial pre-
from the influence of the chemotherapeutic agent. As
disposition is known (sportaneous dermatomyositis).
in humans, chemotherapy-induced alopecia is an ac-
 Dermatomyositis starts on the head where crusting
ceptable side effect that is outweighed by the bene-
and alopecia occur in the periorbital and perioral skin
fit of the treatment. No treatment is available other
(Fig. 3.4.3). Similar lesions may develop on the tips of
than cessation of the chemotherapeutic agent. Alope-
the ear pinnae, atthe claw fold (eponychium), atthe tip
cia is reversible, since hair follicle stem cells are usually
of the tail, or at any bony prominence. Ulceration may
not affected (Amoh et al. 2007). Hair regrowth begins
develop in severely affected patients. In addition to
several weeks after the cessation of chemotherapy. In
skin lesions, claws may become dystrophic. Most dogs
humans, approximately 65% of patients experience a
show some degree of skeletal muscle involvement that
180  Non-inflammatory alopecias
evidence of myositis with interstitial inflammation and
myofiber degeneration and regeneration ( Hargis et al.
1986).
Etiology and pathogenesis of dermatomyositis are
 not yet known, although inheritance of dermato-
myositis in Shetland Sheepdogs has been linked to
canine chromosome 35 (Clark et al. 2005). It is most
likely that vascular lesions and local ischemia play a
central role in disease progress. This can explain the
distribution of lesions that occur at pressure points
(carpus, tarsus) and areas of low sustained circulation.
Therapy of dermatomyositis comprises prevention of
trauma and excessive solar exposure, as these factors
 can worsen the disease. In mild lesions, spontaneous
Hg. 3.4.3 Dermatomyositis in a Collie. Alopecia and crusting
healing is possible. In more severe lesions, patients re-
of periocular skin and lips
quire systemic therapy. Pentoxifyline (25 mg/kg twice
daily) has shown some efficacy in dogs with famil.
ial canine dermatomyositis (Rees and Boothe 2003).
can vary from subtle atrophy oftemporal and masseter
 Other options are prednisone ( 1 mg/kg daily), vitamin
 muscle to generalized muscular atrophy with megae-
E, or lipid supplements.
1985a,b).
3.4.3 Ischemic dermatopathy following
Whereas very earlylesions may show dystrophic hair
vaccine administration in dogs and cats
 follicles (with keratinocyte vacuolation and apopto-
sis), most biopsies from dermatomyositis patients wil
Ischemic dermatopathy can be the result of vaccine
reveal marked hair follicle atrophy (Fig. 3.4.4). This
administration to dogs or cats. Vaccine-associated is-
is accompanied by a cell-poor often very mild lym-
chemic dermatopathy is usually seen in adult animals
phohistiocytic interface dermatitis (rarely with cleft
(Vitale et al. 1999). It occurs 2-3 months after vaccine
formation) and dermal pallor with rarefied collagen
administration, but it may even take longer to develop
bundles (Gross and Kunkle 1987). Some biopsies may
clinically. It can occur as a focal lesion overlying the site
demonstrate evidence of a cell-poor vasculitis and/or
of vaccine administration, or it can be widespread. The
(a)
Hg. 3.4.4 Skin histology of canine dermatomyositis. (a) Moderate diffuse inflammation in the dermis and marked atrophy of hair
follicles; (b) perivascular lymphoplasmacytic inflammation with scattered apoptotic keratinocytes in the epidermis.
Hair follicle dystrophy and atrophy  181
niculitis is typically a disease of long-haired toy breeds
such as Miniature Poodles, Bichon Frises, Shih Tzu,
Lhasa Apso, Maltese, Yorkshire Terrier, Silky Terrier,
and Chihuahua.
The localized form of ischemic dermatopathy does
usually not require therapy. If inflammation is promi
nent, glucocorticoids may be used. The generalized
form of ischemic dermatopathy requires systemic ther-
apy. As for dermatomyositis, pentoxifylline (25 mg/kg
twice daily) or prednisone ( 1 mg/kg daily) can be used.
 In dogs, dapsone (1 mg/kg 3 times a day) can be used
as well. Rarely do patients need more aggressive im-
 munosuppressive therapy with higher doses of pred-
 nisone, cyclophosphamide, or azathioprine.
Fig. 3.4.5 Vaccine-induced ischemic dermatopathy in a dog
3.4.4 Canine traction alopecia
local form typically occurs over the shoulders, back, or
the posterolateral thighs and represents a firm circular
A severe form of atrophic hair losshas been repeatedly
patch of erythema and alopecia. Old lesions will have
described in long-haired dogs with the use of rubber
a shiny appearance with mild scaling (Fig. 3.4.5). The
bands or barrette placement (Rosenkrantz et al. 1989;
generalized form has only been described in the dog
 Ordeix et al. 2001). These grooming devices are used
so far. Clinically, it mirrors canine dermatomyositis,
to style hairs, usually on the top of the head. It is
suggesting that the disease is caused by local ischemia
 assumed that the devices disrupt cutaneous blood flow
of skin regions that are prone to impaired circulation.
and thus induce malnutrition of hair follicles. These
The difference is the older age of onset and often a
e u ymsai Auy Aeu jeu Audoe renpeia oapun
more widespread and more severe form of the disease.
permanent loss of hair follicles and scarring. Histology
Rarely, a similar disease in the Jack Russell Terrier has
will show atrophic hair follicles. In late stages, follicles
been described where no history of previous vaccina-
vanish and are completely replaced by bands of fibrous
tion was evident (Parker and Foster 1996).
tissue (scar) with only some melanophages labeling
Histologically, the localized form of ischemic der-
the previous site of hair folicles. One report describes
matopathy will show dystrophic and/or atrophic hair
a vasculitis that had developed at the site of alopecia
follicles and dermal pallor with rarefied collagen bun-
(Ordeix et al. 2001).
 dlles. In addition, the panniculus will demonstrate
a nodular inflammatory reaction comprising large
3.4.5 Feline post-traumatic alopecia
macrophages and giant cells that surround a central
area of necrosis, often with basophilic debris (Hen-
An atrophic form of alopecia on the rump has been
drick and Dunagan 1991). The basophilic material
described in cats that have experienced traumatic
can also be seen within macrophages and giant cells.
 pelvic fracture (Declerq 2004). It is speculated that
 Eosinophils may accompany the histiocytic inflam-
the trauma disrupts blood supply to the skin and thus
mation. Lymphocytes frequently aggregate in nodular
 is responsible for an ischemic atrophy of cutaneous
lymphoid follicles around blood vessels in the periph-
adnexa. Hair loss is seen within days after trauma and
ery of the necrosis. In ischemic dermatopathy induced
in most cases is permanent, despite a moderate re-
by rabies vaccine in dogs (canine postrabies vaccina-
growth of hair in the periphery. Alopecia is due to a
tion panniculitis), the lesions as described above are
severe atrophy of hair follicles. This is usually accom-
accompanied by cell-poor vasculitis of small blood
panied by some perifollicular fibrosis, fbrosis of the
vessels in the panniculus and the deep dermis. Vas-
subepidermal dermis, atrophy of sebaceous glands and
culitis may be very subtle. It is most likely associated
 apocrine glands, and often degeneration of adipocytes
with deposition of rabies antigen in the vascular wall
in the subcutis. There is no therapy for follicular at-
(Wilcock and Yager 1986). Postrabies vaccination pan-
rophy. Hair follicles that have undergone atrophy are
182  Non-inflammatory alopecias
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.4.6 Feline paraneoplastic alopecia. (a) Shiny appearance
of skin and extensive alopecia on the abdomen; (b) alopecia on 
the face. (Courtesy of C. Nett.)
 permanentlylost, as it must be assumed that follicular
 pancreatic malignancy that may have already metas-
stem cells have vanished. The prognosis for regrowth
tasized into the lung and liver. Some patients may
therefore is guarded. However, it will represent a mere
show excessive grooming that can further contribute
cosmetic problem.
to alopecia. However, the main form of alopecia is a
lack of hair fiber growth, not breaking of hair fibers
due to grooming. Skin biopsy results show atrophic
3.4.6 Feline paraneoplastic alopecia
hair follicles meaning they are smaller than expected
A form of alopecia associated with internal malig-
in telogen. Anagen hair follicles are lacking. Atrophic
nancies occasionally occurs in the old cat (Brooks et
hair folicles are characterized by few keratinocytes in
al. 1994; Pascal-Tenorio et al. 1997; Godfrey 1998).
the isthmus region that are surrounded by a slightly
The vast majority of cases has been presented with
thickened connective tissue sheath (Fig. 3.4.7). Small,
pancreatic adenocarcinomas, but it has also been re-
 condensed dermal papillae are occasionally found at
 ported in a cat with hepatocellular and cholangio-
 the bottom ofthese epithelial strands. Additional char-
cellular carcinoma (Pascal-Tenorio et al. 1997; Mar-
acteristic findings are mild acanthosis and excessive
conato et al. 2007). Alopecia starts on the abdomen
desquamation of the stratum corneum that often is
and then rapidly spreads to the thorax and extrem-
 parakeratotic. Normal telogen hair folicles with or
ities, and eventually may become generalized (Fig.
without hair shafts may be found as well.
3.4.6). Hairs that are still present may epilate very
The diagnosis is confirmed by histopathology of
easily. The alopecic skin has a very characteristic shiny
skin biopsies and demonstration of a pancreatic neo-
and glistening appearance. Footpads are mostly dry
plasm, either by radiography, sonography, computed
with excessive circular scaling. Most cats show concur-
tomography, or laparotomy. Although cases of remis-
 rent anorexia and weight loss as a consequence of the
 sion after successful excision of the neoplasm have
Hair follicle dystrophy and atrophy 
183
(a)
Hg. 3.4.7 Skin histology of feline paraneoplastic alopecia. (a) At-
rophic hair follicles; (b) small remnants of follicular keratinocytes
 surrounded by a thickened connective tissue sheath.
been described (Tasker et al. 1999), most cases are
Ferguson EA, Cerundolo R, Lloyd DH, Rest J, Cappello R. 2000. Der-
diagnosed much too late for therapy. Most patients
matomyositis in five Shetland sheepdogs in the United Kingdom.
Veterinary Record 146:214.
are presented with a rapidly deteriorating disease that
Fitzpatrick JE. 2003. Mucocutaneous complications of antimeoplas-
requests euthanasia within 4 weeks.
tic therapy. In: Fitzpatrick AZ, Eisen K, Wolff KF, Freedberg IM,
Austen KF (eds), Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine,
6th edn, Pp. 1337-1347. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Godfrey DR. 1998. A case of feline paraneoplastic alopecia with sec-
References
ondary Malassezia-associated dermatitis. Journal of Smalf Animal
Practice 39:394.
Amoh Y, Li L, Katsuoka K, Hoffman RM. 2007. Chemotherapy
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK (eds). 2005. Skin Diseases 
targets the hair-follicle vascular network but not the stem cells.
ofthe Dog and Cat, 2nd edn. Ames: Blackwell Publishing.
Journal of Investigative Dermatology 127(1):1l-15.
Gross TL, Kunkle GA. 1987. The cutaneous histology of dermato-
Brooks DG, Campbell KL, Dennis JS, Dunstan RW. 1994. Pancreatic
myositis in collie dogs. Veterinary Pathology 24:11.
paraneoplastic alopecia in three cats. Journal of the American
Hargis AM, Haupt KH, Hegreberg GA, Prieur DI, Moore MP. 1984.
Animal Hospital Association 30:557.
 Familial canine dermatomyositis. Initial characterization of the
Chun R, Garrett L, MacEwen IG. 2001. Cancer chemotherapy. In:
cutaneous and muscular lesions. American Journat of Pathology
Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds), SmallAnimal Clinicat Oncology,
116:234.
 p. 95. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Hargis AM, Prieur DJ, Haupt KH, Collier LL. 1986. Post-mortem
Chun R, Garrett L, Vail DM. 2007. Cancer chemotherapy. In: With-
findings in a Shetland sheepdog with dermatomyositis. American.
row Stephen J, Vail David M (eds), Wethrow and MacEwen's Small
Journal of Pathology 123:480.
Anirmaf Chnicat Oncology,4th edn, pp. 163-192. Edinburgh: El-
Haupt KH, Prieur DJ, Hargis AM, Cowell RL, McDonald TL, Werner
sevier Saunders.
LL, Evermann JF. 1985a. Familial canine dermatomyositis: clin-
Clark LA, Credille KM, Murphy KE, Rees CA. 2005. Linkage of
icopathologic, immunologic, and serologic studies. American
dermatomyositis in the Shetland sheepdog to chromosome 35.
Journal of Veterinary Research 46:1870.
Veterinary Dermatology 16:392.
Haupt KH, Prieur DJ, Moore MP, Hargis AM, Hegreberg GA, Gavin
Crounse RC, Van Scott Ej. 1960. Changes in the scalp hair roots as a
 PR, Johnson RS. 198sb. Familial canine dermatomyositis: clin-
measure of toxicity from cancer chemotherapeutic drugs. Journaf
ical, electrodiagnostic, and genetic studies.American Journa of
of Investigative Dermatology 35:83-90.
Veterinary Research 46:1861.
 Declerq J. 2004. Alopecia and dermatopathy of the lower back
Hendrick MJ, Dunagan CA. 1991. Focal necrotizing granuloma-
following pelvic fractures in three cats. Veterinary Dermatology
tous panniculitis associated with subcutaneous injection of ra-
15:42.
bies vaccine in cats and dogs: 10 cases (1988-1989). fournal of the
Dunstan RW, Credille KM, Mansell J, Tucker KA, Bloom PI, Pe-
American Veterinary Medical Association 198:304.
 tersen AJ, Nachreiner RF, Davenport GM, Lupton CJ. 2001 April.
 Hendrix S, Handjiski B, Peters EM, Paus R. 2005. A guide to assess-
A common sense approach to the morphology of alopecia: ad-
 ing damage response pathways of the hair follicle: lessons from
dressing 10 points of follicular confusion. ISVD Meeting, Norfolk,
cyclosphosphamide-induced alopecia in mice. Journal of Irnves-
VA.
tigative Dermatology 125:42-51.
184  Non-inflammatory alopecias
Herzberg I1. 1966. Cytostatische alopecien einschlieflich thallium-
Rosenkrantz WS, Griffth CE, Walder EJ. 1989. Traction alopecia in
alopecien.Archiv Fur Klinische Und Experimentelle Dermatologie
the canine: four case reports. Calijfornia Veterinarian 43:7.
227:452-467.
 Julie A. Yager, Brian P. Wilcock (eds.) 1994. Color atlas and text
CC, Rumio C. 2006. Doxorubicin-induced alopecia is associated
of surgical pathology of the dog and cat. Dermatopathology and
with sebaceous gland degeneration. Journal of Investigative Der-
skin tumors. London: Mosby-Year Book. (ISBN-10: 0815197527,
matology 126(4):711-720.
ISBN-13: 978-0815197522).
 Sharov AA, Siebenhaar F, Sharova TY, Botchkareva NV, Gilchrest
 Kisseberth WC, MacEwen EG. 2001. Complications of cancer and
BA, Botchkarey VA. 2004. Fas signaling is involved in the con-
its treatment. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds), Smaff Animal
trolofhair folice response tochemotherapy.Cancer Research
Clinical Oncology, p. 95. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
64(17):6266-6270.
Marconato L, Albanese F, Viacava P, Marchetti V, Abramo F. 2007
Tasker S, Griffon DJ, Nuttall TJ, Hill PB. 1999. Resolution of
Aug. Paraneoplastic alopecia associated with hepatocellular car-
paraneoplastic alopecia following surgical removal of a pan-
cinoma in a cat. Veterinary Dermatology 18(4):267-271.
Creatic carcinoma in a cat. Journal of Small Animal Practice 40:
Ohnemus U, Unalan M, Handjiski B, Paus R. 2004. Topical estrogen
16.
accelerates hair regrowth in mice after chemotherapy-induced
Van Vleet JF, Ferrans VJ. 1980. Clinical observations, cutaneous
alopecia by favoring the dystrophic catagen response pathway to
 lesions, and hematologic alterations in chronic adriamycin in-
damage. fournal of Investigative Dermatofogy 122(1):7-13.
toxication in dogs with and without vitamin E and selenium
Ordeix L, Fondevila MD, Ferrer L, Fondati A. 2001. Traction alope-
supplementation. American Journal of Veterinary Research 41:
cia with vasculitis in an Old English sheepdog. Journal of Smalf
691.
Animal Practice 42:304.
Vitale CB, Gross TL, Magro CM. 1999. Vaccine-induced is-
 Parker WM, Foster RA. 1996. Cutaneous vasculitis in five Jack Rus-
chemic dermatopathy in the dog. Veterinary Dermatology 18
 sell terriers. Veterinary Dermatology 7:109.
:131.
Pascal-Tenorio A, Olivry T, Gross TL, Atlee BA, Ihrke PJ. 1997.
Wilcock BP, Yager JA. 1986. Focal cutaneous vasculitis and alopecia
 Paraneoplastic alopecia associated with internal malignancies in
at sites of rabies yaccination in dogs. Journal of the American
the cat. Veterinary Dermatology 8:47.
Veterinary Medical Association 188:1174.
ReesCA,BootheM.2003Therapeuticresponsetopentoxiflline
Yun SJ, Kim SJ. 2007. Hair loss pattern due to chemotherapy-
and its active metabolites in dogs with familial canine dermato-
 induced anagen efluvium: a cross-sectional observation. Der-
myositis. Veterinary Therapeutics 4(3):234-241.
matology 215(1):36-40.
3.5
Traumatic alopecia
Monika Linek
Acquired noninflammatory alopecia can be induced
forming a thorough physical examination. Owners of-
by self-inflicted hair loss. The two main causes for
 ten do not realize that their cat is licking. Therefore,
this are pruritus and psychogenic disorders. Whereas
it is advisable to ask for tufts of hair lying in the cats'
the former is recognized in any species to a greater or
favorite hiding place or hairs excreted with feces. Since
lesser extent, pure psychogenic alopecia has been al-
behavioral problems may result from anxiety neuro-
 most exclusively described in cats. Both have in com-
sis, the questionnaire should include any alteration in
mon that alopecia is produced by constant licking,
lifestyle such as moving to a new home, hospitaliza-
rubbing, pulling of hairs, chewing or biting, and ex-
tion, boarding, new surroundings, a new pet or baby
cessive grooming. Alopecia is often the only evident
in the household, or the loss of a favorite companion.
alteration, but may be accompanied by inflammation.
Cats of all ages and both sexes can be affected. There
It is then difficult to determine whether inflammation
is a predilection for Oriental cat breeds (Scott et al.
is a sequela to self-trauma or vice versa.
2001; Waisglass et al. 2006). The physical examina-
tion reveals short stubby hairs. Trichograms are used
3.5.1 Feline psychogenic alopecia
and spontaneous alopecia (see Section 2.1.4.3). In self-
3.5.1.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
induced alopecia, hair shafts show split tips but hain
roots reveal normal anagen and telogen bulbs. Hairs
The primary abnormality in psychogenic alopecia of
 are not easily epilated. Minimum additional testing in-
cats is excessive grooming of easily reached areas, such
cludes cytology, examination of superficial skin scrap-
as the medial aspects ofthe forelimbs and inner thighs,
 ings, and submission of hair samples for fungal culture
caudal aspect of the abdomen and the inguinal region
(Werner and Manigot 2002). Evaluation of responses
(Fig. 3.5.1). Dorsal aspects of the lumbar, sacral, and
to parasiticidal treatment and feeding an elimination
tail areas are less commonly involved (Scott et al. 2001; 
diet for 8-12 weeks are very important in the workup,
Waisglass et al. 2006). However, as these regions are
since clinical response to parasitic treatment, flea bite
commonly affected by many pruritic diseases, it is very
allergy (FBA), and food adverse reaction made up to
important to keep in mind that the diagnosis of psy-
 70% of self-induced alopecia in cats (Waisglass et al.
chogenic alopecia can only be made ifother conditions
2006). A thorough and intensive ectoparasitic treat-
have been ruled out. The true incidence ofpsychogenic
ment for 4-6 weeks is recommended as a diagnostic
disorders may be overestimated, as a complete workup
 trial therapy for parasitic diseases and FBA. In en-
is often limited by insuffcient owner compliance or
demic areas for Demodex gatoi, a trial therapy with
financial constraints.
lime sulfur may also be warranted. Hematological and
biochemical blood analysis, including evaluation of
thyroid gland function, may be necessary to rule out
3.5.1.2 Diagnosis
 metabolic disorders, such as hyperthyroidism, hyper-
The diagnostic approach of feline psychogenic alope-
adrenocorticism, and diabetes mellitus. Urinary tract
cia begins with obtaining a complete history and per-
disease that can cause pain and discomfort is excluded
186  Non-inflammatory alopecias
 opioids and serotonin as well as various other vasoac-
tive peptides (Virga 2003), and scratching can induce
changes in sensory perception ( Yamaoka et al. 2007).
Compulsive disorders such as trichotillomania have
been identifed in humans in association with alope-
cia. They have no apparent goal, and can be repetitive,
exaggerated, and so intense that they might be diffi
 cult to interrupt. In dogs acral lick dermatitis and flank
or tail sucking have been implicated with compulsive
disorders (Scott et al. 2001).
Although the pathophysiology of compulsive disor-
ders is not entirely understood, an underlying alter-
ation in neurotransmitters is a likely factor and phar-
macologic intervention is often needed. Alterations
Fig. 3.5.1 Feline self-induced "psychogenic" alopecia. Note ex-
 in β-endorphins, dopamine, and serotonin have all
been implicated in compulsive disorders, primarily
ties.
on the basis of response to treatment, but abnormal
serotonin metabolism has been suggested to be the
by urinalysis (Werner and Manigot 2002). If results
 primary mechanism by which these disorders are in-
of these tests are negative, atopic dermatitis and psy-
duced (Landsberg et al. 2003; Luescher 2003).
 chogenic alopecia remain as differentials, as in both
the diagnosis is made by excluding all other possible
3.5.1.3 Therapy
causes of clinical signs. Histological examination of
skin biopsies may then be helpful in eliminating a di-
The patient may improve without medical therapy or
agnosis of psychogenic alopecia. It has been stated that
with only a short course of antianxiety drugs, if an un-
the presence of even a few eosinophils in the dermis
 derlying problem can be identified and if this problem
can be used to rule out psychogenic alopecia (Gross
 can be modified or removed. A behaviorist should
et al. 2005; Waisglass et al. 2006), as cats with his-
always be consulted. If potential stressors cannot be
tologic evidence of inflammation were subsequently
identified or eliminated, long-term therapy may be
found to have a medical condition. The assumption,
necessary.
however, that a lack of inflammatory lesions in skin
 Drugs that inhibit serotonin reuptake such as
biopsies can be used to confirm a diagnosis of psy-
 clomipramine and fluoxetine have been shown to be
chogenic alopecia does not hold true ( Waisglass et al.
 most effective in the treatment of cats and dogs with
2006). Treatment with antipruritic doses of glucocor-
compulsive disorders (Hewson et al. 1998; Sawyer et
ticoids may help to differentiate pruritus from behay-
al. 1999; Mertens et al. 2006). Psychogenic alopecia
ioral self-trauma, because glucocorticoids are unlikely
in cats has also been successfully managed with phe-
to cause any substantial improvement in cats with a
nobarbital or diazepam, amitriptyline, naloxone, and
compulsive disorder. Specific allergen testing cannot
buspirone (Willemse et al. 1994; Sawyer et al. 1999;
be used to prove atopy as a cause of overgrooming.
Scott et al. 2001). Progestational compounds as mege-
In fact, at this level there may remain a considerable
 strol acetate are considered obsolete due to their strik-
overlap between the two conditions. Glucocorticoids
ing side effects (Scott et al. 2001) (Table 3.5.1).
could have effects on the behavior as described in hu-
man patients (Plihal et al. 1996). Serotonin reuptake
inhibitors like clomipramine and fluoxetine used to
3.5.2 Pruritus
treat psychogenic disorders may have antihistaminic
effects. Stressful conditions may potentiate pruritus
3.5.2.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
through a variety of mechanisms, including changes
As illustrated in the former chapter, pruritus can elicit
in cytokine and hormone profles and the release of
alopecia by licking, rubbing, chewing, pulling, and
Traumatic alopecia 187
Table 3.5.1 Treatment options and success rates for psychogenic alopecia in cats
Drug
Dose
Response rate (duration of response)
Clomipramine
1.25-2.5 mg/day, oral
100% (3.6 months); additional environmental changes 
Ami triptyline 
2.5 mg/day. oral
66% (17-27 months)
Buspirone
 5 mg, twice daily oral
 25% (4 months); additional environmental changes
Adapted from Sawyer et al. 1999.
biting. The list of differential diagnoses for animals
bution patterns may help to establish a ranking list
with alopecia accompanied by marked pruritus and
of differential diagnoses (Griffin and DeBoer 2001;
cutaneous inflammation is often lengthy, and a de-
Scott et al. 2001). Hypersensitivity reactions, such as
 tailed discussion of the approach to this presentation
food allergy and atopy, present in the dog with ery-
is beyond the scope of this book.
thema, excoriation, and self-induced alopecia perio-
rally, on the forelegs, the distal extremities, the dorsum
of the paws, lateral thorax, and ventral abdomen (Fig.
3.5.2.2 Diagnosis
3.5.2). In fleabite allergy the dorsal lumbal and cau-
In most pruritic diseases there will be additional cuta-
dal thighs are more commonly affected. Scabies has 
neous changes, such as inflammation, seborrhea, hy-
 a similar clinical picture as atopy, but severe crusting
 perkeratosis, erosion, or ulceration. Distinctive distri-
of elbows and the tips of the pinnae and a diffuse
(a)
b
Hg. 3.5.2 Atopic dermatitis with extensive alopecia by self-
trauma in a dog. (a) Alopecia of the trunk; (b) alopecia of the
proximal hind legs.
188  Non-inflammatory alopecias
maculopapulars rash of the ventral abdomen may
References
predominate. It shall be emphasized that a strict
 adherence to the clinical approach as outlined earlier
Griffn CE, DeBoer DJ. 2001. The ACVD task force on canine atopic
 dermatitis (XIV): clinical manifestations of canine atopic der-
(see Chapter 2.1) is mandatory if pruritus is present.
matitis. Veterinary Immunology and Immunopathology 81:255-
Similarly important is the identification and classi-
269.
fication of primary and secondary skin lesions and
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. 2005. Skin Diseases of
the Dog and the Cat. Oxford: Blackwell Science.
the ability to correlate them to specific skin diseases.
Hewson CJ, Luescher UA, Parent JM, Conlon PD, Ball RO. 1998.
Primary skin lesions are macules, papules or plaques,
Efficacy of clomipramine in the treatment of canine compulsive
pustules, vesicles or bullae, and nodules. Scales, alope-
disorder. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
cia, pigmentary abnormalities, comedones, and crusts
213:1760-1766.
Landsberg GM, Hunthausen W, Ackerman L. 2003. Stereotypic
may be primary or secondary lesions, and lichenifi-
and compulsive disorders. In: von Gary Landsberg. Wayne
cation, epidermal collarettes, scars, erosions, ulcers,
Hunthausen. Lowell J. Ackerman (eds), Handbook of Behav-
ior Problems of the Dog und Cat, Pp. 195-225. Edinburgh: WB
excoriations, fissures, and callus are all secondary le-
Saunders.
sions (Scott et al. 2001).
 Luescher AU. 2003. Diagnosis and management of compulsive dis-
The knowledge of breed, age, and sex predilections
orders in dogs and cats. Veterinary Clinicsof North America. Small
Animal Practice 33:253-267, vi.
and the ability to interpret laboratory and histologi-
 Mertens PA, Torres S, Jessen C. 2006. The effects of clomipramine
cal reports may help to abbreviate the steps necessary
hydrochloride in cats with psychogenic alopecia: a prospective
for a final diagnosis (Scott et al. 2001; Gross et al.
study. fournalof the American Animal Hospital Association42:336-
343.
2005).
Plihal W, Krug R, Pietrowsky R, Fehm HL, Born J. 1996. Corticos-
 In the dog, there might also be pruritic alopecia
 teroid receptor mediated effects on mood in humans. Psychoneu-
without any inflammatory changes, where the ani-
roendocrinology 21:515-523.
 Sawyer LS, Moon-Fanelli AA, Dodman NH. 1999. Psychogenic
mal licks or rubs the pruritic area more gently and
alopecia in cats: 11 cases (1993-1996). Journal of the American
alopecia remains the predominate lesion. Common
Veterinary Medical Association 214:71-74.
underlying causes are Malassezia dermatitis, Sarcoptes
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE. 2001. Muller and Kirk's
Smalf Animmal Dermatology, Pp. 457-476. Philadelphia: WB
incognito, Cheylitiella infestation, atopy, and food al-
Saunders.
lergy. In these cases it is primarily important to distin-
Virga V. 2003. Behavioral dermatology. Veterinary Clinics of North
guish self-induced alopecia from spontaneous alope-
America. Srmaff Animal Practice 33:231232,vi.
Waisglass SE, Landsberg GM, Yager JA, Hall JA. 2006. Underly-
cia. If a self-inflicted alopecia has been diagnosed
ing medical conditions in cats with presumptive psychogenic
and an underlying cause cannot be found, an ag-
alopecia. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
 gressive trial therapy for ectoparasites may be still
228:1705-1709.
Werner AH, Manigot GA. 2002. Diagnosing and treating Psy-
advisable. This would include a minimum of three
chogenic alopecia. In: Thoday KL, Foil CS, Bond R (eds), Ad-
times of biweekly spot-on application of selamectin 
vances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 4, Pp. 280-281. Oxford,
or moxidectin with imidacloprid. This trial ther-
 England: Blackwell Science.
Willemse T, Mudde M, Josephy M, Spruijt BM. 1994. The effect
apy might be combined with an elimination diet to
of haloperidol and naloxone on excessive grooming behavior of
shorten the workup time. Further workup of atopic
Cats. European Neuropsychopharmacology 4:39-45.
 dermatitis in dogs and cats is deferred to special text-
Yamaoka J, Di ZH, Sun W, Kawana S. 2007. Changes in cutaneous
sensory nerve fbers induced by skin-scratching in mice. Journal
books.
of Dermatological Science 46:41-51.
Scarring
allo
Lars Mecklenburg
In man, a very large number of follicular diseases may
except for those cases where earlier stages of follicu-
lead to destruction and replacement of the piloseba-
lar destruction are contained in the biopsy. Clinically,
ceous unit by scar tissue (Abell 2007). These alopecias
scarring alopecia is associated with a loss of follicular
are referred to as scarring alopecia or cicatricial alope-
 openings (ostia). The skin is usually shiny and smooth
cia. They comprise diseases such as lichen planopi-
with a sharp border between haired and alopecic skin
laris, lupus erythematosus, dissecting folliculitis, acne
areas. Differential diagnosis such as alopecia areata,
keloidalis, central centrifugal scarring alopecia, and
folicular atrophy, and mural folliculitis need to be ex-
yet unclassified forms of scarring alopecia including
cluded by histopathology. Scarring alopecia is perma-
“pseudopelade of Brocq." The latter likely represents
 nent since stem cells, usually located in the bulge area,
the end-stage or clinical variant of various other forms
are lost; hence, there is no treatment for this condition.
of scarring alopecia (Sperling 2001). Classification of
Morphea (syn. localized scleroderma) is a distinct
scarring alopecia in human medicine is under contin
but still enigmatic skin disease in humans where der-
uous debate, and therefore, extrapolations from hu-
mal connective tissue and cutaneous adnexa are re-
man to veterinary medicine should be conducted with
placed by fibrous tissue of variable degree of organi-
great caution.
zation. It may range from almost normal to a typical
The term “scarring alopecia" is not commonly used
scar formation. A similar disease has rarely been de-
in veterinary dermatology although, as in humans, nu-
scribed in dogs and cats (Scot 1986; Bensignor et al.
merous different diseases can lead to follicular destruc-
1998). However, neither clinical investigation nor
tion, such as physical or chemical trauma (including
histopathology allows a clear differentiation from cica-
 erythema ab igne), infectious or sterile furunculosis
tricial alopecia (see above). It is therefore questionable
(including juvenile cellulitis), mural folliculitis, or is-
whether a distinct disease entity of morphea actually
 chemic dermatopathy. Scarring, that is, replacement
exists in domestic animals. Histopathology may reveal
 of the pilosebaceous unit by fibrous tissue, is rarely
 mild dermal inflammation, whereas the clinical ap-
 observed. This phenomenon is yet unexplained, but
 pearance is reported as well-demarcated alopecia with
might result from the comparatively small size of pi-
a smooth and shiny skin surface.
losebaceous units in most domestic animals such as
the dog. Scarring is represented by a scar tract that
References
extends into the subcutaneous tissue, associated with
remnants of the elastic fiber sheath of the damaged
 Abell E. 2007. Inflammatory diseases of the epidermal appendages
hair follicle. Sebaceous glands, apocrine glands, and
and of cartilage. In: Elder D, Elenitsas R, Jaworsky C, Johnson B.
arrector pili muscles may remain.
(eds), Lever's Histopathofogy of the Skin, 8th edn, p.414.Philadel-
phia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers.
 In domestic animals, scarring alopecia may be seen
Bensignor E, Carlotti DN, Pin D. 1998. Morphea-like lesion in a cat.
as an end stage of lymphocytic mural folliculitis (see
Journal of Small Animal Practice 39(11):538-540.
Chapter 4.4) or as an end stage of follicular atrophy
Scott DW. 1986. Localized scleroderma (morphea) in two dogs.
(see Chapter 3.4). It is per se unspecific and does not
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 22:207-211.
Sperling LC. 2001.Scarring alopecia and the dermatopathologist.
allow determination of the underlying pathogenesis,
Journal of Cutaneous Pathology 28:333-342.
Part 4
Inflammatory alopecias
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms
193
Necrotizing mural folliculitis
249
Eosinophilic folliculitis
215
Alopecia areata
253
Pustul ar folliculitis
221
Sebaceous adenitis
269
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis
227
Histiocytic or granulomatous mural
folliculitis
243
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms
Monika Linek
 In this chapter, inflammation of the hair follicle is dis.
The most common clinical signs of luminal folli
cussed, in which inflammatory cell invasion into the
culitis in all animals are multifocal areas of alopecia,
follicular lumen is evoked by intraluminal organisms.
follicular papules or pustules (Fig. 4.1.1), crusts, and
The inflammatory infltrate is predominated by poly-
epidermal collarettes that form circular rims of scales
morphonuclear leukocytes (Gross et al. 1992, 2005;
(Fig. 4.1.2) (Scott etal. 2001). It can be accompanied by
Yager and Wilcock 1994). Attracted by the intralumi-
excessive scaling, and scales are often pierced by hairs
nal pathogen, cells migrate from the perifollicular ves-
Pruritus is variable. The type and length of hair coat
sels to the hair follicle, penetrate the hair follicle wall,
 may influence the clinical presentation. Short-haired
and accumulate in the follicular lumen. The pathogen
breeds in dogs and horses often present with multiple
can be located either in the hair shaft (e.g., dermato-
superficial papules that look similar to urticaria, since
phytes) or in the follicular lumen (e.g-, bacteria, mites,
 the inflammation in and around the follicles causes the
or nematodes). By definition, every luminal folliculi-
hairs to stand more erect (Ihrke 1996; Pilsworth and
tis must have been mural initially, but in mural fol-
Knottenbelt 2007). These raised tufts of hair are most
liculitis (see Chapter 4.4) the infiltrate will remain in
striking ifviewed against light. They are easily epilated,
the follicular wall and will not be present in the lu-
an important feature that helps to distinguish super-
men (Gross et al. 1997). In addition, mural folliculitis
ficial folliculitis from true urticaria, in which hairs do
is mostly dominated by mononuclear leukocytes in-
 not epilate easily. When the hairs fall out they leave
stead of polymorphonuclear inflammatory cells. Only
 patches of focal alopecia and give the coat a moth-
in some cases of demodicosis and dermatophytosis,
 eaten appearance (Fig. 4.1.3). Foci of hair loss may
where very low numbers of organisms are present,
coalesce to larger areas of alopecia. The underlying
does the mural pattern of inflammation predominate,
skin does not always look inflamed, particularly if it 
which can then be mistaken for an autoimmune mu-
is darkly pigmented. In long-haired animals owners
ral lymphocytic interface folliculitis such as in lupus
initially report increased shedding and a dull hair coat,
erythematosus (Gross et al. 2005).
subsequently developing scaling, crusts, pustules,
A furunculosis is morphologically defined as a mu-
and epidermal collarettes (Mason 1993; Scott et al.
ral and luminal folliculitis, where the entire follic-
2001).
ular wall is destroyed by the inflammatory reac-
 Iffurunculosis develops, it presents macroscopically
tion. The inflammatory character then changes to
as an erythematous nodule in the dermis, often asso.
a (pyo)granulomatous infltrate composed of neu-
 ciated with hair loss. Hairs are always easily epilated
trophils, macrophages, eosinophils, plasma cells, and
and exudation of blood or pus is seen, if the nodule
eventually giant cells. The naked keratin of hair shafts
is squeezed (Ihrke 1996; Scot et al. 2001). In conflu.
 in the dermis then contributes to a foreign body re-
ating furuncles (also called “carbuncles") pain, ulcer-
action. Severe furunculosis completely destroys the
ation, hemorrhagic crusts, bullae, and draining tracts
affected pilosebaceous unit, which is replaced by scar-
with serosanguinous or purulent exudate may be seen
ring (Gross et al. 2005).
(Fig. 4.1.4). Lichenification and hyperpigmentation
194  Inflammatory alopecias
Fig. 4.1.1 Follicular papules and pustules.
Fig. 4.1.3 Superficial canine pyoderma. Note epidermal col-
larettes that depict circular rims of scales.
4.1.1 Bacterial folliculitis
are signs of chronic inflammation, which are com-
4.1.1.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
pletely unspecific.
Since age, breed, history, or clinical picture do not
 Bacterial folliculitis can be classified on the basis of the
allow a specific diagnosis of the underlying etiology, it
extent of infection and its etiology, and can be divided
is essential to follow the standard dermatological ex-
into primary or secondary disease (Gross et al. 1997).
amination protocol and perform cytology, skin skrap-
ings, trichogram, Wood's lamp examination, and a
dermatophyte culture. Biopsies might become neces-
sary whenever there is no diagnosis after these tests
have been performed. Detailed examination proce-
dures have been explained elsewhere (see Chapter 2.1),
 and will be briefly mentioned in the next paragraphs,
where the main differentials for luminal folliculitis are
128
JQLIXbV
Fig. 4.1.4 Deep canine pyoderma. Note draining tracts with
Fig. 4.1.2 Multifocal "moth-eaten" alopecia due to folliculitis.
serohemorrhagic to purulent exudate.
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms  195
Superficial bacterial folliculitis, the most common
apy, and is due to an underlying disease. Common
clinical presentation of pyoderma in dogs, horses, and
diseases associated with secondary pyoderma include
presumably cats, involves the superficial part of the
allergies (flea allergy, atopic dermatitis due to food
hair follicle lumen and is characterized by pustules. In-
or environmental allergens), endocrinopathies (hy-
tact pustules are erythematous and can be very small. A
peradrenocorticism or hypothyroidism), seborrheic
hair is normally protruding from the center ofthe pus-
conditions (including primary follicular or sebaceous
tule and helps to distinguish follicular pustules from
gland diseases), ectoparasitosis (e.g., demodicosis), or
pustules of the interfollicular skin (such as impetigo
anatomic predispositions (e.g-, skin folds) (Ihrke 1996;
and pemphigus). However, pustules are transient; they
Scott et al. 2001). Any inflammatory, obstructive, at-
easily rupture and eventually result in papules that are
rophic, or degenerative disease of the hair follicle, as
covered by crusts.
discussed in this book, can predispose to secondary
Deep bacterial folliculitis includes inflammation of
 bacterial infection of the hair follicle.
the entire hair follicle with or without furunculosis.
Whereas in primary pyoderma trunk, head, and
Deep pyoderma may evolve from more superficial le-
 proximal extremities are most often affected, in sec-
sions and can coexist with them or may develop au-
ondary pyodermas the clinical distribution pattern de-
tonomously. It is less common, more serious in nature,
pends on the underlying disease.
and usually more painful than superficial pyoderma.
One of the typical features of deep folliculitis is alope-
4.1.1.1.1 Canine pyoderma
cia developing as a sequela to follicular inflamma-
In the dog, Staphylococcus intermedius and S. aureus
tion and destruction. Scarring may finally occur (Ihrke
have been reported as the most frequent isolates asso-
1996; Gross et al. 2005). Alopecia can be accompanied
ciated with pyoderma (May 2006). S. intermedius is a
by lichenification, hyperpigmentation, and swelling.
common resident bacteria in the dog. It is located at
 Pus or a hemorrhagic exudate and sometimes frag-
 mucocutaneous junctions of mouth, nose, and anus
ments of hair shafts may extrude upon pressure.
and in the external ear canal from which it is trans-
Nodules may rupture and form fistules and drain-
ferred to the rest of the skin by grooming (Allaker et al.
 ing tracts. Erosions and ulcers develop secondary to
1992a,b). Most recently S. pseudointermedius (op-
selftrauma.
posed to S. intermedius) has been identified by phe-
 Pyoderma is etiologically classified according to the
 notypic speciation to be the most common cause of
main bacteria involved in the infection. In all species,
canine pyoderma (Bannoehr et al. 2007; Sasaki et
staphylococci are most frequently associated with pyo-
al. 2007). Other staphylococci, particularly the coa-
derma. However, other bacteria such as Pseudomonas,
gulase-negative species such as S.epidermidis, S sciuri,
Escherichia coli, Proteus, and Corynebacterium have
and S. xylosus are generally considered as transient and
also been isolated (Heffner et al. 1988; Scott et al.
nonpathogenic (Harvey and Lloyd 1994). However, S.
2001; Pilsworth and Knottenbelt 2007).
schleiferi (both the coagulase-negative subspecies S.
 Pyoderma is further divided into primary and sec-
schleiferi, schleiferi, and the coagulase-positive sub-
 ondary, depending on whether or not it is triggered.
 species S. schleiferi, coagulans) has been isolated from
by an underlying disease. Prirmary pyoderma occurs
 pyoderma and otitis in dogs (Frank et al. 2003; May et
in otherwise healthy animals, without an identifiable
al. 2005; Morris et al. 2006; Rich et al. 2007). There is
predisposing cause. Primary pyoderma resolves com-
 yet insuffcient information on the incidence of pyo
 pletely upon appropriate antimicrobial treatment and
 derma caused by these newly reported staphylococcal
recurrence is not expected. Development of chronic
 species, since most veterinary laboratories do not dif-
recurrent superficial or deep primary pyoderma is
ferentiate them routinely (Zdovc et al. 2004).
most often caused by inappropriate antibiotic ther-
Other bacteria such as Pseudomonas spp., Es-
apy, that is, failures in dosing, duration of treatment,
 cherichia coli, and Proteus can also cause canine py-
or selection of the right medication. Another cause for
oderma and are particularly common in deep pyo-
dermas (Ihrke 1996; Cole et al. 1998; Petersen et al.
teroid administration.
2002). Pseudomonas aeruginosa has frequently been
Secondary pyoderma is much more common than
isolated from post-grooming furunculosis, an acute
primary pyoderma, recurs in spite of appropriate ther-
 and painful furunculosis developing after bathing or
196  Inflammatory alopecias
grooming (Hillier et al. 2003). Shampoos or bathing
equipments may be contaminated by Pseudomonas
 and violent, traumatizing grooming may facilitate in-
fection.
The clinical presentation of canine bacterial folli-
culitis is highly variable, particularly between breeds.
Pustules and erythema are often absent in short-haired
 breeds. These dogs most frequently present with hy-
 perpigmented foci of alopecia, 0.5-2 cm in diameter
(Fig. 4.1.3), or frm papules or nodules. Some breeds
such as Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs often show
diffuse widespread alopecia with mild erythema and
epidermal collarettes at the periphery, often mimick.
ing an endocrinopathy. Breeds such as the West High-
land White Terrier may develop seborrheic plaques
(Scott et al. 2001). In chronic cases of canine bacterial
folliculitis, erythematous papules, small pustules, epi
dermal collarettes, and hyperpigmentation are simul-
taneously present. Many cases of canine pyoderma are
associated with pruritus (Hill and Moriello 1994). Any
body area can develop pyoderma, but the glabrous site
of the groin and axilla are most commonly affected.
Canine deep pyoderma is less common than su-
perficial bacterial folliculitis, but it is still a relatively
common skin disease. It may develop de novo or may
Fig. 4.1.5 Alopecia in canine pyoderma. Note red to dark blue-
progress from superficial folliculitis. The deep follic-
colored nodules with a fragile surface.
ular inflammation leads to rupture of the hair follicle
wall and subsequent development of a granulomatous
foreign body response against hair shaft fragments.
mites, or other foreign bodies play a significant patho-
Canine deep pyoderma commonly presents as firm
 genetic role (Breathnach et al. 2008). Certain subtypes
nodules or poorly defined edematous plaques. Cir-
 of deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis in dogs
cumscribed, red to dark-blue colored nodules with
present with a distinctive clinical picture, but are not
a fragile surface and hemorrhagic bullae are addi-
further discussed in this chapter, since they are not
tional distinctive clinical features (Fig. 4.1.5). Pain or
primarily alopecic.
pruritus is common. Focal or even generalized lym-
phadenopathy may develop. Deep pyodermas with fu-
runculosis may affect any body area but certain areas
4.1.1.1.2 Feline pyoderma
are preferably involved. Elbows, hocks, and lateral sti-
Bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis in the cat is sig-
fles (where callus may preexist) are more prone to
nificantly less frequent than in the dog. Similar to dogs,
deep infections, possibly due to recurrent traumatic
most cases of primary feline pyoderma are associated
follicular irritation.
with S. interrmedius and S. aureus (May 2006). Less fre-
Acral lick granulomas arise in areas where constant
quently S. schleiferi, both coagulase positive and nega-
licking results in selfinflicted follicular trauma. Py-
tive species, β-hemolytic streptococci, and Pasteurella
otraumatic furunculosis, which occurs predominately
multocida have been isolated. Deep infections in the
at the cheek or neck of Golden Retrievers (and other
cat are most commonly associated with wounds and
large breed dogs such as the Newfoundland Dog or
 present as subcutaneous abscesses and nodules, asso-
the Saint Bernard Dog), is also a clinical manifesta-
ciated with various aerobic and anaerobic organisms.
tion of deep pyoderma (Holm et al. 2004). Interdigital 
 Infections by atypical or opportunistic mycobacteria
furunculosis is a very common clinical pattern in the
have been described (Scott et al. 2001; Gross et al.
 dog, and plant awns, fragmented hair shafts, Demodex
2005).
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms  197
Fig. 4.1.7 Equine pyoderma. Multifocal crusts, alopecia, and
exfoliation in a circular pattern with absence of pustules and
Hg. 4.1.6 Self-induced alopecia in feline eosinophilic plaque
erythema. (Courtesy of S. Rufenacht.)
Note extensive hair loss associated with numerous erytherma-
tous plaques.
in association with moist environmental conditions
(Rosser 1995). Dermatophilosis shows a very charac-
Bacterial folliculitis in cats may be overlooked and
teristic clinical picture with exudation, matted hair,
 underdiagnosed as the most common clinical finding
and excessive scab formation (Fig. 4.1.8). Localized
is scaling and crusting. Intact pustules are rarely found
 or widespread alopecia and crusting with litle pru-
(Wildermuth et al. 2006). Superficial pyoderma in the
ritus are typical. In the short coat of the summer,
cat can present as a miliary dermatitis, mimicking fe-
lesions tend to be smaller and less exudative, leaving
line allergy. Feline skin diseases such as eosinophilic
a moth-eaten appearance, whereas the thick winter
granuloma, eosinophilic plaque (Fig. 4.1.6) ulcera-
coat becomes severely matted with a purulent exudate
tive head and neck lesions, or feline lick alopecia are
and a thick creamy pus adhering to the skin (Rosser
 commonly associated with secondary superficial py-
1995). The distribution pattern of the lesions gen-
oderma. Secondary recurrent nonhealing deep pyo-
erally reflects the areas that are exposed to excessive
derma in cats can also be associated with systemic dis-
 moistening by rain or sweating under rugs. In racing
eases such as feline immunodeficiency virus or feline
horses the cannon region may be solely affected, and
leukemia virus infection.
a traumatic cause is suspected. Dermatophilosis may
be easily diagnosed by cytology, where cocci with a
4.1.1.1.3 Equine pyoderma
"railroad track"-like growth pattern are found.
 In the horse bacterial skin diseases are most of-
 Deep pyoderma is uncommon in the horse. Staphy-
ten caused by S. intermedius and S. aureus. In ad-
lococcal deep pyoderma can present as a nodular
dition, Staphylococcus hyicus, Streptococcus equi, and
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosishave beenisolated
in equine folliculitis (Pascoe 1984; Heffner et al. 1988;
Pilsworth and Knottenbelt 2007). “Heat rash, “sum-
mer rash," “summer scub," “sweating eczema, “sad-
dle scab," and “saddle boils" are all common names
for pyoderma in the horse and reflect the underlying
etiology of excessive sweating, friction, and trauma
from track and saddle and/or allergies to insect bites.
Clinical signs are as described before. Pustules and
erythema are often absent, while crusts and alopecia
usually develop in a circular pattern with an exfoliative
border (Fig. 4.1.7). Variable pruritus is seen
 Dermatophilus congolensis is one of the most im-
Fig. 4.1.8 Equine dermatophilosis. Matted hair and excessive
 portant skin pathogens in the horse. It usually occurs
scab formation with exudation. (Courtesy of S. Rufenacht.)
198  Inflammatory alopecias
disease termed “botryomycosis,” which mimics a deep
thematous skin underlying crusts reveals large num-
fungal infection. These lesions may require surgical
bers of neutrophils, cocci, rods, or both (Fig. 2.1.10).
excision as well as long-term antibiotical therapy.
Neutrophils with intracellular bacteria are considered
Solitary or multiple abscesses are often caused by
the cytological halmark of superficial pyoderma. Fu-
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis (Heffner et al.
runculosis will reveal a mixed inflammatory infiltrate
1988; Farstved et al. 2004).
with neutrophils, macrophages, eosinophils, lympho-
cytes, and plasma cells, while bacteria are quite sparse.
4.1.1.1.4 0vine pyoderma
 Impression smears of alopecic or scaling skin are less
A facial bacterial folliculitis in adult sheep is caused
diagnostic, since they may reveal only large numbers
by virulent strains of S. aureus. Affected animals de-
of exfoliating keratinocytes with overlying bacteria.
velop a nonpruritic dermatitis characterized by alope-
Bacterial culture and susceptibility testing to an
cia, erythema, hyperpigmentation, crusting, superfi-
tibiotics are mandatory in cases of deep pyoderma,
cial ulcers, exudation, and thickening ofthe skin (Scott 
recurrent superficial pyoderma, and pyoderma that
et al. 1980; Koutinas et al. 2007).
does not respond to adequate antibacterial therapy.
Sheep fleece rot is another distinct ovine pyoderma
It is also recommended if rods are the predominate
characterized by marked exudation and crust forma-
infectious agent, since antimicrobial susceptibility of
fion. It is triggered by poor hygiene such as constant
these organisms is rather unpredictable. Accurate test
wetting of the skin. Pseudomonas aeruginosa seems to
results are most likely to be obtained from intact pus-
 be the main causative organism of fleece rot (Salisbury
tules or deep lesions. Nodular lesions are best cultured
and Barrowman 1984; Norris et al. 2007).
from macerated tissue obtained via a sterile biopsy
technique (see Section 2.1.4.11).
As mentioned before, any diagnosis of bacterial fol-
4.1.1.2 Diagnosis
liculitis or furunculosis has to be accompanied by a
As mentioned before, clinical signs of bacterial fol-
thorough search for an underlying disease that fosters
liculitis are variable, and therefore many differential
 secondary pyoderma.
diagnoses have to be considered. Differential diag-
noses for superficial folliculitis include demodicosis
(see Section 4.1.3), Malassezia dermatitis, dermato-
4.1.1.3 Therapy
phytosis (see Section 4.1.2), and other nonfollicu-
lar bacterial diseases such as impetigo and superficial
4.1.1.3.1 Topical therapy
spreading pyoderma. Uncommon pustular and crust-
ing diseases such as pemphigus foliaceus (see Section
ical antibiotics such as 2% mupirocin, 2% fucidinic
4.3.1) and in the cat feline exfoliative dermatitis (see
acid, or silver sulfadiazine cream. Topical neomycin is
Section 4.4.2.1) have to be considered. Clinical differ-
 not recommended, since it may cause contact allergy.
 ential diagnoses for deep bacterial folliculitis include
Topical bacitracin or polymyxin B are more effective
demodicosis (see Section 4.1.3), dermatophytosis (see
against Gram-negative bacteria than other topical an-
Section 4.1.2), cutaneous fungal diseases, prototheco-
sis, mycobacterial infection, and neoplasia (Scott et al.
(Ihrke 1996; Scott et al. 2001). Daily shampooing with
2001).
 an antibacterial shampoo as a sole therapy may re-
 Differentiation is primarily based on clinical signs
 solve more widespread superficial pyoderma, but is
and cytology. Multiple deep skin scrapings are needed
usually not sufficient for deep pyodermas. Appropri-
to rule out parasitic infections, particularly Demodex
 ate antibacterial shampoos contain benzoyl peroxide,
mites. Wood's lamp examination and dermatophyte
 chlorhexidine, chlorhexidine-miconazole, ethyl lac
cultures should be performed to exclude dermato-
tate, or triclosan. Shampooing will remove bacteria,
 phytosis. Biopsies and bacterial cultures are needed
crusts, and scales, and it will reduce the pruritus and
 in many cases to accomplish a final diagnosis (Ihrke
odor associated with pyoderma. Additional clipping of
1987, 1996; Gross et al. 2005).
the hair coat is helpful as it prevents accumulation of
 In superficial pyoderma, direct impression smears
debris and facilitates bathing and lathering (de Jaham
of intact pustules, epidermal collarettes, or moist ery-
2003).
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms 199
4.1.1.3.2 Systemic therapy
lactam antibiotics and cephalosporins, even if in vitro
The primary treatment of pyoderma is with appropri-
resistance testing has indicated susceptibility. This is
ate antibiotics administered systemically for at least
extremely important when interpreting results from
34 weeks. Chronic, recurrent, or deep pyodermas
diagnostic laboratories. In many cases of MRSA or
typically require 8-12 weeks or even longer to re-
MRSI, drugs such as rifampicin, potentiated sulfon-
solve completely. As a general rule, treatment is con-
amids, and chloramphenicol need to be used, although
tinued beyond complete clinical remission for 8 days
they bear a higher risk of adverse effects ( Loeffler et al.
 in superficial and for 14 days in deep pyoderma (De-
2007).
boer 1990, 1995). Antibiotic treatment of 10-14 days
Clindarmycin belongs to the lincosamid class and is
duration is inappropriate for patients with recurent
distributed to fibrous tissue and therefore is a good
bacterial skin infections and may favor the emer-
choice to treat deep infections when based on culture
 gence of multidrug-resistant strains (Pellerin et al.
and susceptibility testing (Harvey et al. 1993; Scott
1998; Loeffler et al. 2007). Empiric antibiotic therapy
et al. 1998; Bloom and Rosser 2001). Clindamycin is
is inappropriate except for cases of mild, first-time
bacteriostatic at low doses and bacteriocidal at higher
superficial pyodermas without complicating factors.
doses. Lincomycin is less commonly used nowadays
Any systemic antibacterial therapy should be accom-
due to an increased bacterial resistance.
 panied by shampooing with an antibacterial substance
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics such as enrofloxacin,
 as mentioned before. Immunomodulatorytherapy has
marbofloxacin, ibafloxacin, or orbifloxacin are broa d-
 been used with variable success rates for the manage-
spectrum antibiotics with activity against Gram-
positive and Gram-negative bacteria (Paradis et al.
derlying etiology has been found (Deboer 1990; Curtis
2001; Ganiere et al. 2004; Horspool et al. 2004, 2006).
1998; Curtis et al. 2006).
Fluoroquinolones distribute to most tissues and accu-
The choice of an antibiotic to treat bacterial folli-
 mulate in white blood cells, which results in high con-
culitis should be based on the chronicity of the disease,
centrations at sites where bacteria are present. They are
microbial isolates, susceptibility testing, and safety. A
commonly used for their safety and convenience in ad-
review of the mechanisms of action and common side
ministration (once daily). However, fluoroquinolone
effects of antibiotics is beyond the scope of this book
should not be used for empiric therapy and should
but can be found elsewhere (Prescott et al. 2000; Plumb
 not represent the first choice antibiotic, even if sus-
2005).
ceptibility has been demonstrated, because there has
β -lactam antibiotics and tetracylines are inappropri-
been a significant increase of reports on bacterial re-
ate choices for treating canine superficial or deep py-
sistance to fluoroquinolones in the last decade (Lloyd
odermas, because they are ineffective in 90% of cases 
et al. 1999). Pradofloxacin, a new fluoroquinolone
(Kim et al. 2005; May 2006). Superfcial pyoderma
 antibiotic, can be used in deep pyodermas of dogs,
should be treated with β-lactamase-stable antibiotics
where it has demonstrated similar efficacy as amoxy-
such as amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, cephalexin, or ce-
cillin/clavulanic acid (Mueller and Stephan 2007).
fadroxil. These drugs have shown very low occur-
Potentiated sulfonarmids remain a reasonable choice
rence of bacterial resistance so far (Lloyd et al. 1997;
 of antibiotic therapy in small animals, as staphylococci,
Holm et al. 2002; Ganiere et al. 2005; White et al
 including methicillin-resistant and coagulase-negative
2005). There is, however, emerging evidence that with
 species, are mostly susceptible. However, idiosyncratic
repeated exposure to these antibiotics, methicillin-
adverse effects (hepatotoxicitiy, vasculitis, polyarthri-
resistant strains of S. intermedius (MRSI) occur (Kania
tis, and anemia) are quite common. Treatment for
et al. 2004; Loeffler et al. 2007). Methicillin-resistant
-au pasnes Aeuoppe seu poad au pauoqoid e
S. aureus (MRSA) has been a major problem in human
pothyroidism in the dog ( Daminet and Ferguson 2003;
medicine for more than a decade, and has increas-
Trepanier et al. 2003). In the horse the most commonly
ingly been isolated in companion animals. ( Boag et al.
used antibiotic for pyoderma is trimethoprim sulfa (30
2004; Rich 2005; Jones et al. 2007). In most bac-
 mg/kg) given orally every 12 h for 2-6 weeks or even
teria, methicillin resistance is conferred to a low-
longer, if infection is deep. Enrofloxacin (7.5 mg/kg
affinity penicillin-binding protein 2a that is encoded
 once daily) may be effective in cases of staphylococcal
by the bacterial “ mecA" gene. Resistance includes all β-
resistance, but should be avoided in horses less than
200  Inflammatory alopecias
 2 years of age due to possible cartilage damage (Pascoe
1984; Pilsworth and Knottenbelt 2007).
4.1.2 Dermatophytosis
4.1.2.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
Dermatophytosis is a superficial cutaneous infection
of hair, skin, and nails with one or more of the fun-
gal species in the keratinophilic genera Microsporum,
Trichophyton, and Epidermophyton. The most com-
mon Microsporum and Trichophyton species are usu-
ally separated on the basis of host preference and natu-
ral habitat. M. caris (new nomenclature: Arthroderma
otae Graser et al. 2008) is the most common pathogen
in cats and dogs, but is able to infect all species (Foil
1994; Scott et al. 2001; Kerl 2003). M. gypseum and
T. mentagrophytes (subspecies mentagrophytes) are
recognized in a wide range of animals, including dogs,
cats, cattle, horses, and sheep. T. verrucosum is more
frequent in cattle, M. nanum in pigs, and T. and
M. equirum in horses. Most dermatophytes found in
animals represent a group of zoophilic pathogens able
to infect people and cause severe human disease (tinea)
depending on the immune response of the infected in-
 Fig. 4.1.9 Feline dermatophytosis with extensive alopecia, scal-
dividual (Moriello 2003b).
ing, and crusts on the dorsum.
Infection occurs via direct transmission of fungal
spores to a susceptible host. Reservoirs of infection
 penetration into the keratin. This provokes both a hu-
for both, people and animals, include contaminated
 moral and a cell-mediated immune response.
environments and objects, animals with subclinical or
Clinical lesions consist of any combination of
clinical infections, and animals that are mechanical
papules, pustules, focal to widespread alopecia, ery-
carriers of the spores on their hair coat (Mancianti
thema, scaling, and crusting (Fig. 4.1.9). Nodular le-
and Papini 1996; Mancianti et al. 2003; Heinrich et al.
sions (kerion) may develop particularly on the face
2005). The disease tends to be more common in warm
where they mimic areas of deep pyoderma or furuncu-
tropical and subtropical climates or where there are
losis (Fig. 4.1.10). Trichophyton and M. persicolor are
large numbers of feral animals.
Any age, sex, or breed of animal is susceptible
to infection. However, the disease tends to be more
 common in young, sick, debilitated, and old ani-
mals. Immunodeficient patients, human or animal,
are more prone to infection. Long-haired animals,
 particularly Persian cats, seem to be more suscepti-
ble and more diffcult to treat, either due to hereditary
 internal factors or simply due to the fact that the long
 hairs easily trap fungal spores (Morillo and DeBoer
1995a).
Once infection has been established, dermato-
phytes invade the keratin of hairs and skin. Fungal
arthrospores can produce various enzymes such as
Fig. 4.1.10 Alopecia in canine dermatophytosis. Note nodular
 proteinases, keratinases, and mannases that facilitate
lesion (kerion) on the face.
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms  201
able to induce acantholysis and thus can mimic au-
ature of 24-28°C. They should be incubated for up to
toimmune blistering skin diseases (Gross et al. 2005).
 4 weeks and need to be examined regularly. Growth
In cats, lesions may resemble miliary dermatitis.
characteristics and the presence of macro- or micro-
conidia are documented (Fig. 2.1.9) to determine the
fungal species. In general, the clinician needs to be
4.1.2.2 Diagnosis
 aware of falsely negative and falsely positive cultures,
Diagnostic steps include Wood's lamp investigation,
particularly as T. verrucosurm, for example, does not
trichograms, and fungal culture (see Section 2.1.4)
grow on DTM agar (Moriello 2001).
 Diagnosis via skin biopsy is not as sensitive as a
(Moriello 1995; Moriello 2001). Only M. caris
fungal culture. Skin biopsy, however, is helpful for the
infected hairs fluoresce with Wood's ultraviolet light
diagnosis of kerion and granulomatous inflammation
(Fig. 2.1.8). This examination is a screening tool and
when cultures are often negative (Gross et al. 2005).
is helpful for identification of hairs for direct exami-
 nation and/or culture; a negative test does not rule out
dermatophytosis. Fluorescence due to scales, creams,
4.1.2.3 Therapy
and crusts may cause false-positive results. Only flu-
In healthy animals, dermatophytosis is generally a self-
 orescence of the hair shafts is indicative of dermato-
phytosis (see Section 2.1.4.4).
curing disease that will spontaneously resolve within
3 months (Medleau and Chalmers 1992). Remission
 Direct examination of hairs and scales looks for the
 occurs when infected hair follicles pass the telogen
presence of ekto- or endotrix fungal hyphae and/or
spores (Fig. 4.1.11). This procedure can be performed
phase and shed their hair shafts or when a curative in-
with mineral oil, but is facilitated bythe use of clearing
flammatory response is mounted against the fungus.
However, treatment is important to limit spreading of
 agents such as 10% potassium hydroxide or 20% chlor-
spores to other susceptible animals and especially peo-
phenolac. A positive result confirms dermatophytosis
 ple, and to minimize contamination of the environ-
but does not allow specification of the causative agent.
 ment. Many treatment protocols have been described
Definitive diagnosis is achieved by fungal culture
 in the literature (Moriello and DeBoer 1995a; Moriello
on Sabouraud's dextrose agar or dermatophyte test
and Newbury 2006). Treatment aims at remission of
medium (DTM). Both culture media contain broad-
dermatological signs, mycological cure (represented
 spectrum antibiotics to inhibit concurrent bacterial
by two consecutive negative cultures), and environ-
growth. The DTM agar uses phenol as a pH indica-
mental decontamination. Treatment protocols differ
tor that changes color in the presence of by-products
according to the animal species and depend on the
of fungal reproduction. Fungal cultures are best incu-
animals' husbandry condition.
bated in a dark humid environment and at a temper
The most thorough protocol has to be applied
in cats, particularly in multicat households, since
cats tend to become clinically inapparent carriers. In
horses, topical treatment combined with cleaning of
the tack is often curative. In cattles, studies have shown
that a live-attenuated vaccine to T. verrucosum is cura-
tive and protective (Gordon and Bond 1996; Bredahl
and Gyllensvaan 2000).
 Treatment of dermatophytosis in cats and dogs
should comprise a combination of topical treatment,
systemic treatment, and environmental treatment.
This is initiated according to the following algorithm:
1 Perform dermatophyte culture from the suspected
 animal and from all animals that had contact to it
 2 Start systemic therapy for alanimals with lesions or
Hg. 4.1.11 Trichogram of dermatophytosis. Note the presence
positive cultures
of fungal hyphae and ektotrix spores. (Courtesy of C. Nett.)
 3 Apply topical therapy to all infected animals
202  Inflammatory alopecias
4 Apply topical therapy to all animals that have contact
However, the risk is usually low (Hnilica and Medleau
to infected animals
 2002), and to prevent grooming an Elizabethan collar
 5 Start decontamination of the environment
is advised until the treated hair coat is thoroughly dry.
Miconazole and chlorhexidine
4.1.2.3.1 Topical therapy
Miconazole and chlorhexidine are frequently used for
 Topical antifungal treatments for dermatophytosis
topical dermatophyte treatment. A shampoo with 2%
have been evaluated both in vitro (using isolated in-
miconazole and 2% chlorhexidine is widely used and
fected hairs) and in various in vivo studies (Deboer
has demonstrated effcacy as an adjunct treatment
and Moriello 1995a; Moriello and Deboer 1995b;
to systemic therapy, if applied twice weekly (Pater-
Paterson 1999; Mason et al. 2000; Sparkes et al.
son 1999; Sparkes et al. 2000). Higher concentra-
2000; Hnilica and Medleau 2002; Moriello et al. 2002;
tions of miconazole (5.2%) and chlorhexidine (5.9%)
Guillot et al. 2002; Perrins and Bond 2003; Moriello et
demonstrate similar antifungal efficacy as lime sulfur
 al. 2004b). Topical therapy isalways necessary ina mul-
(Moriello and Verbrugge 2007).
ticat or multipet household, in order to avoid spread-
ing of spores. It is also necessary ifenvironmental con-
Lime suifur
tamination is a serious risk for people, which includes
 Lime sulfur is used in a dilution of 1:32 or l:16. It is one
children, elderly people, immunocompromised peo-
of the most effective topical products (Moriello and
 ple, and people with occupational risk of transmission
Verbrugge 2007). It is very safe even in young animals,
(contact to many susceptible people such as teachers
but has a bad smell. It should not be ingested, since it
 and health care providers).
can cause vomitus and diarrhea.
Topical therapy is used to complement systemic
therapy (Paterson 1999; Sparkes et al. 2000; Perrins
4.1.2.3.2 Systemic therapy
and Bond 2003). Only under certain circumstances,
lime sulfur without systemic antifungal therapy has
Griseofulvin
a as  a a  pa a
Griseofulvin is a fungistatic agent that inhibits nucleic
infected cats that were clipped and treated twice weekly
acid synthesis and cell mitosis metaphase by interfer-
(Moriello 2003a). Mycological cure was very slow and
 ing with the function of spindle microtubules ( Gentles
was not achieved before 10 weeks of treatment.
and Barnes 1960). Given with a fatty meal, griseoful-
 Dipping, rinsing, or shampooing is the recom-
vin is well absorbed. It is still a good systemic drug
 mended form of topical application. Topical therapy
for dermatophytosis, particularly in dogs and horses
 should not be used locally, since infective spores can
where in contrast to cats myelotoxicity is not a con-
occur as far as 10 cm away from the visible lesion.
cern. In the cat, bone marrow suppression with life-
Clipping of the hair coat is still discussed controver-
threatening and irreversible leukopenia is a severe and
 sially, since minor trauma may facilitate development
unpredictable side effect of griseofulvin therapy. It is
 of pseudomycetomas. However, clipping will facilitate
more common in cats infected with the feline immun-
 topical treatment and will diminish environmental
odeficiency virus. Griseofulvin is highly teratogenic
 contamination. Clipping is necessary in long-haired
 and must not be used in pregnant animals ( Hill et al.
 cats, in generalized infection, and if environmental
1995; Moriello and Deboer 1995b).
 contamination is a serious risk for other cats and
The daily dose regimen depends on the formulation
 people.
(microsize versus ultramicrosize) (Moriello 2004).
The recommended dose in small animals for microsize
Enilconazole
griseofulvin is 50 mg/kg once daily and for ultramicro.
 Enilconazole is approved for the treatment of canine
size griseofulvin it is 10-15 mg/kg/day. Griseofulvin is
 and equine dermatophytosis. Only in France it is regis-
 given orally When used as the only therapy for fe-
 tered for feline dermatophytosis. Enilconazole is very
line dermatophytosis, mycological cure is achieved in
effective on M. caris-infected hair (Moriello 2004).
63-70 days (Moriello and Deboer 1995b). The effi-
A 0.2% solution is used as a sponge-on and leave-
cacy and proper dose of griseofulvin in horses has not
on treatment. Toxicity has been reported in cats and is
been thoroughly researched. However, a dosage of 100
considered to be related to oral ingestion by grooming.
 mg/kg daily has been advocated. There are no reports
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms  203
on the necessary treatment duration in horses (Rosser
has been achieved after 70 days oftreatment (Colombo
1995).
et al. 2001).
Ketoconazole
Terbinafine
Griseofulvin therapy is rapidly being replaced by azoles
 Similar to azoles, allylamines interfere with ergos-
that block ergosterol biosynthesis, a key component of
terol biosynthesis in the fungal membrane, although
the cytoplasmic membrane of fungi ( Vanden Bossche
at an earlier step in the enzymatic pathway. Ally.
et al. 2003). Ketoconazole is the prototype of azoles.
lamines inhibit the fungal enzyme squalene epoxi-
However, it is not approved for the therapy of der-
dase. The main compound of the allylamine class is
matophytosis in animals and has demonstrated con-
terbinafine. Terbinafine is one of the main treatment
siderable side effects at high doses. Since other azoles
options for dermatophyte infections in a nimals. Com-
 are approved for the treatment of dermatophytosis,
 pared to griseofulvin, it is more effective and less toxic.
ketoconazole should no longer be used in animals.
 There are several studies on the use of terbinafine and
various doses have been reported to treat dogs or cats
Itraconazole
(Mancianti et al. 1999; Chen 2000; Castanon-Olivares
Itraconazole is an azole derivate with particular ac-
et al. 2001; Kotnik et al. 2001; Kotnik 2002; Moriello
cumulation in lung, kidney, liver, bone, muscle, skin,
2003a). The recommended dose is 30-40 mg/kg orally
and nails. It is, therefore, ideally suited to treat der-
once a day, but there are additional studies necessaryto
matophytosis. In humans, itraconazole formulated in
evaluate short-term cycles or continuous versus pulse
capsules should be administered with food (Barone
 therapy. Terbinafine is available in both oral and top-
et al. 1993). The soluble formulation, however, should
 ical formulations and appears to be well tolerated in
be given without food. Concurrent treatment with
 dogs and cats. However, terbinafine is not yet approved
antacida will diminish absorption. Itraconazole is gen-
for the use in veterinary medicine.
erally well tolerated. The most common side effects
are vomiting, anorexia and elevation of liver enzymes,
Lufenuron
and in rare cases icterus. In the dog cutaneous vas-
 Lufenuron is a benzyl-urea phenol compound that in-
culitis has been described with dosages higher than
hibits chitin synthesis and is used as an insecticide.
5 mg/kg. Itraconazole is with teratogenic in labora-
Since chitin is a critical component of the outer cell
tory animals. Although less prominent than in ke-
wall of fungi, chitin inhibition can also have antifungal
 toconazole, it has a known potential for drug-drug
activity. Its efficacy in the therapy of dermatophyto-
interactions, mediated through the effects on the cy-
sis in dogs and cats was evaluated in several studies,
 tochrome P450 3A isoenzyme and the P-glycoprotein
reporting contradictory results (Ben Ziony and Arzi
system. Thus, the plasma concentration of several im-
2000, 2001; Guillot et al. 2002; Deboer et al. 2003;
portant therapeutics such as cyclosporine, digoxin,
Moriello 2004; Zur and Elad 2006). Although one
warfarin, and ivermectin may be increased when given
retrospective study suggests a strong association with
together with itraconazole. Phenobarbitals and pheny-
recovery from dermatophytosis (Ben Ziony and Arzi
toin might increase the metabolism of itraconazole
 2000), controlled blinded prospective studies did not
and hence can decrease its plasma levels (Willems
 confirm these results. Lufenuron did not prevent in-
et al. 2001). Due to its retention in target sites (skin a nd 
 fection, nor did it alter the course of infection ( Deboer
nails), it is possible to use intermittent dosing. In cats,
et al. 2003; Moriello et al. 2004a; Zur and Elad 2006).
a residual effect for up to 2 weeks has been described
 Furthermore, the use oflufenuron in conjunction with
(Sterkens 1997; Vlaminck and Engelen 2004).
topical enilconazole in two catteries with dermatophy-
The proposed dosing of itraconazole is a 6-week
tosis did not result in cure (Guillot et al. 2002). There
pulse therapy with 1 week on treatment (daily dosing
fore, lufenuron should not be used for the treatment
of 5 mg/kg) and 1 week off. This treatment schedule
of dermatophytosis.
has been described to achieve clinical cure in 100% of
shelter cats and mycological cure within 12 weeks in
4.1.2.3.3 Environmental decontamination
 85% of them (Cieslicki 2004). When given orally once
Commercial disinfectants are tested for antifungal
daily at 5 mg/kg for28 days, followed by an alternating
actions by observing their effects on suspensions
weekly therapy, a 100% clinical and mycological cure
 of fungal spores or fungal mycelium in vitro. In
 204  Inflammatory alopecias
dermatophytosis, however, the dermatophytes grow
strate mites in healthy animals since their number is
in or along hair fibers, and these may protect the
very low (Scott et al. 2001). The life cycle of D. canis
fungus from the action of disinfectants. Studies that
lasts 3-4 weeks and consists of four stages: a fusiform
mimic the actual conditions in isolated infected hair
egg, a six-legged larva, an eight-legged nymph, and an
demonstrated that most consistent fungicidal activity
eight-legged cigar-shaped adult (Scott et al. 2001).
is provided by lime sulfur (1:33), enilconazole, and
Many mammals may host more than one species of
1:10 bleach. Lime sulfur and enilconazole are 100%
Dermodex mites, but so far proof of distinctive different
fungicidal, even if the recommended concentration is
species is lacking. In the dog, a short-bodied D. cornei
diluted 1:4 (Moriello et al. 2004b; Moriello and New-
has been reported to coinfect the skin with D. carisand
bury 2006). Recently, the efficacy of benzalkonium
resides in the stratum corneum rather than the hair
chloride, a quaternary ammonium compound, and
follicle (Chesney 1999; Tamura et al. 2001). D. injai
Virkon-S was tested against M. canis (Marchetti et al.
is a long-bodied mite with about twice the length of
 2006) and showed approximately 90% effcacy. In con-
 D. canis (Desch and Hillier 2003). These mites prefer
 trast, chlorhexidine solutions, phenolic disinfectants,
the dorsal trunk and cause excessive greasiness more
and other quaternary ammonium compounds have
than alopecia. Terrier breeds and their crosses were
no effects (Moriello et al. 2004b).
 overrepresented in one study.
In the dog, infections with Dermodex mites can be
4.1.2.3.4 Vaccination
divided into juvenile and adult onset and can be de-
Vaccination against dermatophytosis  with life-
scribed as localized or generalized. Localized demod-
attenuated T. verrucosum has proven effcacy in cattle.
icosis in young dogs can occur in any breed and is
frequently self-limiting. Generalized juvenile demod-
Large-scale vaccination programs initiated during the
 past 30 years in eastern Europe and some Scandinavian
icosis by contrast is a severe disease that is more com-
countries have reduced the prevalence of dermatophy.
mon in purebred dogs. A hereditary predisposition is
 likely and an autosomal recessive mode has been pro-
tosis in cattle to less than 1% of all herds (Gordon and
Bond 1996; Bredahl and Gyllensvaan 2000). Similar
posed. Studies in dogs with generalized demodicosis
have demonstrated a decrease in lymphoblastogene-
results were obtained in farmed foxes with a combina-
tion of a life vaccine and an inactivated vaccine for M.
sis and a reduction in interleukin-2 and its receptor
caris (Bredahl et al. 2000). In cats and horses, how-
expression, most likely associated with a mite-specifc
ever, commercially available inactivated vaccines did
reduction in Th-1 response (Lemarié and Horohov
neither prevent infection nor did they provide a faster
1996). However, puppies with demodicosis do not
 mycological cure when compared to nonvaccinated
seem to suffer from immune dysfunction, and unspe-
cific immunostimulation does not change the course
controls (Deboer and Moriello 1995b; DeBoer et al.
 2002; Karle et al. 2002). No studies on dermatophyte
of the disease (Mueller 2004). On the basis ofthe heri-
vaccination have been performed in dogs so far.
tability of demodicosis, dogs with generalized demod-
icosis and their parents should be excluded from fur-
ther breeding.
4.1.3 Demodicosis
 Adult onset demodicosis in most cases develops due
to an immunosuppressing disease or therapy, and a
4.1.3.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
thorough clinical work-up for any underlying disease
Demodicosis is a common and often serious skin dis-
is warranted.
ease ofthe dog. Itis less common in cats and very rarely
 In the cat, the equivalent to D. caris is D. felis that
reported in horses and farm animals. Demodex mites
harbors the hair follicle (Desch and Nutting 1979;
are thought to be normal inhabitants of the piloseba-
Chesney 1989). Cats, however, do not develop a juve.
ceous unit in humans and most animals. In the dog, it
nile onset of demodicosis, but rather develop adult on-
is known that Dermodex canis mites are transmitted to
 set disease secondary to immunosuppression caused
neonates from the bitch within the first few days after
by feline immunodeficiency virus, feline leukemia
birth. They feed on skin cells, sebum, and epidermal
virus, or diabetes mellitus (Ackerman 1984; Scoft et
debris and spend their entire life cycle on the host.
al. 2001; Lowenstein et al. 2005). Cats can also be in-
Although normal inhabitants, it is diffcult to demon-
fected by a short-bodied mite, D. gatoi (Desch and
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms  205
Stewart 1999). It is a stubby and small mite that lives
set (Lemarié and Horohov 1996). The former usually
in the stratum corneum rather than the hair folli-
starts in dogs less than 18 months of age and the le-
cle. Infection causes severe pruritus (Beale 1998). Its
sions may be similar to those of localized demodico-
worldwide distribution differs with most reports from
sis, but are often complicated by secondary pyoderma.
the United States and very few reports so far from
Pruritus can become severe with secondary skin infec-
Europe or Japan.
tions. Cutaneous changes include extensive hair loss,
 papules, and pustules that coalesce to crusted plaques
and sometimes nodular lesions with deep folliculitis
4.1.3.2 Diagnosis
and furunculosis due to secondary infections. Come-
4.1.3.2.1 Clinical presentation of canine
dones and follicular casts are common features. Pe-
demodicosis
ripheral lymphadenopathy is always present and some
Localized demodicosis usually consists of one or sev-
 dogs develop fever, pain, and septicemia. In contrast
eral small erythematous or hyperpigmented alopecic
to short-coated breeds, some long-coated breeds and
and slightly scaly lesions. Follicular plugging, come-
some terriers (e.g., West Highland White Terrier, Scot-
dones, or follicular casts may be present. The face,
tish Terrier) do not develop extensive alopecia, but
lip commissures, periocular area, and forelegs are the
 present with extensive scaling, exfoliation, and espe-
most common sites. In general, lesions are not sym-
cially severe follicular casts (Scott et al. 2001).
metric and bilaterally periocular alopecia, although
 Head, trunk, and legs are most frequently affected.
often cited, is not pathognomonic for canine demod-
 Involvement of the paws may occur in conjunction
icosis. Pruritus is variable. There are no uniformly
with generalized demodicosis or alone and is marked
accepted criteria for differentiating the localized from
by severe swelling, erythema, and interdigital hemor-
the generalized form. In general, localized forms are
rhagic bullae (Fig. 4.1.12). Infections by D. injai may
 considered less than 6-8 focal lesions with less than
present with oily seborrhea over the back as the only
3 cm in diameter and no involvement of the feet
clinical sign (Hillier and Desch 2002).
(Gortel 2006). Most cases occur in young otherwise
Purebred dogs and short-haired breeds such as
healthy dogs and resolve without treatment. Progres-
Doberman Pinscher, Pit Bull Terrier, Pug, Boxer, En-
sion to generalized disease is rare and cannot be
glish Bulldog, Boston Terrier, Great Dane, Chinese
avoided by local treatment.
Shar- Pei, American Staffordshire Terrier, and Dalma-
Generalized demodicosis is a severe and potentially
tian seem to be at increased risk for developing de-
life-threatening skin disease. It involves more than six
modicosis. There might be a familiar accumulation
spots, one entire body region, or at least two feet.
in certain litters. Commonly affected medium-haired
It can be divided into juvenile onset and adult on-
breeds include the West Highland White Terrier,
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.1.12 Generalized demodicosis in a Pug. (a) Extensive alopecia, furunculosis, and lichenification of the ventral trunk and 
extremities; (b) severe involvement of the paws.
206  Inflammatory alopecias
Scottish Terrier and Airedale Terrier. Long-haired
and crusting. D. cati infections in the cat can also
 breeds at increased risk are the German Shepherd Dog,
 present simply with a ceruminous otitis externa (Scott
Collie, Old English Sheepdog, and Afghan Hound
et al. 2001).
(Gross et al. 2005).
Feline demodicosis caused by the short-bodied
Adult onset generalized demodicosis is often seen in
 D. gatoi in most cases is very pruritic and therefore
conjunction with immunosuppressive drugs such as
resembles clinically allergic skin diseases or feline sca-
corticosteroids or cytotoxic drugs, or immunosup-
bies. Alopecia, excoriation, crusts, and multifocal ery
 pressive diseases such as hyperadrenocorticism, lym-
thema are concentrated at the head, neck, and limbs. In
phoma or other neoplasias, leishmaniasis, and hy-
some cases alopecia of the abdomen mimics feline hy-
 pothyroidism (Scott et al. 2001). A thorough clinical
 persensitivity reactions or psychogenic alopecia. The
work-up for any underlying disease is recommended,
infection with D. gatoi is thought to be contagious.
 but not always can an immunosuppression be docu-
mented.
4.1.3.2.3 Diagnostic tests
To diagnose demodicosis due to Dermodex mites that
4.1.3.2.2 Clinical presentation of feline
harbor the hair follicle or sebaceous glands, a deep skin
demodicosis
scraping is evaluated under the microscope (see Sec-
 In the cat, infection with D. cati is often localized to the
tion 2.1.4.6) (Hall and Keirstead 2005; Gortel 2006).
head, periocular regions, and neck. Lesions consist of
 In most patients, both adult and immature vital mites
 patches or plaques of erythema, ulceration, crusts, and
and eggs are found at the initial presentation (Fig.
alopecia. Generalized demodicosis affects the neck,
2.1.3). It is necessary to differentiate between imma-
trunk, and limbs and reveals variable pruritus. Lesions
ture and adult mites, since a continuous high pro.
range from generalized alopecia with scaling and seb-
 portion of immature mites suggests treatment failure.
orrhea (Fig. 4.1.13) to erythema, hyperpigmentation,
Trichograms can also be useful for the diagnosis of
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.1.13 Feline demodicosis. (a) Mild alopecia of the distal
extremities; (b) alopecia of the face.
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms  207
demodicosis, especially in areas where skin scrapings
4.1.3.3 Therapy
are difficult to obtain (Saridomichelakis et al. 2007).
4.1.3.3.1 Therapy of canine demodicosis
Negative trichograms, however, do not rule out the
disease. Since Dermodex mites are part of the nor-
Localized demodicosis resolves spontaneously in most
 mal cutaneous fauna, occasionally a single mite may
cases. Treatment may comprise topical benzoyl sham-
be found on skin scrapings of normal patients. In
 poo (or benzoyl gel) or systemic antibiotics for sec-
questionable cases, additional scrapings should be ob-
 ondary pyoderma. Miticidal therapy should not be
tained. In contrast to the mites living in hair follicles,
performed, since otherwise neither spontaneous re-
the short-bodied mites such as D. gatoi are localized
 gression nor generalization of the disease can be de-
superficially in the stratum corneum, and can be found
 termined. The later, however, would suggest breeding
in superficial skin scrapings, although they may easily
restrictions.
be overlooked due to their small size.
Generalized demodicosis is a serious disease, and
 Biopsies may be needed to diagnose demodicosis in
 treatment of this condition is lengthy and expensive.
some breeds such as the Shar- Pei, in some areas of the
The general health status should be assessed and con-
body such as the feet, or in cases with chronic scarring
current underlying diseases should be treated ( Mueller
lesions (Gross et al. 2005). Histopathology will re-
2004; Gortel 2006). Immunosuppressive drugs should
veal a lymphocytic perifolliculitis and mural folliculi-
be discontinued whenever possible. Most dogs with
tis. Intraluminal mites and a nodular granulomatous
 generalized demodicosis suffer from secondary super-
dermatitis with fragments of mites are diagnostic for
ficial or deep pyoderma, requiring a 4-6 week course
demodicosis (Figure 4.1.14a,b) (Caswell et al. 1997).
of antibiotics (see Section 4.1.1.3.2).
(b)
{a]
of the entire folicle resulting in a foreign body granuloma (left); (b) higher magnification of the follicular infundibulum with
intrafollicular Demodex mites.
208  Inflammatory alopecias
Treatment of demodicosis has to be monitored by
tem of mites and insects. This results in an increased
clinical and parasitological responses. Skin scrapings 
cell permeability to chloride ions, resulting in neuro-
from previously affected areas are collected every 4
muscular blockage, paralysis, and death of the mite.
weeks regardless of the clinical assessment. Skin scrap-
Mammals lack glutamate-gated chloride channels and
ings are negative if only dead mites or mite segments
GABA-gated chloride channels in the peripheral ner-
 are present. Treatment should be continued until at
vous system. Since macrocyclic lactones do not cross
least two consecutive skin scrapings are negative. A
the blood-brain barrier, they are regarded as safe in
patient can be considered cured, if there has been no
mammals (Campbell 1981, 1993).
 relapse within 12 months after cessation of therapy.
 Ivermectin given orally at daily doses of 300-600
μg/kg has demonstrated effcacy in several studies
Amitraz
(Mueller 2004). Adverse effects are rare and include
 The only approved, highly efficacious acaricide for the
mydriasis, lethargy, and ataxia. A gradually increasing
 treatment of generalized demodicosis is amitraz. Ami-
dose starting at 50 μg/kg followed by addition of an-
 traz inhibits monoamine oxidase and prostaglandin
other 50 μg/kg until a dose of 400 μg/kg is achieved
synthesis and is an α2-adrenergic agonist (Hugnet et
improves the safety profle. However, adverse reactions
al. 1996). Amitraz is applied topically as a weekly or
can still occur up to 10 weeks into treatment. Own-
fortnightly rinse at a concentration of 0.025-0.05%.
ers should be instructed to observe their pet closely
To maximize skin contact, clipping of the hair coat
during the entire treatment period.
in medium- and long-haired dogs is essential. The
 Collies, their crossbreeds, and other herding breeds
use of a bactericidal shampoo to remove crusts and
(Shetland Sheepdog, Australian Shepherd, White
bacteria is recommended before applying amitraz. To
Swiss Shepherd, Border Collie, MeNab, Silken Wind-
avoid rinsing off the medication, dogs should not be
hound, Long-haired Whippet) are at increased risk
wetted in between treatments. Although higher con-
for severe life-threatening neurotoxicity (Geyer et al.
centrations of amitraz (up to 1.25%) or a higher fre-
2005a,b, 2007). In these breeds, a mutation of the
quency of rinses may result in a higher success rate,
multidrug resistance (mdrl) gene has been found.
this off-label use is also associated with more side ef-
This gene encodes for P-glycoprotein, a transporter
fects (Hugnet et al. 2001). Even with the standard
molecule that transports drugs from the brain back
therapy, adverse effects are common and include de-
into the blood (Fromm 2000). Dogs that are homozy-
pression, bradycardia, ataxia, hyperglycemia, and gas-
 gous for the mutation show an increased ivermectin
 trointestinal disturbance. A premedication with Ati-
sensitivity. Toxicity comprises ataxia, stupor, paralysis,
pamezol (0.1 mg/kg i.m.) or Yohimbin (0.1 mg/kg
coma, and death. There is no antidote. In many coun-
p.o.) has been used to counteract and prevent side ef-
tries, a commercial test for detecting the mutation is
fects in higher concentrations. Rinsing with Amitraz
m shop g parapisuoo aq pmous pue aqelieae mou
should be performed in a well-ventilated room, and
increased risk or unknown pedigree have to be treated
 protective clothing (gloves) should be worn, since ad-
(Geyer et al. 2005b). Ivermectin is not approved for
verse effects such as respiratory problems have been
the treatment of demodicosis in dogs or cats.
observed in humans (Scott et al. 2001). Amitraz may
interact with other monoamine oxidase inhibitors and
Milbemycin
therefore sedatives should be avoided.
 Milbemycin oxime is approved in most countries for
 preventing infection with heartworms and intestinal
Avermectins
parasites. An evidence-based review of the literature
Systemic macrocyclic lactones such as avermectins
describes efficacy of milbemycin in demodicosis at
(e.g-, ivermectin, doramectin) and milbemycins (mil-
a daily dose of 2 mg/kg. This dose is well tolerated
bemycin oxime and moxidectin) are broad-spectrum
 and can even be applied in ivermectin-sensitive dogs,
antiparasitic agents. Their efficacy in the treatment of
as Collies only showed signs of toxicity at 5 mg/kg
 generalized demodicosis has been demonstrated in a
(Tranquilli et al. 1991). One disadvantage of milbe-
number of studies (Mueller 2004).
mycin oxime, however, is its high cost.
Macrocyclic lactones potentiate glutamate-gated
Moxidectin is another milbemycin that has shown
chloride channels or gamma-aminobutyric acid
 good efficacy in generalized demodicosis at a dose
(GABA)-gated chloride channels of the nervous sys-
of 400 ug/kg per day. Similar side effects as with
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms  209
ivermectin may occur, but are less common (Paul et
infection, hookworm dermatitis, contact dermatitis,
al. 2000; Geyer et al. 2005a). Moxidectin has recently
 and superficial bacterial folliculitis.
been launched as a topical 1% spot-on solution com-
The fastest and easiest way to confirm the diag-
bined with imidacloprid. It is approved and marketed
nosis is to demonstrate typical larvae in skin scrap-
for the treatment of demodicosis. In mild cases the re-
ings, where the relatively small (approximately 650
sponse rate is comparable to what is reported for other
μm in length) motile larvae are found. In uncertain
treatments. However, the outcome for more severely
cases, skin biopsies are diagnostic and will reveal an
affected patients in unsatisfactory ( Mueller et al. 2008).
eosinophil-rich perifolliculitis, folliculitis, and furun-
culosis with similarity to demodicosis (Gross et al.
2005). Fragments of nematodes are found within the
4.1.3.3.2 Therapy of feline demodicosis
follicular infundibulum. If confirmation of the para-
There are only few reports on the treatment of fe-
site is requested, nematodes can be cultured from skin
line demodicosis. Weekly dips with 2% lime sulfur
 scrapings on an ordinary blood agar.
are recommended. Weekly rinses with 0.0125-0.025%
Therapy mainly consists of a complete removal of
amitraz have been effective but adverse effects are nu-
the moist bedding, asthe infection isself-limiting ifthe
merous in the cat (Mueller 2004). Ivermectin (400
source ofinfection is abandoned. Various ectoparasiti-
μg/kg/dayp.o.) has been used in a few cases with good
cides are reported to be effective such as organophos-
success. Adverse effects include mydriasis, blindness,
phate dips, selamectin and ivermectin. Antibiotic ther
ataxia and Heinz body anemia (from the glycol vehi-
apy is supportive if a concomitant pyoderma exists.
cle). As the short bodied mite is thought to be conta-
 gious, all cats in the household should be treated.
4.1.5 Straelensiosis
4.1.4 Rhabditic folliculitis
 Straelersia cyrotis belongs to the Leeuwenhoekidae,
Pelodera (syn. Rhabditis) strongyloides is a free-living
a family close to Trombiculidae. A distinctive nodular
saprophytic nematode whose natural habitat is de-
dermatitis in dogs, induced by the larvae of Straelensia
caying organic material. Pelodera can be very numer
cynotis, was first reported in 1999 (Le Net et al. 1999).
ous in damped straw, hay, soil, or marshes. Its third-
 Since then there have been several cases reported from
stage larvae are able to invade mammalian skin that
the south of France and one case from Portugal (Bour-
comes into contact with contaminated soil or straw
deau et al. 2000; Le Net et al. 2002; Seixas et al. 2006).
(Scott et al. 2001). It is therefore not surprising that
 All affected dogs lived in rural areas either as hunting
 rhabditic folliculitis has been reported in many mam-
dogs or outdoor dogs with free access to wildlife.
malian species including dogs and humans. Domestic
Nymphs and adults from the families Trombiculi-
animals are generally considered as aberrant hosts to
dae and Leeuwenhoekidae are free-living, whereas the
P. strongyloides (Willers 1970; Farrington et al. 1976;
larvae primarily parasitize wild mammals, birds, and
Pasyk 1978; Clark et al. 1989; Ramos et al. 1996; Saari
reptiles and only rarely parasitize domestic animals
and Nikander 2006).
 and humans (Scott et al. 2001). For Straelensia cynotis
 Rhabditic folliculitis is a rare skin disease in do-
it was postulated that the natural host was the fox,
mestic animals, particularly with increasing indoor
whereas the dog is only an incidental host. Straelersia
housing of pet animals. Most reports originate from
cyrotis infections in dogs are not contagious.
Central Europe and the Midwestern United States, but
The most striking clinical feature of strealensiosis
recently 11 cases from Finland were described. Hunt-
is a very sudden onset and a rapid development of
 ing dogs and dogs with short-hair coat are overrepre-
numerous nodules, papules, and crusts with a cen-
sented (Saari and Nikander 2006).
 tral crater, sometimes accompanied by scales and ery-
Clinical features of Pelodera dermatitis are quite
thema. Lesions are not regional as in trombiculosis
severe pruritus, alopecia, and an erythematous and
but are rather multifocal or generalized. Main local-
crusting dermatitis affecting body sites in contact with
izations are the head, the neck, and the dorsum, of
the ground (Scoft et al. 2001). Differential diagnoses
 ten associated with lesions on the front legs and tail.
of rhabditic folliculitis include demodicosis, dirofi-
 Severely affected dogs may show pruritus and pain
lariosis, strongyloides stercoralis infection, Straelensia
 accompanied by lethargy and anorexia.
210  Inflammatory alopecias
Since mites are firmly attached to the hair follicle
Bourdeau P, Degorce-Rubiales F, Breton C, Poujade Deverdier A.
wall by their chelicerae, skin scrapings will not reveal
 2000. Newly recognized cutaneous manifestation of acariosis as-
sociatedwithepithelil encystmentof probable follicular origin
 any parasites. Histopathology is the diagnostic tool
in the dog. Veterinary Dermatotogy ll(1 Suppl):14-40.
of choice and will demonstrate dermal nodules com-
 Breathnach RM, Fanning S, Mulcahy G, Bassett, Jones BR. 2008.
posed of a dilated follicular ostium that contains a
Canine pododermatitis and idiopathic disease. Veterinary Journal
well-preserved larval arthropod with oval shape and a
176(2):146-157.
 Bredahl L, Gyllensvaan C. 2000. Incidence and control of cattle
length of approximately 800 μm. In addition, there is
ringworm in Scandinavia. Mycoses 43(1 Suppl):8-10.
 a severe irregular hyperplasia of the infundibular ep-
Bredahl LK, Bratberg AM, Solbakk IT. 2000. Effcacy of an exper-
imental Microsporum canis vaccine in farmed foxes. Veterinary
ithelium and a perifollicular mucinosis that can almost
Dermatology 12(1 Suppl):39.
be considered pathognomonic for this condition. The
Campbell WC. 1981. An introduction to the avermectins. New
inflammatory infiltrate mainly consists of neutrophils
Zealand Veterinary Journal 29:174-178.
 and plasma cels, in some cases developing into a sup-
Campbell WC. 1993. Ivermectin, an antiparasitic agent. Medicinal
Research Reviews 13:61-79.
purative folliculitis and furunculosis. Diagnosis can
Castanon-Olivares LR, Manzano-Gayosso P, Lopez-Martinez R, De
 be confirmed by dissection of biopsies in ethanol and
la Rosa-Velazquez IA, Soto-Reyes-Solis E. 2001. Effectiveness of
terbinafine in the eradication of Mficrosporum canis from labora-
investigation of the larval mite.
tory cats. Mycoses 44:95-97.
The clinical response totopical ectoparasitic therapy
Caswell JL, Yager JA, Parker WM, Moore PF. 1997. A prospective
is minimal, except for amitraz used twice a week (0.5-
 study of the immunophenotype and temporal changes in the
histologic lesions of canine demodicosis.Veterinary Pathology
1%). Systemic ivermectin has demonstrated some effi-
34:279-287.
 cacy. Spontaneous cure has been observed after several
Chen C. 2000. The use of terbinafine for the treatment of dermato-
months.
 phytosis. Veterinary Dermatology 12(1 Suppl):41.
Chesney CJ.1989.Demodicosis in the cat.Journat of Srmall Animal
Practice 30:689-695.
Chesney CJ. 1999. Short form of Demodex species mite in the dog:
References
occurrence and measurements. Journal of Small Animal Practice
40:58-61.
Ackerman L. 1984. Demodicosis in cats. Modern Veterinary Practice
Cieslicki M. 2004. Itrafungol, a new oral antimycotic drug for the
65:751-752
therapy of Microsporum canis infections in the cat. Der Praktische
Allaker RP, Lloyd DH, Bailey RM. 1992a. Population sizes and fre-
Tierarzt.Zeitschrif fitr fortschrittliche Tiermedizin 85:548-554.
quency of staphylococci at mucocutaneous sites on healthy dogs.
Clark EG, Griffn S, Goodall P. 1989. Saskatchewan. Pelodera der-
Veterinary Record 130:303-304
matitis in a dog. Canadian Veterinary Journal 30:970.
Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Kowalski JI, Hillier A. 1998. Microbial flora
coccus intermedius on the hair and skin of normal dogs. Research
and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of isolated pathogens
in Veterinary Science 52:174-176.
from the horizontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs with otitis 
Bannoehr J, Ben Zakour NL, Waller AS, Guardabassi L, Thoday
media.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
K, Van Den Broek AHM, Fitzgeraldi R. 2007. Population ge-
212:534-538.
netic structure of the Staphylococcus interrmedius group: insights
Colombo S, Cornegliani L, Vercelli A. 2001. Effcacy of itraconazole
into agr diversification and the emergence of methicillin-resistant
 as a combined continuous/pulse therapy in feline dermatophy-
strains. Journal of Bacteriology 189(23):8685-8692.
tosis: preliminary results in nine cases. Veterinary Dermatology
 Barone JA, Koh JG, Bierman RH, Colaizzi JL, Swanson KA, Gaf-
12:347-350.
far MC, Moskovitz BL, Mechlinski W, Van de Velde V. 1993.
Curtis C. 1998. Canine idiopathic recurrent superficial pyoderma.
Food interaction and steady-state pharmacokinetics of itracona-
Veterinary Record 143:344.
zole capsules in healthy male volunteers. Antimicrobal Agents and
Curtis CF, Lamport AI, Lloyd DH. 2006. Masked, controlled study to
Chemotherapy 37:778-784.
investigatetheefficacyofa Staphylococcus intermedius autogenous
 Beale KM. 1998. Contagion and occult demodicosis in a family of2
bacterin forthecontrolof canineidiopathic recurrent superficial
cats. Proceedings of the 14th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, San Antonio,
pyoderma. Veterinary Dermatology 17:163-168.
p. 99.
Daminet S, Ferguson DC. 2003. Influence of drugs on thyroid func-
 Ben Ziony Y, Arzi B. 2000. Use of lufenuron for treating fungal
tion in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 17:463-472.
infections of dogs and cats: 297 cases (1997-1999). fournal of the
de Jaham C. 2003. Effects of an ethyl lactate shampoo in conjunc-
American Veterinary Medical Association 217:1510-1513.
tion with a systemic antibiotic in the treatment of canine superf-
 Ben Ziony Y, Arzi B. 2001. Updated information for treatment of
cial bacterial pyoderma in an open-label, nonplacebo-controlled
fungal infections in cats and dogs. fournal of the American Veteri-
study. Veterinary Therapeutics 4:94-100.
nary Medical Association 218:1718.
Deboer DJ.1990. Strategies formanagement of recurrent pyoderma
Bloom PB, Rosser EJ. 2001. Effcacy of once-daily clindamycin hy-
in dogs. Veterinary ClinicsofNorth America.Small Animal Practice
drochloride in the treatment of superficial bacterial pyoderma in
20:1509-1524.
dogs. Journal ofthe American Animal Hospital Association37:537-
 Deboer DJ. 1995. Management of chronic and recurrent pyoderma
542.
in the dog. In: Bonagura JD (ed), Kirk's Current Veterinary Ther-
Boag A, Loeffler A, Lloyd DH. 2004. Methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
apy XIl, pp. 611-617. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
coccus aureus isolates from companion animals. Veterinary Record
Deboer DJ, Moriello KA. 1995a. Inability of two topical treat-
154:411.
ments to influence the course of experimentally induced
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms  211
dermatophytosis in cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Med-
Graeser Y, Scott J, Summerbell R. 2008. The new species con-
ical Association 207:52-57.
mdopoundos yoeordde orsydkjod e-ssokydoeuap u ad
Deboer DJ, Moriello KA. 1995b. Investigations of a killed dermato-
166:239-256.
phyte cell-wall yaccine against infection with Microsporum canis
Gros TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ. 1992. Veterinary Dermatopathology:
in cats. Research in Veterinary Science 59:1l0-113.
A Macroscopic and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline
 Deboer DI, Moriello KA, Blum JL, Volk LM. 2003. Effects of lufenu-
Skin Disease. St. Louis: Mosby Year Book.
 ron treatment in cats on the establishment and course of Micro-
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. 2005. Skin Diseases of
sporumcanisinfectionfollowingexposuretoinfectedcats. Journal
the Dog and the Cat. Oxford: Blackwell Science.
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 222:1216-1220.
Gross TL, Stannard AA, Yaeger JA. 1997. An anatomical classifica-
DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA, Blum JL, Volk LM, Bredahl LK. 2002.
tion of folliculitis. Veterinary Dermatology 8:147-156.
 Safety and immunologic effects after inoculation of inactivated
Guillot J, Malandain E, Jankowski F, Rojzner K, Fournier C, Touati
and combined live-inactivated dermatophytosis vaccines in cats.
F, Chermette R, Seewald W, Schenker R. 2002. Evaluation of the
American fournal of Veterinary Research 63:1532-1537.
effcacy of oral lufenuron combined with topical enilconazole
Desch C, Nuting WB.1979.Demodex cati Hirst 1919: a redescrip-
for the management of dermatophytosis in catteries.Veterinary
tion. Cornefl Veterinarian 69:280-285.
Record 150:714-718.
Desch CE, Hillier A. 2003. Demodex injai: a new species of hair folli-
 Hall JA, Keirstead N. 2005. Diagnostic dermatology. Demodicosis.
cle mite (Acari: Demodecidae) from the domestic dog (Canidae).
Canadian Veterinary Journal 46:949-950, 952.
Journal of Medical Entomology 40:146-149.
Harvey RG, Lloyd DH. 1994. The distribution of Staphylococcus in-
Desch CE, Stewart TB. 1999. Demodex gator new species of hair
termedius and coagulase-negative staphylococci on the hair, skin
follicle mite (Acari: Demodecidae) from the domestic cat (Car-
surface, within the hair folicles and on the mucous membranes
nivora: Felidae). Journal of Medical Entomology 36:167-170.
of dogs. Veterinary Dermatology 5:75-78.
Farrington DO, Lundvall RL, Greve JH. 1976. Pelodera strongyloides
Harvey RG, Noble WC, Ferguson EA. 1993. A comparison of lin-
dermatitis in a horse in Iowa. Veterinary Medicine, Smalf Animal
comycin hydrochloride and clindamycin hydrochloride in the
Chinician 71:l199-1202.
treatment of superficial pyoderma in dogs. Veterinary Record
Farstvedt EG, Hendrickson DA, Dickenson CE, Spier SJ. 2004. Treat-
132:351-353.
 ment of suppurative facial cellulitis and panniculitis caused by
Heffner KA, White SD, Frevert CW, Jakowski R. 1988. Corynebac-
Corynebacterium peudotuberculosisintwohorses.ournal of the
terium foliculitisin ahorse.Journalofthe AmericanVeterinary
American Veterinary Medical Association224(7):1139-1142, 1112.
Medical Association 193:89-90.
Foil CS. 1994. Fungal diseases. Clinics in Dermatofogy 12:529-542.
Heinrich K, Newbury S, Verbrugge M. 2005. Detection of environ-
Frank LA, Kania SA, Hnilica KA, Wilkes RP, Bemis DA. 2003. Isola-
mental contamination in homes exposed to Microsporum canis
tion of Staphylococcus schleiferifrom dogs with pyoderma. Journal
arthrospores and efficacy of the triple cleaning technique (ab-
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 222:451-454.
stract). Veterinary Dermatology l6:192.
 Fromm MF. 2000. P-glycoprotein: a defense mechanism limiting
Hill PB, Moriello KA. 1994. Canine pyoderma. Journal of the Amer-
oral bioavailability and CNS accumulation ofdrugs. International
ican Veterinary Medical Association 204:334-340.
Journal of Clinicai Pharmacology and Therapeutics 38:69-74.
Hill PB, Moriello KA, Shaw SE. 1995. Systemic antifungal drugs.
Ganiere JP, Medaille C, Etore F. 2004. In vitro antimicrobial activity
Veterinary Dermatology 6:59-66.
of orbifloxacin against Staphylococcus intermedius isolates from
Hillier A, Alcorn JR, Cole LK et al. 2003. Pyoderma due to Pseu-
Canine skin and ear infections. Research in Veterinary Science
domonas aeruginosa infectionindogs:15 cases.Proceedings ofthe
77:67-71.
18th AAVD/ACVD Meeting Monterey, p. 222.
Ganiere JP, Medaille C, Mangion C. 2005. Antimicrobial drug sus-
Hillier A, Desch CE. 2002. Large-bodied Demodex mite infestation
ceptibiltyofStahyccusntrmdusclincalisolates fromca
in4 dogs.Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association
nine pyoderma. Journal of Veterinary Medicine.Part B: Infectious
220:623-627,613.
Diseases and Veterinary Public Health 52:25-31.
Hnilica KA, Medleau L. 2002. Evaluation of topically applied enil-
Gentles JC, Barnes MJ. 1960. A report on animal experiments with
conazole forthetreatmentofdermatophytosisinaPersiancattery.
griseofulvin. The griseofulvin content of hair. Archives of Derma-
Veterinary Dermatology 13:23-28.
tofogy 81:703-708.
Holm BR, Petersson U, Morner A, Bergstrom K, Franklin A, Greko
Geyer J,Doring B, Godoy IR, LeidolfR, Moritz A, Petzinger E. 2005a.
C. 2002. Antimicrobial resistance in staphylococci from canine
 Frequency of the nt230 (del4) MDRl mutation in collies and re-
pyoderma: a prospective study of frst-time and recurrent cases
lated dog breeds in Germany. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology
in Sweden. Veterinary Record i51:600-605.
and Therapeutics 28:545-551.
Holm BR, Rest JR, Seewald W. 2004. A prospective study
Geyer J, Doring B, Godoy JR, Moritz A, Petzinger E. 2005b. Devel-
of the clinical fndings, treatment and histopathology of 44
opment of a PCR-based diagnostic test detecting a nt230(del4)
cases of pyotraumatic dermatitis. Veterinary Dermatology 15:
MDRI mutation in dogs: verification in a moxidectin-sensitive
369-376.
Australian shepherd. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and
Horspool LJ, van Lar P, Van Den BR, Mawhinney I. 2004. Treat-
Therapeutics 28:95-99.
ment of canine pyoderma with ibafloxacin and marbofloxacin-
Geyer J, Klintzsch S, Meerkamp K, Wohlke A, Distl O, Moritz A,
fluoroquinolones with different pharmacokinetic profles.
 Petzinger E. 2007. Detection of the nt230(del4) MDRl mutation
Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology andTherapeutics 27:
in white Swiss shepherd dogs: case reports of doramectin toxi-
147-153.
cosis, breed predisposition, and microsatellite analysis. fournaf of
Horspool LJ, van Laar P, Van Den BR, Mawhinney IC. 2006. Clinical
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 30:482-485.
efficacy of two ibafloxacin formulations in the treatment of canine
Gordon PJ, Bond R. 1996. Efficacy of a live attenuated Trichophy-
Pyoderma. Veterinary Record 158:236-237.
ton verrucosum vaccine for control of bovine dermatophytosis.
Hugnet C, Bruchon-Hugnet C, Royer H, Bourdoiseau G. 2001.
Veterinary Record 139:395-396.
Efficacy of 1.25% amitraz solution in the treatment of generalized
Gortel K. 2006. Update on canine demodicosis. Veterinary Clinucs of
demodicosis (eight cases) and sarcoptic mange (five cases) in
North America. Small Animal Practice 36:229-41, ix.
dogs. Veterinary Derrmatology 12:89-92.
212  Inflammatory alopecias
Hugnet C, Buronrosse F, Pineau X, Cadore JL, Lorgue G, Berny PJ.
the households of infected cats and dogs. Journal of Feline
1996. Toxicity and kinetics of amitraz in dogs. American Journal
Medicine e Surgery 5:323-328.
of Veterinary Research 57:1506-1510.
Mancianti F, Papini R. 1996. Isolation of keratinophilic fungi from
Ihrke PJ. 1987. An overview of bacterial skin disease in the dog.
the floors of private veterinary clinics in Italy. Veterinary Research
British Veterinary Journal 143:112-118.
Communications 20(2):161-166.
Ihrke PJ. 1996. Bacterial skin diseases in the dog: a guide to canine
 Mancianti F, Pedonese F, Millanta F, Guarnieri L. 1999. Effcacy of
pyoderma.Veterinary Learning Systems, Conference Proceeding,
oral terbinafine in feline dermatophytosis due to Microsporum
Trenton, pp. 1-97.
canis. Journal of Feline Medicine e Surgery 1:37-41.
 Jones RD, Kania SA, Rohrbach BW, Frank LA, Bemis DA. 2007.
 Marchetti V, Mancianti F, Cardini G, Luchetti E. 2006. Evaluation
Prevalence of oxacillin- and multidrug-resistant staphylococci in
 of fungicidal efficacy of benzalkonium chloride (Steramina G
clinical samples from dogs: 1,772 samples (2001-2005). Jourrnal
Lv.) and Virkon-S against Microsporum canis for environmental
ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association 230:221-227.
disinfection. Veterinary Research Commumications 30:255-261.
 Kania SA, Williamson NL, Frank LA, WIkes RP, Jones RD, Bemis
 Mason I. 1993. Pustules and crusted papules. In: Locke PH, Har-
DA. 2004. Methicillin resistance of staphylococci isolated from
vey RG, Mason I (eds), Manual of Small Animal Dermatology,
the skin of dogs with pyoderma. American Journal of Veterinary
Pp.60-64.Gloucestershire:BSAVA.
Research 65:1265-1268.
Mason K, Frost A, O'Boyle D, Connole MD. 2000. Treatment of a
Karle J, Steller U, Fenner A. 2002. Controlled blind study to prove 
Microsporum canisinfection in a colony of Persian cats with grise-
the efficacy of the inactivated vaccine Insol Dermatophyton in
 ofulvin and a shampoo containing 2% miconazole, 2% chlorhexi-
artifcially infected horses. Pferdeheilkunde 18:625-628.
dine,2% miconazole and 2% chlorhexidine or placebo. Veterinary
 Kerl ME. 2003. Update on canine and feline fungal diseases. Veteri-
Dermatology 12(1 Suppl):55.
nary Clinics of North America. Small Anirmal Practice 33:721-747.
May ER. 2006. Bacterial skin diseases: current thoughts on patho-
Kim TJ, Na YR, Le I. 2005. Investigations into the basis ofchloram-
genesis and management. Veterinary Clinics of North America.
phenicol and tetracycline resistance in Staphylococcus intermedius
Small Animal Practice 36:185-202.
Aaa fo jun sop u uaod jo sasee o saeo
 May ER, Hnilica KA, Frank LA, Jones RD, Bemis DA. 2005. Isolation
Medicine.Part B:InfectiousDiseases andVeterinary Public Heath
ofStaphylococcus schleiferifrom healthy dogs and dogs with otitis,
52:119-124.
pyoderma,or both.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Kotnik T. 2002. Drug effcacy of terbinafine hydrochloride (Lamisil)
Association 227:928-931.
during oral treatment of cats, experimentally infected with Mi-
 Medleau L, Chalmers SA. 1992. Resolution of generalized dermato-
Crosporumcanis.fournalofVeterinary Medicine.PartB:Infectious
phytosis without treatment in dogs. Journal of the American Vet-
Diseases and Veterinary Public Health 49:120-122.
erinary Medical Association 20l:1891-1892.
Kotnik T, Kozuh EN, Kuzner J, Drobnic-Kosorok M. 2001.
Moriello K. 1995. Diagnostic testing. In: Moriello K, Mason IS
Terbinafine hydrochloride treatment of Mficrosporum canis ex-
(eds), Handbook of SmallAnimal Dermatology, Pp. 19-44.Oxford:
perimentally induced ringworm in cats. Veterinary Mficrobiology
Pergamon.
83:161-168.
 Moriello KA. 2001. Diagnostic techniques for dermatophytosis.
 Koutinas AF, Saridomichelakis MN, Argyroudis S, Koutinas CK,
Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice 16:219-224.
Karatzanos P, Giadinis N. 2007. Clinical, histopathological
 Moriello KA. 2003a. Feline dermatophytosis: topical and systemic
and therapeutic considerations in a flock of sheep with fa-
treatment recommendations. Veterinary Medicine 98:877-884.
Cial staphylococcal-associated dermatitis. Veterinary Dermatology
Moriello KA.2003b.Zoonotic skin diseases of dogs and cats. Animal
18:211-216.
Health Research Review 4:157-168.
Lemarie SL, Horohov DW. 1996. Evaluation of interleukin-2 pro-
 Moriello KA. 2004. Treatment of dermatophytosis in dogs and cats:
 duction and interleukin-2 receptor expression in dogs with gen-
review of published studies. Veterinary Dermatology 15:99-107.
eralised demodicosis. Veterinary Dermatology 7:213-219.
Moriello KA, DeBoer DJ. 1995a. Feline dermatophytosis: recent
Le Net J-L, Fain A, George C et al. 1999. Dermatitis in dogs in-
 advances and recommendations for therapy. In: Kunkle GA (ed),
duced by larval mite( Acari) ofthe genus Straelensia(Prostigmata:
FelineDermatology,pp.901922.Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Leeuwenhoekidae) in France. Proceedings of the 24th World Small
Moriello KA, Deboer Dj. 1995b. Efficacy of griseofulvin and itra-
Animal Veterinary Association Congress, Lyon, France.
conazole in the treatment of experimentally induced dermato-
Le Net JL, Fain A, George C, Rousselle S, Theau V, Longeart L.
phytosis in cats. Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medical Asso-
2002. Straelensiosis in dogs: a newly described nodular dermatitis
ciation 207:439-444.
induced by Straelensia cynotis. Veterinary Record 150:205-209.
Moriello KA, Deboer DJ, Schenker R, Blum JL, Volk LM. 2004a.
Lloyd DH, Carlotti DN, Koch HI, Van Den Broek AH. 1997. Treat-
Efficacy of pre-treatment with lufenuron for the prevention of
ment of canine pyoderma with co-amoxyclav: a comparison of 
Microsporum canis infection in a feline direct topical challenge
two dose rates. Veterinary Record 141:439-441.
model. Veterinary Dermatofogy 15:357-362.
Lloyd DH, Lamport AI, Noble WC, Howell SA. 1999. Fluoro-
Moriello KA, DeBoer DJ, Volk L. 2002. Determination of strain varj-
quinolone resistance in Staphylococcus intermedius. Veterinary
abilityofMicrosporumcanistodisinfetants(abstract).Veterinay
Dermatology 10:249-251.
Dermatology 13:225.
Loeffler A, Linek M, Moodley A, Guardabassi L, Sung IM, Winkler
Moriello KA, Deboer DJ, Volk LM, Sparkes A, Robinson A. 2004b.
 M, Weiss R, Lloyd DH. 2007. First report of multiresistant, mecA-
 Development of an in vitro, isolated, infected spore testing model
positive Staphyiococcus intermediusin Europe: 12 cases from a vet-
for disinfectant testing of Microsporum canis isolates. Veterinary
Dermatotogy 15:175-180.
ratology 18:412-421.
 Moriello KA, Newbury S. 2006. Recommendations for the man-
Lowenstein C, Beck W, Bessmann K, Mueller RS. 2005. Feline de-
agement and treatment of dermatophytosis in animal shelters.
modicosis caused by concurrent infestation with Dermodex cati
Veterinary Clinics ofNorth America. SmallAnimal Practice36:89-
and an unnamed species of mite. Veterinary Record 157:290-292.
114.
Mancianti F, Nardoni S, Corazza M, D'Achille P, Ponticeli C. 2003.
 Moriello KA, Verbrugge M. 2007. Use of isolated infected spores to
Environmental detection of Microsporum canis arthrospores in
 determine the sporocidal effcacy of two commercial antifungal
Folliculitis with intraluminal organisms  213
rinses against Microsporum canis. Veterinary Dermatology 18:55-
Rosser EJ Ir. 1995. Infectious crusting dermatoses. Veterinary Clinics
58.
ofNorth America. Equine Practice 1l(1):53-59.
Morris DO, Rook KA, Shofer FS, Rankin SC. 2006. Screening of
Saari SA, Nikander SE. 2006. Pelodera (syn. Rhabditis) strongyloides
Staphylococcus aureus,Staphylococcusintermedius,and Staphylo-
as a cause of dermatitis—a report of ll dogs from Finland. Acta 
coccus schleiferisolates obtained from small companion animals
Veterinaria Scandinavica 48:18.
for antimicrobial resistance: a retrospective review of 749 isolates
Salisbury RH, Barrowman PR. 1984. Fleece-rot: the epidemiology
(2003-2004). Veterinary Dermatology 17:332-337.
and signifcance of the disease in sheep. Journal of the South
Mueller RS. 2004. Treatment protocols for demodicosis: an
African Veterinary Association 55:147-151.
evidence-based review. Veterinary Dermatology 15:75-89.
Saridomichelakis MN, Koutinas AF, Farmaki R, Leontides LS, Kasa-
Mueller RS, Stephan B. 2007. Pradofloxacin in the treatment of ca-
balis D. 2007. Relative sensitivity of hair pluckings and exudate
nine deep pyoderma: a multicentred, blinded, randomized par-
microscopy for the diagnosis of canine demodicosis. Veterinary
allel trial. Veterinary Dermatology 18:144-151.
Dermatology 18:138-141.
Mueller RS, Meyer U, Bensignor E. 2008. Treatment of canine gener-
 Sasaki T, Kikuchi K, Tanaka Y, Takahashi N, Kamata S, Hiramatsu K.
alised demodicosis with a'spot-on' formulation containing 10%
2007. Reclassification of phenotypically identified Staphylococcus
moxidectin and 2.5% imidacloprid (Advokate,Bayer). Veterinary
intermedius strains. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 45(9):2770-
Dermatology 19(1 Suppl. 1):12.
2778.
 Norris BJ, Colditz IG, Dixon TJ. 2007. Fleece rot and dermatophilo-
Scott DW, Beningo KE, Miller WH Jr, Rothstein E. 1998. Effcacy
sis in sheep. Veterinary Microbiology 128:217-230.
of clindamycin hydrochloride capsules for the treatment of deep
Paradis M, Abbey L, Baker B, Coyne M, Hannigan M, Joffe D,
pyoderma due to Staphylococcus intermedius infection in dogs.
Pukay B, Trettien A, Waisglass S, Wellington J. 2001. Evaluation
CanadianVeterinary fournal39:753-756.
of the clinical effcacy of marbofloxacin (Zeniquin) tablets for the
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE. 2001. Muller and Kirk's Smalfl
treatment of canine pyoderma: an open clinical trial. Veterinary
Animal Dermatofogy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Dermatology 12:163-169.
Scott FM, Fraser J, Martin WB. 1980. Staphylococcal dermatitis of 
Pascoe RR. 1984. Infectious skin diseases ofhorses. Veterinary Clinics
sheep. Veterinary Record 107:572-574.
ofNorth America. Large Animal Practice 6:27-46.
Seixas F, Travassos PJ, Pinto ML, Correia J, Pires MA. 2006.
Pasyk K. 1978. Dermatitis rhabditidosa in an 1l-year-old girl: a new
Dermatitis in a dog induced by Straelensia cynotis: a case re-
cutaneous parasitic diseaseof man.British JournatlofDermatology
port and review of the literature. Veterinary Dermatology 17:
98:107-112.
81-84.
 Paterson S. 1999. Miconazole/chlorhexidine shampoo as an adjunct
Sparkes AH, Robinson A, MacKay AD, Shaw SE. 2000. A study of
the effcacy of topical and systemic therapy for the treatment of
nal of Small Animal Practice 40:163-166.
feline Microsporum canis infection. Journal of Feline Medicine 
 Paul AJ, Tranquilli WJ, Hutchens DE. 2000. Safety of moxidectin
Surgery 2:135-142.
in avermectin-sensitive collies. American Journal of Veterinary
 Sterkens P. 1997. Pharmacokinetics of itraconazol and hydroxy-
Research 61:482-483.
 itraconazol in cats treated orally at 5 mg/kg/day following the
Pellerin JL, Bourdeau P, Sebbag H, Person JM. 1998. Epidemio-
proposed treatment schedule Janssen Research Foundation, e-
surveillance of antimicrobial compound resistance of Staphy-
port No. FK 1855.
lococcus ntermedus clinical isolates from canine pyodermas.
Tamura Y, Kawamura Y, Inoue I,Ishino S. 2001. Scanning electron
Comparative Immunology Mficrobiology and Infectious Diseases
microscopy description of a new species of Demodex canis spp.
21:115-133.
Veterinary Dermatology 12:275-278.
 Perrins N, Bond R. 2003. Synergistic inhibition of the growth in
Tranquilli WJ, Paul AJ, Todd KS. 1991. Assessment of toxico-
vitro of Microsporum canis by miconazole and chlorhexidine.
sis induced by high-dose administration of milbemycin oxime
Veterinary Dermatology 14:99-102.
in collies. American Journal of Veterinary Research 52:l170-
Petersen AD, Walker RD, Bowman MM, Schott HC, Rosser EJ Jr.
1172.
2002. Frequency of isolation and antimicrobial susceptibility pat-
Trepanier LA, Danhof R, Toll J, Watrous D. 2003. Clinical findings in
terns of Staphyiococcus intermedius and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
 40 dogs with hypersensitivity associated with administration of
isolates from canine skin and ear samples over a 6-year period
potentiated sulfonamides. fournal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
(1992-1997).Journal ofthe AmericanAnimalHospitai Association
17:647-652.
38:407413.
Vanden Bossche H, Engelen M, Rochette F. 2003. Antifungal agents
 Pilsworth RC, Knottenbelt D. 2007. Staphylococcal pyoderma and
 of use in animal health—-chemical, biochemical and pharmaco-
furunculosis. Equine Veterinary Education 19:88-89.
logical aspects. Journalof Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeu-
Plumb DC 2005. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, Sth edn. Lon-
tics 26:5-29.
don: Wiley-Blackwell.
Vlaminck KMJA, Engelen MACM. 2004. Itraconazole: a treatment
Prescott JF, Baqqot JD, Walker RD, Dowling PM. 2000. Antimicro-
with pharmacokinetic foundations. Veterinary Dermatology 15{1
bial Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, 4th edn. Oxford: Iowa State
Suppl):8.
Press.
White SD, Brown AE, Chapman PL, Jang SS, Ihrke PJ. 2005. Evalua-
Ramos JI, Luco DF, Verde MT, Lucientes J, Fernandez A.
tionof aerobicbacteriologic culture ofepidermal collarette spec-
1996. Pelodera dermatitis in sheep. Veterinary Record 138:474-
imens in dogs with superficial pyoderma. Journal of the American
475.
Veterinary Medical Association 226:904-908.
Rich M. 2005. Staphylococci in animals: prevalence, identification
Wildermuth BE, Griffn CE, Rosenkrantz WS. 2006. Feline py-
and antimicrobial susceptibility, with anemphasis on methicillin-
oderma therapy. Cinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice
resistant Staphylococcus aureus. British fournal of Biomedical Sci-
21:150-156.
ence 62:98105.
Willems L, Van Der GR, de Beule K. 2001. Itraconazole oral solution
Rich M, Roberts L, Jones M, Young V. 2007. Staphylococcus schleiferi
and intravenous formulations: a review of pharmacokinetics and
 subspecies coagulans in companion animals. Veterinary Record
pharmacodynamics. Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeu-
161:107.
tics 26:159-169.
214  Inflammatory alopecias
Willers WB. 1970. Pelodera strongyloides in association with canine
dogs and possible misidentifcation with other canine coagulase-
dermatitis in Wisconsin. Journal of the American Veterinary Med-
positive staphylococci. Journal of Veterinary Medicine. Part B:
ical Association 156:319-320.
InfectiousDiseases and Veterinary Public Health 51:449-454.
Yager JA, Wilcock BP. 1994. Colour Atlas and Text of Surgical Pathol-
 Zur G, Elad D. 2006. In vitro and in vivo effects of lufenuron on
ogy of the Cat and Dog, London: Wolfe Publishing.
 dermatophytes isolated from cases of canine and feline dermato-
 Zdovc I, Ocepek M, Pirs T, Krt B, Pinter L. 2004. Microbiological fea-
phytoses. Journalof Veterinary Medicine.Part B:Infectious Diseases
tures of Staphylococcus schleiferi subsp. coagulans, isolated from
and Veterinary Public Health 53:122-125.
Eosinophilic folliculitis
Monika Linek
 Some alopecic diseases are histologically character-
 pod venoms from stinging insects is proposed by most
ized by an eosinophil-predominated, folliculocentric
authors (Gross 1993; Curtis et al. 1995; Guaguere et al.
inflammation. Many of these diseases may look alike,
1996). Most of the dogs develop lesions in the warm
although multiple etiological triggers are able to ini-
season and after an outdoor activity, but a direct doc-
tiate an eosinophilic reaction pattern. Intrafollicular
umentation of arthropod insults is rare. The hypoth.
parasites such as Demodex mites or nematodes can
esis of arthropod hypersensitivity is contradicted by
induce follicular inflammation rich in eosinophils.
reports of cases in cold seasons and the fact that recur-
In these diseases, however, the inflammatory infil-
 rence or repetitive lesions have not been reported ex
trate is quite heterogeneous and mostly parasites can
cept in one case (Linek and Mecklenburg 2002; Scott et
be detected within the lesion. The eosinophilic folli-
al. 2001). There is a clinically and histologically similar
 culitis mentioned in this chapter does not show any
disease in humans where an autoimmune reaction to
-id us e a pazaiero s pue suod
sebaceous glands, microorganisms, or Dermodex mites
nance of eosinophils that not only center around hair
has been discussed (Basarab 1997; Magro and Crow
follicles but also accumulate within the follicular wall
son 1994; Mengesha and Bennett 2002; Ofuji et al.
and the follicular lumen. The high number of infil-
1970; Spira et al. 1986).
trating eosinophils is frequently coupled with periph-
 Eosinophilic furunculosis is characterized by the
eral eosinophilia and often responds to immunosup-
rapid development of bilateral pruritic papular, pustu.
pressive dosages of glucocorticoids (Scott et al. 2001;
lar, and ulcerative lesions in the face, predominantly on
Gross et al. 2005). A subgroup of lymphocytic mural
the bridge of the nose, the lateral muzzle, and the peri-
folliculitis in dogs may be associated with large num-
orbital region (Fig. 4.2.1). Lesions may also develop on
bers ofperifollicular eosinophils. This canine disease is
the pinnae, the extremities, and the glabrous skin ofthe
named “eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis" (see
axilla and abdomen (Gross 1993; Scottetal. 2001). The
Section 4.4.2.5), since mucin deposition within the fol-
disease starts with papules, pustules, or nodules ac-
licular wall is a striking feature. However, since any in-
 companied by severe pruritus and self-trauma. These
filtration of eosinophils can be associated with mucin
first lesions rapidly ulcerate forming draining tracts
deposition, mucin alone cannot be used to distinguish
and crusts. The severity is variable. In more destruc-
the diseases reliably. As the striking clinical picture in
 tive and widespread cases fever and anorexia develop.
 eosinophilic foliculitis is not alopecia, we provide the
 Blood eosinophilia may be present. There is no sex
reader only with a brief review of these diseases.
predilection. Affected dogs are mostly young and be-
long to large or moderately large breeds. However, the
4.2.1 Canine facial eosinophilic
author has seen the disease in the Dachshund and the
West Highland White Terrier.
furunculosis
Clinical differential diagnoses include nasal deep
Facial eosinophilic furunculosis is a rare skin disease
 bacterial folliculitis, severe demodicosis or dermato-
 of the dog. The etiology and pathomechanism are still 
phytosis, and a faciall-oriented pemphigus foliaceus.
unclear althougha hypersensitivity response to arthro-
A hallmark of eosinophilic furunculosis, however,
216  Inflammatory alopecias
dermal mucin deposition are frequently seen. Heavy
inflammation may be accompanied by fibrinoid vas-
culitis and hemorrhage.
 In mild cases, the course of the disease is self-
limiting and most cases respond excellently to short
courses of immunosuppressive doses of prednisolon
( 1-2 mg/kg/day) given for 8-14 days, tapering down
as soon as the lesions disappear (Gross 1993; Gua-
 guere et al. 1996). Glucocorticoids are combined with
oral antibiotics such as cefalosporines, if secondary
pyoderma exists.
4.2.2 Feline mosquito bite
hypersensitivity
Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity has some simi-
larities to canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face
(see Section 4.2.1). It is an uncommon seasonal skin
disease in cats where lesions develop in the sum-
mer and regress in autumn and winter. The face and
 ear pinnae are predominantly affected as is dark and
sparsely haired skin (Nagata and Ishida 1997).
According to its name, the disease is thought to
Fig. 4.2.1 Canine facial eosinophilic furunculosis. Alopecia on
represent a hypersensitivity reaction to mosquito bites
the nose with marked erythema, papules, ulceration, and crusts.
(Mason and Evans 1991). However, since its frequency
of occurrence is highly variable in different geographic
 is that none of these differential diagnoses develop
regions, it is assumed that only some mosquito species
 lesions as fulminant as in eosinophilic facial furuncu-
 may induce hypersensitivity. The disease can be pre-
losis.
vented by insect repellents and sting protection such as
Diagnosis is made by history, clinical picture,
indoor confinement (Mason and Evans 1991). Chal-
cytology, and biopsy. A deep skin scrape and
a
lenges with mosquito bites induce typical lesions at
dermatophyte culture to exclude demodicosis and
the sites of the bite (Nagata and Ishida 1997). Intrader-
 dermatophytosis are advisable. Cytology reveals pre-
mal allergy testing with mosquito antigen and positive
dominately eosinophils. It is, however, important to
 Prausnitz-Kister testing indicate that a type I hyper-
sample acute not self-traumatized or ulcerated lesions,
sensitivity reaction is involved in the pathogenesis. In
since in the latter neutrophils with intracellular bacte
addition, the clinical and histological reaction pattern
ria may become more numerous. Biopsies should also
 be taken from intact nodules and papules or edema-
ity reaction (Gross et al. 2005).
tous swollen areas, whereas ulcerated lesions should
The clinical picture is visually distinctive. Lesions
be avoided. Histopathology may vary due to severity
 are usually found bilaterally on the bridge of the nose
of the disease, but demonstrates a nodular perifollicu-
(Fig. 4.2.3), the convex and less commonly the con-
lar eosinophilic inflammation in all cases. Eosinophils
cave surface of the pinnae, and rarely the eyelids. The
infiltrate the hair follicle wall and accumulate both in-
nasal planum and philtrum can be involved. Very
tramurally and intraluminally. Follicular rupture with
rarely can the disease become more widespread affect-
subsequent foreign body granuloma and numerous
ing the flexor surface of carpi, footpads, and adjacent
eosinophils are common (Fig. 4.2.2). Eosinophilic de-
skin (Power and Ihrke 1995). Feline mosquito bite
granulation may focus around collagen fibers and may
hypersensitivity may resemble miliary dermatitis, es-
cause “flame figures." A severe dermal edema and some
 pecially when the pinnae are affected. Early lesions are
Eosinophilic folliculitis  217
ab
Fig. 4.2.2 Skin histology of canine facial eosinophilic furuncu-
losis. (a) Marked inflammation of the dermis with inflamma-
tory cells accumulating in the follicular wall and the follicular
Iumen; (b) eosinophils accumulate in the follicular lumen and
form pustules in the follicular wall.
characterized by erythematous papules or nodules,
its severity is variable. Regional lymphadenopathy is
whereas later stages show well demarcated ulcers,
common.
 crusts, and necrotic lesions. Concurrent hyperpig-
 Differential diagnoses include herpesvirus-induced
mentation or hypopigmentation or alopecic nodules
 dermatitis (see Section 4.6.1), pemphigus foliaceus
may be seen (Scott et al. 2001). Pruritus is present, but
(see Section 4.3.1), food hypersensitivity and atopy,
in early cases, dermatophytosis (see Section 4.1.2)
and demodicosis (see Section 4.1.3). Some severe
ulcerative cases may resemble squamous cell carci-
 noma or pox virus infection (see Section 4.6.2). Cy-
tology reveals predominately eosinophils. Peripheral
eosinophilia and hypergammaglobulinemia have been
reported commonly in one large study (Nagata and
Ishida 1997).
Histopathology will reveal a strikingly eosinophil-
rich inflammatory infiltrate that spreads from the su-
perficial to the deep dermis. Hypereosinophilic colla-
gen bundles ("flame figures") and mural eosinophilic
folliculitis and furunculosis are frequently found.
These findings, however, are not diagnostic, since
 similar histopathological changes occur in cats with
 Other allergic diseases. Herpesvirus ulcerative dermati-
Fig. 4.2.3 Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity. Note focal
tis (see Section 4.6.1) may be indistinguishable from
alopecia and erythema on the bridge of the nose
mosquito bite hypersensitivity, if inclusion bodies
218  Inflammatory alopecias
cannot be identified (Gross et al. 2005). Immunohis.
genus Culicoides (Brostrom et al. 1987). It is by far
tochemistry or polymerase chain reaction tests may
the most common allergic dermatitis in horses with
be necessary to rule out feline herpesvirus infection. A
 striking geographical variations in its prevalence (van
history of mosquito bites and disease regression upon
Grevenhof et al. 2007).
 strict avoidance of mosquito bites allow a final diag-
 A genetic predisposition has been assumed as some
nosis.
horse breeds are particularly sensitive, such as Shire,
 Avoidance of mosquito bites is the treatment and
 Iceland, and Welsh Ponies. Icelandic horses living in
 prophylactic measure of choice. This might involve
Iceland do not have insect bite hypersensitivity due
confinement to indoors during the peak mosquito
to the absence of relevant insects, but acquire it at
feeding time, and appliance of repellents such as per-
high frequency after being imported to mainland Eu-
methrin, diethyltoluamid, or iciridin. Good immedi-
rope (Brostrom et al. 1987). The sensitivity in Ice-
ate response is usually seen to short courses of gluco-
landic horses born outside of Iceland is not signifi-
corticoids.
cantly different from the disease prevalence in other
horse breeds (Bjornsdottir et al. 2006; Hamza et al.
4.2.3 Equine culicoides hypersensitivity
2007). Therefore, the existence of a genetic predispo-
 sition needs further proof.
Culicoides hypersensitivity or insect bite hypersensi-
Most horses become affected by the age of 4-5 years
tivity in horses is also known under the names *sweet
and the disease usually progresses with age. There is
itch," “"Queensland itch, “summer eczema,” or “aller-
 no sex or hair/skin color predilection. The disease
gic urticaria."
is characterized by intense irritation, scratching, and
Equine culicoides hypersensitivity is a chronic, re-
rubbing, leading to self-inflicted trauma, exfoliation,
 current, and seasonal dermatitis of horses caused by
serous exudation, and alopecia. The species of Culi-
an allergic reaction to the bites of mosquitos of the
coides dictates the location of the clinical distribution
a)
(b)
pue shieu uasoug ym enadoe auew jenonn (e) . uaned
crusts; (b) alopecia on the tail. (Courtesy of S. Rufenacht.)
Eosinophilic folliculitis  219
pattern. The “neck and tail pattern" is the most com-
of environmental and genetic factors. Acta Veterinaria Scandinav-
 mon one with sparse and broken tail and mane hairs
ica 48(1):3.
Brostrom H, Larsson A, Troedsson M. 1987. Allergic dermatitis
(Fig. 4.2.4). In chronic cases thickening of the skin,
(sweet itch) of Icelandic horses in Sweden: an epidemiological
formation of hyperkeratotic rugae, severe hair loss,
study. Equine Veterinary fournal 19:229-236.
and coarse hair develop. A “ventral pattern" of the
Curtis CF, Bond R, Blunden AS, Thomson DG, McNeil PE, Whit-
bread TW. 1995. Canine eosinophilic folliculitis and furuncu-
disease is rarely found.
losis in three cases. Journal of Smmalf Animal Practice 36:l19-
 Although the clinical picture is visually striking, the
123.
list of differential diagnoses is long and includes para-
 Fadok VA and Greiner EC. 1990. Equine insect hypersensitivity:
skin test and biopsy results correlated with clinical data. Equine
sitic infestations such as lice, Chorioptes and Psoroptes
Veterinary Journal 22:236-240.
mites, Oxyuris equi, fly bites, ticks, and onchocer-
Ferroglio E, Pregel P, Accossato A, Taricco I, Bollo E, Rossi L, Triscj-
cal dermatitis. Dermatophytosis and dermatophilosis
uoglio A.2006. Equineculicoides hypersensitivity: evaluation ofa
have to be considered as well as more rare dermatoses
skin test and ofhumoral response. Journal of Veterinary Medicine,
A. Physiology Pathology Clinical Medicine 53:30-33.
such as unilateral papular dermatitis, alopecia areata
Gross TL. 1993. Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face. In:
(mane and tail dystrophy) (see Section 4.7.3), and
Ihrke PJ, Mason IS, White SD (eds), Advances in Veterinary Der-
chemical irritation.
rmatology, Vol. 3, Pp. 239-246. Boston: Butherworth Heinemann.
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. 2005. Skin Diseases of
 Diagnosis is based on characteristic clinical signs,
the Dog and the Cat. Oxford: Blackwell Science.
seasonality, and elimination of all other ectoparasitic
Guaguere E, Prelaud P, Peyronnet L, Delverdier-Poujade A, Magnol
diseases. A discussion about different tests for allergen-
 J-P. 1996. Furonculose eosinophilique chez le chien: etude retro-
spectivede 12 cas. Pratique Medicale et Chirurgicale de IAnimal
specific IgE and IgG in horses and the sensitivity and
de Compagnie,31(5):413-419.
 specificity of skin tests and in vitro tests is beyond the
Hamza E, Doherr MG, Bertoni G, Jungi TW, Marti E. 2007. Modu-
 zs as s p ooq s no s
lation of allergy incidence in Icelandic horses is associated with a
changeinIL-4-producingTcellsInternationaArchvesofAlergy
the literature (Fadok and Greiner 1990; Ferroglio et al.
and Immunology 144:325-337.
2006; Wagner et al. 2006).
Linek M, Mecklenburg L. 2002. Die Eosinophile pustulose Follikuli-
tis des Hundes: Eine Beschreibung von drei Fallen. Praktischer
 Biopsies are needed to differentiate equine culi-
Terarzt,Zeitschrift fir fortschrittliche Veterinirmedizin 83:946-
950.
or unilateral papular dermatitis. Biopsies of equine
 Magro CM, Crowson AN. 1994. Eosinophilic pustular follicular re-
action: a paradigm of immune dysregulation. International Jour-
culicoides hypersensitivity will show an eosinophilic
nal of Dermatology 33(3):172-178.
folliculitis and dermatitis.
Mason KV, Evans AG. 1991. Mosquito bite-caused eosinophilic der-
 The most important part of therapy is protection
matitis in cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Associ
ation 198: 2086-2088.
of the horse from further insect bites. The armamen-
 Mengesha YM, Bennett ML. 2002. Pustular skin disorders: diag-
tarium comprises stabling of the horse at the peak
nosis and treatment. American Journal of Clinical Dermatology
biting time, installation of very fine screen mesh at all 
3(6):389-400.
 Nagata M, Ishida T. 1997. Cutaneous reactivity to mosquito bites
windows and doors, and installation of fans. Horses 
and its antigens in cats. Veterinary Dermatofogy 8:19-26.
 should be treated with repellents. Fenvalerate and per-
Ofuji S, Ogino A, Horio T, Oseko T, Uehara M. i970. Eosinophilic
methrin have been claimed to be effective when used
pustular folliculitis. Acta Dermato Venereofogica 50(3):195-203.
 Power HT, Ihrke PJ. 1995. Selected feline eosinophilic skin diseases.
regularly and intensively. Covering the horse with a
Veterinary ClinicsofNorth America Small Animal Practice25:833-
face mask, blankets, and newly developed nose-to-tail
850.
 protection blankets may be considered. Acute cases can
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE. 2001. Muller and Kirk's Small
be treated with short courses of oral or intramuscular
Anirmal Dermatology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
 Spira I, Simon M Jr, Keller I. 1986. Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis.
glucocorticoids, but prolonged usage is not advisable
Der Hautarzt 37:222-225.
due to the risk of significant side effects. Response to
van Grevenhof EM, Ducro B, Heuven HC, Bijma P. 2007. Identif-
antihistamines is weak and variable. Allergen-specific
cation of environmental factors affecting the prevalence of insect
bite hypersensitivity in Shetland ponies and Friesian horses in
immunotherapy is still a matter of controversy.
The Netherlands. Equine Veterinary Journal 39:69-73.
Wagner B, Miller WH, Morgan EE, Hillegas JM, Erb HN, Leibold W,
Antczak DF. 2006. IgE and IgG antibodies in skin allergy of the
References
horse. Veterinary Research 37:813-825.
Wilson AD, Harwood LJ, Bjornsdottir S, Marti E, Day MJ.
Basarab T. 1997. HIV-associated eosinophilic pustular folliculitis.
 2001. Detection of IgG and IgE serum antibodies to culicoides
Journal of the American Academy of Dermatotogy 37:670-671.
Bjornsdottir S, Sigvaldadottir J, Brostrom H, Langvad B, Sigurdsson
 A. 2006. Summer eczema in exported Icelandic horses: influence 
713.
4.3
Pustular folliculitis
Monika Welle
Pustular mural folliculitis describes pustule forma-
humans. However, in recent years it turned out that
tion within the infundibular epithelium of the hair
 recombinant canine dsgl is recognized by sera from
follicle. This pattern is usually associated with a pus-
ue o 5i Aq iou 1nq d m suad u
tular dermatitis of the interfollicular epidermis. Since
of the tested canine PF sera (Iwasaki and Olivry 2004;
these diseases are extensively described in other text-
Yabuzoe et al. 2006). In addition, only five of 83 canine
books, not all aspects of them are discussed in this
PF sera (6%) recognized canine dsgl-transfected hu-
chapter.
man cells. Therefore, dsgl is most likely only a minor
autoantigen in canine PF, with the major autoantigen
still being unknown.
4.3.1 Pemphigus foliaceus
 In dogs, PF is a disease of the middle age and may
 The pemphigus complex is a group of diseases that is
occur as a sequela of chronic or ongoing inflammatory
characterized by the formation of pustules or vesi-
skin diseases (Pascal et al. 1995). Various drugs (an-
cles, developing due to the loss of cohesion be-
tibiotics, methimazol) have been reported to cause
tween keratinocytes (i.e., acantholysis). Acantholy-
PF in dogs. In some cases withdrawal of the drug
sis is immunologically accompanied by the presence
leads to complete remission of the disease (PF-like
of autoantibodies to components of the keratinocyte
 drug reaction), whereas in others the disease contin-
desmosomes. Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) has been re-
ues (drug-induced PF). In both forms, clinical signs
ported in dogs, cats, horses, and goats (Scott et al.
 develop rapidly after drug administration ( White et al.
1987; Scott 1988; Valdez et al. 1995; Scott et al. 2001;
2002; Olivry et al. 2004; Gross et al. 2005).
Vandenabeele et al. 2004; Gross et al. 2005; Ginn et al.
Clinical signs of PF appear to be similar in all do-
2007), and all aspects of this disease have been exten-
mestic animal species. PF is characterized by transient
sively reviewed recently (Olivry 2006). In this review
large and sometimes confluent pustules that rapidly
it was suggested that canine PF may not be a sin-
evolve into erosions and crusts. In rare ocasions, pus-
gle disease but a clinicopathological syndrome which
tules, erosions, and crusts are grouped in a unique an-
is clinically, histologically, and immunologically het-
nular or polycyclic pattern. Alopecia and generalized
erogeneous. Whether feline, equine, and caprine PF
exfoliative erythroderma follow. Pruritus is present in
are immunologically heterogeneous currently remains
less than 50% of the patients and systemic symptoms
unknown.
such as anorexia, depression, fever, and weight loss are
 Autoantigens and the pathogenicity of circulating
usually only encountered in patients with widespread
autoantibodies in feline, equine, and caprine PF have
erosive skin lesions.
not been investigated until now, whereas in the dog
In most dogs, the disease begins with bilateral le-
autoantigens have been studied for many years. For
sions on the face, namely on the dorsal muzzle, nasal
a long time a 14 kDa and a 160 kDa antigen, both
planum, periocular skin, and ears. Lesions progress
binding to serum IgG autoantibodies, were suspected
and can become generalized within 3-12 months. Only
to represent different glycosylation forms of canine
 rarely the disease begins with generalized skin lesions.
desmoglein-1 (dsg1). Dsg1 is the major PF antigen in
A remarkable finding of canine PF is the predilection
222  Inflammatory alopecias
of lesions for the footpads. These are involved in one
and teats (Jackson et al. 1984; Scott et al. 1984a; Valdez
third of all cases. Some canine patients may even show
et al. 1995).
skin lesions that are restricted to the footpads (Ihrke
Cytology is a useful screening test to differen-
et al. 1985; Mueller et al. 2006). Mucosal lesions have
tiate PF from superficial pyoderma (see Section
-d Hd ao jo  iiexde ui aas ua a
4.1.1). Classical PF pustules reveal mainly nonde-
tients (Mueller et al. 2006). One canine case with PF
 generated neutrophils (rarely eosinophils) and clus-
lesions confined to the claws has been reported (Gua-
ters of acantholytic keratinocytes. Superficial py-
guere and Degorce-Rubiales 2004).
oderma in contrast is characterized by abundant
 In cats, pustules are more transient and thus the
degenerated neutrophils with intracellular bacteria,
clinical phenotype is dominated by erosions and yel-
 some macrophages, and only rare acantholytic cells.
lowish crusts on the face, ears, and the feet. Pedal le-
However, the diagnosis needs to be confirmed by
sions, consisting of suppuration or crusts, can be seen
histopathology, as there is some cytological overlap be-
on or around the footpads or the nail beds. Feline PF
tween PF, superficial pyoderma, and dermatophytosis.
is usually mild and fairly localized, but generalized le-
Histopathology is until now the most important
sions are possible (Preziosi et al. 2003). Dogs and cats
tool to diagnose PF since serological tests are only
with widespread lesions are often febrile, anorectic,
useful in those cases where the major autoantigen is
and depressed.
known. Biopsy findings are similar in all species. It
Horses with PF usually present with multifocal to
is described thatin very early lesions epidermal vesicles
 generalized crusting, scaling, and alopecia affecting the
with acantholytic keratinocytes and scarce neutrophils
face, neck, trunk, and extremities (Fig. 4.3.1). Pustules
can be seen (Olivry 2006). However, the major histo-
are observed rarely, and whenever present, they are
logical findings are intragranular or subcorneal pus-
transient. A remarkable ventral edema is seen in many
tules with isolated or clustered acantholytic cells and
horses with PF. Systemic symptoms such as depression
many well-preserved neutrophils. Variable numbers
and lethargy were noticed in 50% of the horses with
 of eosinophils may be found. Similar pustules are also
PF in one study. Lesions of equine PF are occasionally
seen in the infundibular epithelium of the hair follicle
 painful and pruritic (Vandenabeele et al. 2004; Zabel
(Fig. 4.3.2). In general, the pustules are large and span
et al. 2005).
 In goats, pustules, crusts, scales, and alopecia are
seen on the face, ventral abdomen, limbs, perineum,
and tail. In female animals, lesions may affect the udder
Fig. 4.3.1 Equine pemphigus foliaceus. Multifocal to general-
Fig. 4.3.2 Skin histology of pemphigus foliaceus. Pustules with
ized crusting. scaling. and alopecia affecting face, neck, trunk,
well-preserved neutrophils and acantholytic keratinocytes are
and extremities. (Courtesy of M. Linek.)
found in the infundibular epithelium of the hair follicle.
Pustular folliculitis 223
the length of multiple follicular ostia, a finding that
Clinical signs of PE are similar to PF but less se-
differentiates PF from bacterial folliculitis or super-
vere. Pustules, erosions, and crusts are localized on
ficial dermatophytosis. Furthermore, a newly formed
the face and the ear pinnae. Depigmentation, ery-
stratum corneum at the base of neutrophilic pustules
thema, erosion, and ulceration of the nasal planum
and nonspongiotic detachment of keratinocytes are
 and the dorsal muzzle are seen in addition (Scott et al.
more suggestive of PF than bacterial folliculitis and
1980; Faircloth and Montgomery 1982; Kaufman and
dermatophytosis. Apoptotic keratinocytes are often
Blakemore 1984; Scott et al. 1984b; Bennett et al. 1985;
seen in the epidermis of dogs with PF, but are not
Olivry 1986; Scott et al. 1987; Griffies et al. 2004;
 considered a marker for an underlying drug reaction
Gonsalves-Hubers 2005). Only rare patients exhibit
(Scott et al. 2001; Gross et al. 2005).
nonfacial lesions (Scott et al. 1987).
Immune suppression with oral glucocorticoids,
Skin biopsies from dogs and cats with PE will re-
such as prednisone or prednisolone, at daily dosages
veal similar findings to PF, that is, intragranular to
varying from 2 to 6.6 mg/kg divided into one or two
subcorneal epidermal and infundibular pustules filled
administrations per day are the treatment of choice
with neutrophils, eosinophils, and acantholytic cells.
(Ihrke et al. 1985; Scott et al. 1987; Rosenkrantz 2004;
In contrast to PF, a mild interface dermatitis occurs
Mueller et al 2006). If the response is good, dose or
in the superficial dermis that resembles discoid lupus
administration frequency should be reduced (Ihrke
erythematosus (Scott et al. 1980; Faircloth and Mont-
et al. 1985; Rosenkrantz 2004). In canine patients,
gomery 1982; Kaufman and Blakemore 1984; Scott
where glucocorticoids alone are insufficient, cyto-
et al. 1984b; Bennett et al. 1985; Olivry 1986; Scott
toxic drugs such as azathioprine (2-2.5 mg/kg, orally,
et al. 1987; Griffies et al. 2004; Gonsalves-Hubers
once daily), cyclophosphamide (25 mg/kg, orally, once
2005).
daily), or chlorambucil (0.2 mg/kg every 24-48 h)
 PE lesions in dogs and cats respond well to the same
have been used (1hrke et al. 1985; Scott et al. 1987;
immunosuppressive therapy as is used in PF (Scott
Rosenkrantz 2004). In one study additional antibiotic
et al. 1987). One oftwo dogs with PE treated with tetra-
 treatment during the induction of immunosuppres-
 cycline and niacinamide showed a partial response
sion was associated with a significant improvement of
(White et al. 1992). The use of sun-avoidance and
the survival rate (Gomez et al. 2004). In cats with PF,
sunscreens or topical treatment with 0.1% tacrolimus
glucocorticoid monotherapy with oral prednisolone
ointment has been reported to be of benefit (Scott
is often sufficient (Graham-Mize and Rosser 2005).
et al. 1987; Griffies et al. 2004).
If response to treatment is insufficient, prednisolone
or chlorambucil (0.2 mg/kg, orally, once daily) can be
 used in addition (Helton- Rhodes and Shoulberg 1992;
4.3.3 Canine idiopathic linear pustular
Preziosi et al. 2003). Similar to dogs and cats, lesions
acantholytic dermatosis
of PF in horses and goats can be treated successfully
with either prednisolone or dexamethasone alone or in
The first case of this disease has been described in a
combination with aurothioglucose (Scott et al. 1987;
young Brittany Spaniel in 2001 (Beningo and Scott
Valdez et al. 1995; Vandenabeele et al. 2004). Careful
2001) and the same author reported a second case in a
monitoring depending on the combination of treat-
young Australian Shepherd dog in 2003 (Scott 2003).
ments is necessary.
Since then, to the authors knowledge, no further cases
have been described. The etiology of this disease is still
unknown. In the two described cases, contact der-
4.3.2 Pemphigus erythematosus
matitis, self-trauma, vasculitis, and lymphangitis were
The clinical, histopathological, and immunological
ruled out (Beningo and Scott 2001; Scott 2003).
characteristics of pemphigus erythematosus (PE) in
 Idiopathic linear pustular acantholytic dermatosis
 is characterized by coalescent annular papules, pus-
(1980). Although still controversially discussed, most
 tules, and crusts. Mild erythema and scaling are also
dermatologists consider PE a rare variant of PF, with a
 present. Alopecia develops later on. Histology is char-
 more local, that is, facial distribution pattern (Olivry
 acterized by a predominant eosinophilic and to a lesser
2006).
extent neutrophilic pustular mural folliculitis with
224 Inflammatory alopecias
marked acantholysis. Many of the acantholytic ker-
Ihrke PJ, Stannard AA, Ardans AA, Griffin CE. 1985. Pemphigus
atinocytes contain keratohyalin granules, suggesting
foliaceus in dogs: a review of 37 cases. Jourmal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 186:59-66.
they derive from the stratum granulosum of the follic-
Iwasaki T, Olivry T. 2004. Spontaneous canine model of pemphi-
ular infundibulum. The surface epidermis and the hair
gus foliaceus. In: Chan LS (ed.), Animal Models of Human In-
follicle infundibulum show a marked regular or irreg-
flammatory Skin Diseases, Pp. 309-319. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press.
ular hyperplasia, a mild to moderate orthokeratotic or
Jackson PPG, Lloyd S, Jeffries AR. 1984. Pemphigus foliaceus in a
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, and focally intense ar-
goat.Veterinary Record 114:479.
eas of intercellular edema associated with exocytosis
Kaufman GM, Blakemore JC. 1984. Facial dermatitis in a dog. Corm-
of eosinophils. In the dermis, a superficial perivas-
pendium onContinuingEducationfor thePracticingVeterinarian
6:109-112.
cular to interstitial infiltrate composed of eosinophils
Mueller RS, Krebs I, Power HT, Fieseler KV. 2006. Pemphigus foli-
with smaller numbers of neutrophils, plasma cells, and
aceus in 9l dogs. Jourmal of the American Anirmal Hospital Associ-
aton42:189-196
lymphocytes is seen.
Olivry T. 1986. Les dermatoses auto-immunes du chien et du chat.
Both described cases ofcanineidiopathic linear pus-
Universite Paul-Sabatier, Toulouse.
tular acantholytic dermatosis responded well to an
Olivry T. 2006. A review of autoimmune skin diseases in domes-
tic animals: I—superficial pemphigus. Veterinary Dermatofogy
immunosuppressive dose of prednisolone ( 1.6 mg/kg
17:291-305.
once daily, orally). Treatment was slowly tapered and
Olivry T, Bergvall KE, Atlee BA. 2004. Prolonged remission after im-
eventually stopped. In the second reported case, le-
munosuppressive therapy in six dogs with pemphigus foliaceus.
Veterinary Dermatology 15(4):245-252.
sions reoccurred several times and regressed sponta-
Pascal A, Scheibert J, Ihrke PJ. 1995. Seasonality and environ-
neously without treatment (Scott 2003).
mental risk factors for pemphigus foliaceus in animals: a ret-
 rospective study of 83 cases presented to the Veterinary Medical
Teaching Hospital, University of California, Davis from 1976-
1994. Proceedings of the 1Ith AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Santa Fe,
References
Pp. 2425.
 Preziosi DE, Goldschmidt MH, Greek JS, Jeffers JG, Shanley KS,
Beningo KE, Scott DW. 2001. Idiopathic linear pustular acantholytic
Drobatz K, Mauldin EA. 2003. Feline pemphigus foliaceus: a
dermatosis in a young Brittany spaniel dog. Veterinary Dermatof-
retrospective analysis of 57 cases. Veterinary Dermatofogy 14:313-
ogy 12:209-213.
321.
Bennett D, Kelly DF, Kirkham D. 1985. Two cases of pemphigus
Rosenkrantz WS. 2004.Pemphigus: current therapy. Veterinary Der-
erythematosus (the Senear-Usher syndrome) in the dog. Journaf
matology 15:90-98.
ofSmall Animal Practice 26:219-227.
Scott DW. 1988. Large Animal Dermatofogy Philadelphia: WB Saun-
Faircloth JC, Montgomery JK. 1982. A practitioner case report:
ders.
pemphigus erythematosus in a cat.Feline Practice 12:31-33.
Scott DW. 2003. Canine idiopathic linear pustular acantholytic der-
Ginn PE, Mansell JEKL, Rakich PM. 2007. Skin and appendages.
matosis: a second case. Veterinary Dermatofogy 14:275.
In:Maxie MG (ed.),hubb,Kennedy and Palmer's Pathology of
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE. 2001. Muller and Kirk's Smafl
Domestic Animals, Pp. 553-781. Edinborough, Scottland: Elsevier
Anirmal Dermatofogy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Saunders.
Scott DW, Miller WH,Lewis RM.1980.Pemphigus erythematosus
Gomez SM, Morris DO, Rosenbaum MR, Goldschmidt MH. 2004.
in the dog and the cat. Journal of the American Amimal Hospital
Outcome and complications associated with treatment of pem-
Association 16:815-823.
phigus foliaceus in dogs: 43 cases (1994-2000). Jourmat of the
Scott DW, Smith MC, Smith CA. 1984a. Pemphigus foliaceus in a
American Veterinary MedicalAssociation224(8):1312-1316.
goat.Agri-Practice 5:38-45.
Gonsalves-Hubers T. 2005. Pemphigus erythematosus in a chow
Scott DW, Walton DK, Slater MR. 1987. Immune-mediated der-
chow. Canadian Veterinary Journal 46:925-927.
matoses in domestic animals: ten years after—part I. Comm-
Graham-Mize CA, Rosser EJ. 2005. Absorption, bioavailability and
pendium onContinuingEducationfor thePracticingVeterinarian
activity of prednisone and prednisolone in cats. In: Hillier A, Fos-
9:424435.
ter AP,Kwochka KW (eds.)AdvancesinVeterinary Dermatology,
Scott DW, Walton DK, Smith CA. 1984b. Unusual findings in ca-
nine pemphigus erythematosus and discoid lupus erythemato-
Griffes JD, Mendelsohn DL, Rosenkrantz WS. 2004. Topical 0.1%
sus. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Associntion 20:579-
tacrolimus for the treatment of discoid lupus erythematosus and
584.
pemphigus erythematosus in dogs. Journal of the American Ani-
Valdez RA, Gelberg HB, Morin DE. 1995. Use of corticosteroids
malHospitalAssociation40:29-41.
and awrothioglucose in a pygmy goat with pemphigus foliaceus.
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. 2005. Skin Diseases ofthe
Journal of the American Veterinury Medical Association 207:761-
Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathological Diagnosis. Oxford:
765.
Blackwell Science.
Vandenabeele SI, White SD, Affolter VK, Kass PH, Ihrke PJ. 2004.
Guaguere E, Degorce-Rubiales F. 204. Pemphigus foliaceus con-
 Pemphigus foliaceus in the horse: a retrospective study of 20 cases.
fined to the nails in a Hungarian short-haired pointer (Abstract).
Veterinary Dermatology 15:381-388.
Veterinary Dermatology 15(1 Suppl):56.
White SD, Carlotti DN, Pin D, Bonenberger T, Ihrke PI, Monet E,
Helton-Rhodes K, Shoulberg N. 1992. Chlorambucil: effective ther-
Nishifuji K, Iwasaki T, Papich MG. 2002. Putative drug-related
apeutic options for the treatment of feline immune-mediated
pemphigus foliaceus in four dogs. Veterinary Dermatology 13(4):
dermatoses. Feline Practice 20:5-8.
195-202.
Pustular folliculitis 225
White SD, Rosychuk RAW, Reinke SI, Paradis M. 1992. Use of tetra-
by post-embedding immunoelectron microscopy in one dog. Vet-
cycline and niacinamide for treatment of autoimmune skin dis-
erinary Dermatology 17:220.
ease in 3l dogs. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Asso-
Zabel S, Muellr RS, Fieseler KV, Bettenay SV, Littlewood JD,
ciation200:1497-1500.
Wagner R. 2005. Review of 15 cases of pemphigus foliaceus in
Yabuzoe A, Nishifuji K, Shimizu A. 2006. Ultrastructural localiza-
horses and a survey of the literature. Veterinary Record 157:505-
 tion of binding site of serum antibodies in pemphigus foliaceus
509.
4.4
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis
Monika Welle
Mural folliculitis with predominately lymphocytes can
dog and rare in cats, horses, and cattle (Caciolo et al.
occur in association with similar epidermal lesions or
1984; Baker and Scott 1989; Beale and Bolon 1992;
 as an autonomous disease without epidermal involve-
Moore and Olivry 1994; Affolter and Moore 2000;
ment. Lymphocytic mural folliculitis can further be
Affolter 2007).
subdivided into an infltrative type of lesion where
lymphocytes infiltrate the follicular wall without evi-
dence of keratinocyte degeneration and into an inter-
4.4.1.1.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
face type of lesion where the lymphocytic infiltrate is
Epitheliotropic T-cell lymphomas are composed of
associated with vacuolar degeneration and/or apop-
memory (CD45RA-, CD4+, CD8+; 80%) or dou-
tosis of outer root sheath keratinocytes, just as in an
ble negative (CD4-, CD8-;20%) T-cells that express
interface dermatitis.
β1-integrin (Moore et al. 1994; Affolter and Moore
2000; Gross et al. 2005; Affolter 2007). Whereas “page-
4.4.1 Lymphocytic mural folliculitis as a
toid reticulosis" in humans is composed of y/8 T-cells,
bystander of similar epidermal lesions
classic MF may be either of y/8 T-cell or ofα/β T-cell
origin.
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis can occur in associa-
Some studies in man and dogs suggest that MF oc-
tion with a lymphocytic dermatitis affecting the in-
terfollicular epidermis. These cases are not primarily
nosed with atopic dermatitis ( Winkelmann and Rajka
associated with alopecia, although hair loss can de-
1983; Abel et al. 1986; Lange-Vejlsgaard et al. 1989;
velop when the disease progresses and in rare cases can
Haselen et al. 1999; Pielop et al. 200l; Fletcher et al.
be the dominant clinical sign. Since these diseases are
2004; Santoro et al. 2007). This is in concordance with
extensively described in other textbooks (Scott et al.
the observation that MF often develops in areas where
2001; Gross et al. 2005), not all aspects of them are
atopic dermatitis manifests. However, whether MF is
discussed here.
directly linked to atopic dermatitis or whether it might
 be a consequence of immunomodulatory therapy or
other factors is yet unknown. Nevertheless, the simul-
4.4.1.1 Epitheliotropic T-celf lymphoma
taneous occurrence of these two diseases might sup-
Epitheliotropic T-cell lymphoma is not a dermatitis
 port the hypothesis that chronic antigen stimulation
and mural folliculitis in the strict sense, but a pro-
may be an initiator of a clonal neoplastic T-cell popu-
gressive disease characterized by the infltration of
lation in the skin.
neoplastic T-cells into the epidermis and the adnexal
In dogs, the age of onset ranges from 6 to 14 years
epithelium. However, as it often mimics an inflamma.
with a mean age of 1l years. There is no apparent
tory disease, it is included under the heading of mural
breed or sex predilection. The course of the disease
folliculitis.
varies from a few months up to 2 years and the lesions
Epitheliotropic T-cell lymphoma is also known as
may extend to lymph nodes and other organs. Like in
"mycosis fungoides" (MF) and is uncommon in the
the dog, no apparent breed or sex predilection exists
228  Inflammatory alopecias
in cats and horses where most patients are also of
present. In most cases, histology will reveal classical
advanced age.
features of MF (see below).
4 The ulcerative forrm of the disease is seen in the oral
4.4.1.1.2 Clinical presentation
mucosa. Ulceration varies from mild to severe.
Clinically five different presentations of MF are known
 5 In Sezary syndrome the cutaneous lesions are asso-
that can mimic various other skin diseases (Moore
ciated with concurrent involvement of lymph nodes
and Olivry 1994; Scott et al. 2001; Gross et al. 2005;
and peripheral blood. Circulating neoplastic lym-
Affolter 2007). These forms may occur separately or in
phocytes may have hyperchromatic, folded, and
 any combination and they will merge with chronicity.
 grooved nuclei (Sezary cells).
1Exfoliative erythroderma is characterized by exfolia-
4.4.1.1.3 Histopathology
tive erythema, depigmentation, and alopecia, most
The key diagnostic feature is epitheliotropism of neo-
often on the head and trunk (Fig. 4.4.1). Lesions may
plastic lymphocytes. The infiltrate may be diffuse and
 be bilateral and symmetric or may become general-
is most pronounced in the lower level of the epider-
ized. In exfoliative erythroderma no palpable mass is
mis and the follicular infundibulum. It forms so-called
 present, but patches, plaques, and nodules may ap-
Pautrier's micro aggregates in the epithelium. Tropism
pear with progression of the disease. Pruritus varies
to adnexal structures including apocrine sweat glands
from mild to severe. This form histologically often
is common. Accompanying mucinosis is possible. Der-
presents as pagetoid reticulosis and sometimes as
mal involvement and cytologic features vary among
Sezary syndrome (see below).
the different forms. Small lymphocytes, medium-sized
 2 Mucocutaneous lesions are characterized by ery-
lymphocytes, euchromatic or hyperchromatic nuclei,
thema, erosion, ulceration, depigmentation, and
nuclei with an irregular contour, and small to mod-
alopecia mostly on the facial mucocutaneous junc-
erate amounts of cytoplasm may be seen. MF with
tions such as lips, nasal planum, and eyelids. They
cellular features of well-differentiated lymphocytes is
may also be seen on the anorectal junction, the vulva,
hard to distinguish from nonneoplastic interface der-
and the prepuce. This form histologically presents
matosis. Tumor-stage lesions are often characterized
as pagetoid reticulosis (see below).
by larger neoplastic cells, which may have large and
 3 The third form is characterized by solitary or rmul-
often folded or cleaved nuclei. Mitotic activity varies.
tiple erythematous and scaly plaques or nodules
Histologically, three different patterns can be distin-
which may coalesce during progression and become
guished.
eroded and ulcerated. Lymphadenopathy may be
1 The “classical form" is characterized by neoplastic
infiltrates in the epidermis and the adnexal epithe-
lium (Fig. 4.4.2). In the patch and plaque stage the
dermal infiltrate is limited to the superficial der-
mis; in the tumor stage the infiltration is diffuse and
involves the deep dermis and subcutis. In the cat,
patch and plaque lesions are common, whereas the
tumor stage appears to be less prevalent than in the
dog.
2 The “d'emblee form" is characterized by tumor for-
 mation without previous patch and plaque stages.
Keratinocyte apoptosis and confluent epidermal
necrosis and ulceration may be seen (Fig. 4.4.3). Re-
 active dermal infiltrates include small lymphocytes,
plasma cells, eosinophils, and neutrophils.
3 In “pagetoid reticulosis" the neoplastic infiltrate is
Fig. 4.4.1 Epitheliotropic lymphoma in a dog. Focal alopecia
mostly confined to the epidermis and the follicu-
with erythema and exfoliation. (Courtesy of M. Linek.)
lar epithelium (Fig. 4.4.4). Apoptotic keratinocytes
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis 229
Fig. 4.4.4 Skin histology of epitheliotropic lymphoma, "page-
toid reticulosis" form. The neoplastic infiltrate is mostly con-
fined to the epidermis and the follicular epithelium.
may be observed in conjunction with the lympho-
cytic infiltrate. The neoplastic cells are often small
lymphocytes. The superficial dermis may contain a
pleocellular reactive infltrate. With disease progres-
sion the lesions extend into the dermis.
4.4.1.1.4 Therapy
Fig. 4.4.2 Skin histology of epitheliotropic lymphoma, classi-
cal form. Diffuse epitheliotropic infiltrate of neoplastic lympho-
Several chemotherapy protocols have been used in the
cytes, most pronounced in the lower level of the epidermis and 
dog with little success. A concise update on the man-
the follicular infundibulum.
agement of canine epitheliotropic cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma has recently been published (de Lorimier
2006). Retinoids or topical nitrogen mustard may be a
helpful approach in early lesions. However, due to its
carcinogenic potential and its potential for other ad-
verse skin reactions, topical nitrogen mustard is rarely
recommended. In more advanced disease, lomustine
has shown complete response for more than 511 days
in 15% of cases and partial response for 80 days in
57% of cases (Risbon et al. 2006). Careful monitor-
ing is necessary with this therapy due to numerous
side effects such as myelosuppression and hepatotox-
icity; the reader is referred to oncology textbooks for
more detailed information (Withrow and Vail 2006).
Surgery or radiation therapy (30 Gray) is an option
in small or localized lesions (Withrow and Vail 2006;
Ruifenacht et al. 2007).
4.4.1.2 Systemic and discoid fupus erythematosus
Hg. 4.4.3 Skin histology of epitheliotropic lymphoma,
"d'emblee" form. Tumor formation with keratinocyte apop-
Lupus erythematosus is divided into systermic lu-
tosis and confluent epidermal necrosis and ulceration.
pus erythermatosus (SLE),discoid lupus erythermatosus
230  Inflammatory alopecias
(DLE) and in the dog the rather newly described enti-
ties vesicular lupus erythematosus (see Section 4.4.1.3)
and exfoliative cutareous lupus (see Section 4.4.1.4).
4.4.1.2.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
Although the term lupus erythematosus encompasses
a group of diseases that have different clinical syn-
dromes and are still not fully understood, the main
characteristics in the skin are damaged keratinocytes
accompanied by a lymphohistiocytic infiltrate in the
basement membrane zone of the epidermis and the
follicular wall. It is most likely that damaged ker.
atinocytes expressed formerly nuclear and cytoplasmic
antigens and these lead to the formation of autoanti-
bodies and immunocomplexes. Antinuclear antibody
(ANA) titers are positive in SLE and mostly negative in
DLE. The organ-specific and non-organ-specific cir-
culating autoantibodies are directed against a wide va-
riety of tissue antigens such as double-stranded DNA.
RNA, nucleoproteins, and histones. Ultraviolet radia -
tion (UVR) damage seems to contribute to the patho-
genesis of both SLE and DLE, and it has been demon-
 a aq o sosa so e ps
ultraviolet light exposure in previously unexposed skin
(Bennion and Norris 1997). The exact pathogenesis of
Fig. 4.4.5 Systemic lupus erythematosus in a dog. Mild scal-
VAn ie umou si hI imq rea jou si hep an
ing. erythema, and alopecia. (Courtesy of Section of Clinical
and UVB can induce cell damage and cytokine release
Dermatology. Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Berne.)
possibly leading to the exposure of novel intracellular
antigens on the surface of keratinocytes.
quence of ruptured bullae in the skin, mucocutaneous
4.4.1.2.2 Diagnosis
junctions, and mucous membranes. Generalized exfo-
SLE occurs in horses, dogs, and cats without clear age
liative dermatitis, ulcers of footpads, and panniculitis
 or sex predilection. Poodle, Collie, Shetland Sheepdog.
have been seen. In horses the clinical lesions of SLE
German Shepherd dog, Spitz, and Siamese, Persian,
are characterized by rather sharply demarcated areas
and Himalayan cats are apparently predisposed. SLE
of depigmentation around the eyes, lips, nostrils, gen
is a severe multisystemic autoimmune disease with
italia, and skin of the perianal and perineal regions
different organ involvement and only 20-50% of cases
 Onset may be gradual or rapid. The clinical signs may
may be associated with cutaneous signs (Scot et al.
wax and wane.
2001; Gross et al. 2005; Ginn et al. 2007). SLE has been
 DLE occurs without age or sex predilection. Col-
reported rarely in cats and horses and is uncommon in
lie, Shetland Sheepdog, German Shepherd dog, and
dogs. DLE is rather benign and restricted to the skin.
Siberian Husky appear to be predisposed. The dis-
ease presents initially with depigmentation, erythema,
4.4.1.2.3 Clinical cutaneous presentation
scaling, and loss of the normal cobblestone-like archi-
Skin lesions tend to occur in areas exposed to sunlight,
tecture of the nasal planum. With chronicity, lesions
such as the face, ears, nose, lips, and lightly pigmented,
may involve the bridge of the nose. Subsequently ero-
sparsely haired areas of other body regions. Clinically,
sions, ulcerations, and crusts are seen. Lesions may be
skin lesions are highly variable and may range from
 observed, though less frequently, on the dorsum of the
mild scaling, erythema, and alopecia to a severe ulcer-
 muzzle, the lips, in periocular regions, on the pinnae,
ative dermatitis (Fig. 4.4.5). Ulcers may be the conse-
the genitals, and rarely in the oral cavity (Angarano
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis231
1989; Gross et al. 2005). Like in SLE,cutaneous lesions
rough Collies (Ihrke and Gross 1995). In the latter de-
are at least photoaggrevated if not photoinduced, and
scription it was thought to represent a subgroup of
tend to be more severe under intense UV light expo
dermatomyositis (see Section 3.4.2). Since it has clin-
sure.
ical and histological similarities to the photosensitive
vesicular form of subacute cutaneous lupus erythe-
4.4.1.2.4 Histopathology
matosus in humans (Kovacs and Kovacs 1998), it was
The classical histological findings in both DLE and SLE
renamed in 2001 to vesicular cutaneous lupus erythe-
are an either cell-poor (hydropic) or cell-rich interface
matosus (Jackson and Olivry 2001).
dermatitis with basal cell vacuolation and apoptosis of
The breed specificity of this disease supports
 basal cells. The band-like inflammatory component is
 a hereditary predisposition. Immunological studies
rather mild in SLE and more severe in DLE. The cel-
lular infiltrate is composed of lymphocytes and to a
2004). In the majority of dogs, deposition of im-
lesser extent of plasma cells. However, on mucocuta-
munoglobulin was found at the dermoepidermal junc.
neous junctions the infiltrate may be plasma cell rich,
tion. A similar finding is seen in the so-called lupus
and it is a challenge for the dermatopathologist to dis-
band in humans. The onset of clinical signs in the
tinguish DLE from mucocutaneous pyoderma. Basal
summer months and the distribution of the lesions
cell vacuolation may lead to dermal-epidermal sep-
au snausloid e podns seare paiie aisieds laa
aration and ulceration. The outer root sheath of the
of UV light. This is further supported by the detection
hair follicles to the level of the isthmus may be equally
of autoantibodies against RO/SSA; these are small ri-
involved. Additional findings are a lymphocytic and
bonucleoprotein complexes that are translocated from
plasma cellular perivascular infiltrate, pigmentary in-
the nucleus to the cytoplasm and the cell membrane
 continence, and focal basement membrane thickening
after UV radiation (Sibilia 1998; Jackson et al. 2004).
(Yager and Wilcock 1994; Scott et al. 2001; Wiemelt
Characteristically middle aged and older dogs with
et al. 2004; Gross et al. 2005). The epidermis is usu-
a mean age of 5 years are affected. In the majority of
ally hyperplastic but may have focal areas of atrophy
the described cases the onset of the disease is during
(Gross et al. 2005). Dermal and epidermal mucinosis
the summer months and remission during the win-
may be present (Gross et al. 2005).
ter month is possible (Jackson 2004). Clinical findings
in early lesions are transient vesicles or bullae that
4.4.1.2.5 Therapy
rupture easily. Thus, the major clinical findings are
Treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus depends
annular, polycyclic, and serpiginous erosions and ul-
on the severity of lesions and the organs involved, and
 se   a  
consists of a variety of immunosuppressive and im-
body such as the ventral abdomen, groin, axillae, and
munomodulating treatment options. These options
medial thighs. They may progress and involve the mu-
are described in detail in other textbooks. Discoid lu-
cocutaneous junctions of the eyes, mouth, external
 pus erythematosus often responds to topically applied
 genitalia, and anus, the oral cavity, concave aspects
glucocorticoids or 0.1% tacrolimus and sun avoidance
of the pinnae, and footpads. Ulcerative lesions may
(Griffies et al. 2004). In more severe cases a combina-
be painful. Secondary pyoderma occurs. A myositis
tion of tetracycline and niacinamide has been success-
has been documented by electromyography in several
ful (White et al. 1992).
dogs. Nevertheless consistent abnormalities on physi-
cal examination other than the dermatological lesions
are not noted (1hrke and Gross 1995).
4.4.1.3 Canine vesicular cutaneousfupus
erythematosus
Skin biopsies are characterized by an interface der
matitis and a mural interface folliculitis. Vacuolation
This disease occurs exclusively in adult rough Collies,
and basal cell apoptosis may be severe in the epider-
Shetland Sheepdogs, and their crosses, and was for-
mis and the hair follicle to the level of the isthmus.
merly described as suppurative hidradenitis (Schwartz-
 Coalescing vacuolation of the basal keratinocytes may
man and Maguire 1969; Reedy et al. 1973), bullous 
result in vesiculation at the dermal-epidermal junc.
pemphigoid (White et al. 1981; Scott et al. 1982), and
tion. Apoptotic cells may be seen in the basal cell layer
finally ulcerative dermatitis of Shetland Sheepdogs and
and in the lower level of the stratum spinosum. The
232Inflammatory alopecias
superficial dermis contains a band-like subepidermal
Dogs clinically affected with this skin disease are
mixed mononuclear infiltrate that invades the basal
young adults between 6 months and 2.75 years at the
cell layer of the epidermis and the outer root sheath
age of onset (Vroom et al. 1995; Bryden and Burrows
of the hair follicle and obscures the dermo-epidermal
2004). The most prominent clinical features are ad-
junction. The infiltrate is composed mainly of CD3+
herent scales, crusts, and alopecia, which are typically
T-lymphocytes expressing CD4 in acute and CD8 in
seen on the muzzle, the pinnae, and the dorsal trunk.
older lesions. In addition, in epidermis and dermis,
Lesions may progress and involve the limbs and ventral
CD1+ and MHCII-expressing antigen presenting cells
trunk or become generalized. In the generalized cases
are present (Jackson et al. 2004). In areas of ulceration
pressure points and the scrotum are severely involved.
neutrophils are prominent. Superficial dermal edema
Follicular casts may be present. Secondary pyoderma
and congestion ofthe vessels may be present in variable
and Malassezia dermatitis may be present. Periphera
severity.
lymphadenopathy and, less often, pyrexia have been
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus in the
reported. Systemic signs of pain and lameness are seen.
rough Collie and Shetland Sheepdog is best man-
aged with aggressive immunosuppressive therapy such
nia may occur. Severity of the disease may wax and
as oral administration of short-acting glucocorticoids
wane.
alone or in combination with azathioprine. The prog-
Histological examination reveals a severe vacuolar
nosis is guarded for complete remission, but clinical
degeneration of the basal cell layer. Apoptotic ker-
signs can be controlled with adequate therapy. Since
atinocytes throughout the epidermis are seen in most
100% remission is not achieved in most cases, inter-
cases and may become focally confluent. Lymphocytic
mittent topical or systemic antibacterial therapy dur-
exocytosis throughout the epidermis is moderate to
ing the course of treatment may be necessary. Sun
marked. A moderate to marked discontinuous or con-
avoidance or the use of sunscreens is also important
tinuous subepidermal band-like infiltrate composed
in the management of the disease (Jackson 2004). Re-
of lymphocytes in the superficial dermis may be seen.
    o sa  
Comparable to the epidermal lesions a lymphocytic
cyclosporin A successfully controlled vesicular cuta-
interface mural folliculitis to the level of the isthmus
neous lupus erythematosus for more than 18 months
is present. In one study the epitheliotropic lympho-
(Jackson 2006).
cytes were identified as CD8+ T cells (Olivry et al.
1999). In addition to the interface cha nges, the epider-
mis is moderately hyperplastic and a moderate, diffuse
4.4.1.4 Exfoliative cutaneous lupus
predominantly orthokeratotic but multifocally also
erythematosus in the German Short-haired
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis is present. A lymphocytic
Pointer
sweat gland infiltrate and absence of sebaceous glands
This uncommon disease was originally reported as
are observed in approximately 50% of the cases.
hereditary lupoid dermatosis of the German Short-
 Treatment of ECLE with topical antiseborrheic
haired Pointer (Gross et al. 1992) and has been seen
shampoo and humectants, oral fatty acid supplemen-
in dogs from Europe, North America, and Australia
tation, and oral tetracycline and niacinamide admin-
(Gross et al. 1992; Theaker and Rest 1992; Vroom et al.
istration have all produced transient improvement but 
1995; White and Gross 1995; Vercelli and Schiavi 1996;
have failed to achieve long-term remission. Treatment
Olivry et al. 1999; Bryden and Burrows 2004). Since
response to immunosuppressive therapy using either
these dogs histologically have a lymphocytic interface
prednisolone, cyclosporine, or leflunomide was both
dermatitis similar to lupus-specific dermatoses of hu-
reported to be successful and unsuccessful (Bryden
 mans, it has been proposed to rename this syndrome
and Burrows 2004).
exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus (ECLE)
(Olivry et al. 1999).
4.4.1.5 Erythema multiforme
The pathogenesis of ECLE is poorly understood but
the recognition of this disease exclusively in the Ger-
Erythema multiforme (EM) is a rare condition re-
man Short-haired Pointer and its familial incidence
ported in dogs, cats, horses, and cows. It is thought
strongly suggest a hereditary origin (Olivry etal. 1999).
to be a host-specific T-cell mediated reaction pattern
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis 233
directed toward various triggering agents such as
strated. Feline EM has been associated with feline her-
drugs or infectious agents ( Fabbri and Panconesi 1993;
pes virus (Scott et al. 2001; Gross et al. 2005).
Fritsch and Elias 1993). No age or sex predilections
EM has also been associated with underlying neo-
have been documented in most studies. A human clas-
plasia (Ginn et al. 2007) and with adverse reactions to
sification system (Bastuji-Garin et al. 1993) has been
ingested beef and soy (Scott and Miller 1999). How-
adapted to veterinary medicine (Hinn et al. 1998) and
ever, in numerous cases the triggering agent could not
according to this, EM rmiror is reserved for patients
be identified. The various triggers for EM in cats and
     n  , 
  s      so
one mucosal surface and less than 10% ofthe body sur-
al. 1998; Scott and Miller 1999).
face are affected. In EM major, more than one mucosal
surface and between 10 and 50% of the body surface
4.4.1.5.2 Diagnosis
are involved. Epithelial detachment has to be less than
 In the dog, EM is a vesiculobullous and/or ulcera-
10%. Stevers-Johrsor syndrome (SJS) is reserved for
tive disease. Occasionally maculopapular eruptions
those patients where more than 50% of the body sur-
are seen. Lesions develop mostly in the axillary and
face is affected and epidermal detachment ranges from
groin region, on mucocutaneous junctions, the oral
10 to 30%. Toxic epidermal recrolysis(TEN), which has
cavity, the pinnae, and the footpads. Lesions may
a completely different histological picture, is used for
be mildly to moderately painful and are rarely pru-
patients with generalized disease and more than 30%
ritic. Target lesions (i.e., lesions that appear as con-
epithelial detachment. A SJS/TEN overlap syndrome
centric rings), Nikolsky's sign (i.e., the top layers of
is recognized.
the skin slip away from the lower layers when slightly
rubbed), and pitting edema (i.e., edema that retains
4.4.1.5.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
for a time the indentation produced by pressure) of
EM may be elicited bya wide array of triggering factors,
the distal limbs are occasionally seen. Affected dogs
and its pathogenesis is incompletely understood ( Huff
frequently show systemic signs of illness such as de-
et al. 1983; Ledesma and McCormack 1986; Gold-
 pression, lethargy, anorexia, and pyrexia. Hemograms,
berg 1987; Fabbri and Panconesi 1993; Fritsch and
serum biochemistry profiles, and urinalyses are usu-
Elias 1993; Scott et al. 1995a; Gross et al. 2005). One
ally unremarkable.
   n  s  s
Clinical lesions in the cat are predominantly vesic-
changes in keratinocytes (e.g-, upregulation of ICAM-
ular bullous or ulcerative (Scott and Miller 1999), but
 1,MHCI1, CD1a, and CD44) might bea primary factor
generalized exfoliative lesions have also been described
 in disease pathogenesis (Affolter et al. 1998).
(Gross et al. 2005). Presumably drug-associated EM
In one study the majority of canine cases (59%)
occurs after 1-2 weeks of treatment and markedly im-
and all cases in cats were associated with adminis-
proves within 1-2 weeks of discontinuation of the of-
tration of drugs. Antibiotics such as trimethoprim-
fending drug (Huff et al. 1983; Scott et al. 1983; Hees
sulfadiazine, chloramphenicol, and enrofloxacin are
frequently found as triggering factors in drug-induced
and Payne-Johnson 1991; Bond and Brownlie 1992;
cases. However, other drugs such as antiparasitics have
Fritsch and Elias 1993; Rosenkrantz 1993; Keck et al.
been associated with EM as well. In one study in which
1995; Noli et al. 1995; Ihrke 1997; Scott and Miller
the human classification system (Bastuji-Garin et al.
1999; Scott et al. 2001).
1993) was adapted for animals (Hinn et al. 1998),
 Skin and mucocutaneous biopsy specimens are
drugs were found to be causative in only 19% of the
characterized by an interface dermatitis. The epi-
EM minor and major cases, but were associated with
 dermis typically is mildly to moderately hyperplas-
92% of SJS and SJS/TEN cases.
tic with multifocal areas of hydropic degeneration
Infections (viral, fungal, or bacterial) are other pos-
of basal keratinocytes, lymphocytic exocytosis, and
sible triggering factors for EM. In one case canine
 apoptotic keratinocytes in all layers of the epidermis.
 parvovirus was identified to be the triggering factor
Mild to moderate numbers of lymphocytes and histi-
(Favrot et al. 2000). In five puppies with EM-com-
 ocytes are present directly underneath the epidermis
patible skin lesions, canine distemper virus, canine
and may obscure the dermoepidermal junction. Sim-
parvovirus, and canine herpesvirus were demon-
ilar findings are usually observed in the infundibular
234Inflammatory alopecias
McCormack 1986; Goldberg 1987; Fabbri and
Panconesi 1993; Fritsch and Elias 1993). In a study
presented by Scott and Miller ( 1999), 4 dogs with id-
iopathic EM clearly benefited from treatment with
large doses of glucocorticoids or with azathioprine.
These dogs went into complete remission while being
treated, and relapsed each time therapy was stopped
(Scott and Miller 1999).
4.4.2 Autonomous lymphocytic mural
folliculitis
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis can be associated with
(interface type) or without (infiltrative type) signifi-
cant degeneration of keratinocytes. It again needs to
Fig. 4.4.6 Skin histology of erythema multiforma in a dog.
e  si sty p, sn pisa ag
Scattered apoptotic keratinocytes in the epidermis and the in-
pathologic term and not a disease diagnosis (see Sec-
fundibular epithelium of hair follicles.
tion 2.2.3.7). Numerous diseases can present with this
morphology, among others dermatophytosis (see Sec-
tion 4.1.2) and demodicosis (see Section 4.1.3).
hair follicle epithelium (Fig. 4.4.6). Satellitosis and
segmental areas of epidermal necrosis are frequently
found. Occasionally, full-thickness epidermal necrosis
4.4.2.1Feline exfoliative dermatitis
may result in dermoepidermal separation. Pigmentary
with lymphocytic mural folliculitis
incontinence is frequent. Small numbers of plasma
4.4.2.1.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
cells, neutrophils, and eosinophils infltrate the der-
Exfoliative dermatitis with either interface or infiltra-
mis. Neutrophils and plasma cells are numerous in
tive lymphocytic mural folliculitis is a rather newly
areas of ulceration and/or secondary bacterial infec-
described group of skin diseases in cats that cannot
tion. No apparent histopathological differences
be-
be associated with one single etiology. Disease names
tween cases with suspected triggers and those without
associated with this group of skin diseases are feline
(ie., idiopathic) could be defined so far.
thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis, feline id-
iopathic mural folliculitis, and feline sebaceous adeni-
4.4.1.5.3 Therapy
tis. Various causative factors have been identified in
The most important aspects in the therapy of EM are
recent years. The most well-documented cause is thy-
recognition and elimination of triggering factors (Huff 
moma (Loveday 1959; Carpenter and Holzworth 1982;
et al. 1983; Ledesma and McCormack 1986; Goldberg
Scott et al. 1995b; Forster- Van Hijfte et al. 1997; Turek
1987; Fritsch and Elias 1993; Scott et al. 2001). When
2003; Rottenberget al. 2004). Other cases of feline mu-
the triggering factor can be eliminated, EM usually
ral lymphocytic folliculitis and exfoliative dermatitis
resolves within 1-2 weeks (Huff et al. 1983; Scott et al.
have been associated with other neoplasms (Pascal-
1983; Hees et al. 1985; Mason 1990; Medleau et al.
Tenorio et al. 1997), drug administration (Scott et al.
1990; Delmage and Payne-Johnson 1991; Bond and
2001; Gross et al. 2005), a lupus erythematosus-like
Brownlie 1992; Fritsch and Elias 1993; Rosenkrantz
disease (Wilhelm et al. 2005), nutritional factors (De-
1993; Keck et al. 1995; Noli et al. 1995; Ihrke 1997;
clercq 2000), and seasonal influences (Marignac et al.
Scott and Miller 1999; Scott et al. 2001). In dogs with
 2003). However in most cases an underlying etiology
infection- or diet-associated EM, it may take up to
cannot be determined (Declercq 1995, 2000; Pascal-
4 weeks until clinical signs improve.
Tenorio et al. 1997; Wendlberger 1999; Marignac et al.
 In human medicine, the use of immunosuppres-
2003; Foster 2004; Wilhelm et al. 2005).
sive drugs, especially glucocorticoids, is still contro-
 In cases where a thymoma has been identified
versially discussed (Huff et al. 1983; Ledesma and
the disease is named “thymoma-associated exfoliative
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis 235
dermatitis." It is an uncommon disease in the cat and
a
has also been reported in one rabbit (Florizoone 2005).
The pathogenesis is unknown, but the lymphocytic in-
terface nature of the follicular and epidermal inflam-
mation suggests a cell-mediated autoimmunity caused
by the thymic tumor (Scott et al. 1995b). Autoreac-
tive cells, however, have not been demonstrated yet.
Since cases with unknown etiology but a similar clini-
cal or histological picture are seen, it is most likely that
feline lymphocytic mural folliculitis with exfoliative
dermatitis is an immune-mediated T-cell-associated
reaction pattern.
4.4.2.1.2 Diagnosis
(b)
Clinica! presentation
Cats with thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis
are usually middle-aged to aged and may show signs
of systemic illness such as lethargy. Extensive exfolia-
tion with sheets of tightly adherent scales is a clinical
hallmark of this paraneoplastic syndrome. The head,
trunk, and limbs are most commonly affected before
the lesions become generalized. The hair coat is often
raised by the thick scales or crusts that adhere to the
skin. Alopecia is noted secondary to severe exfolia-
tive erythroderma (Fig. 4.4.7). The ear canals may be
 plugged with crusty debris. Brown, waxy, keratoseba-
ceous debris may also accumulate in the interdigital
Hg. 4.4.7 Feline exfoliative dermatitis and mural folliculitis as-
skin around the nail beds. Ulceration may be seen
sociated with a thymoma. (a) Alopecia on the neck (Courtesy
(Scott et al. 1995b). Pruritus is usually not present
of Section of Clinical Dermatology. Vetsuisse Faculty, University
of Berne); (b) Alopecia on the abdomen associated with severe
but was reported in conjunction with secondary over-
exfoliative erythroderma. (Courtesy of M. Linek.)
 growth of Malassezia (Forster- Van Hijfte et al. 1997;
Mauldin et al. 2002).
In cats where no thymoma can be detected and the
glands (as in canine sebaceous adenitis) may occur
etiology remains unknown, similar clinical features
(Rottenberg et al. 2004). In addition, a mild to moder-
may be seen. One diet-related case was described where
ate interface dermatitis with apoptotic cells in all layers
erosions on the lips and eyelids predominated. In this
of the epidermis is present. Exfoliation is reflected by
case, footpads were dry and scaly (Declercq 2000).
a moderate to severe laminar orthokeratic hyperker-
atosis. Variable serocellular crusting may be seen. As
Histopathology
mentioned before, cases with an identical histological
Histopathological features of feline lymphocytic mu-
picture but no thymoma have been reported. However,
ral folliculitis with exfoliative dermatitis are best de-
detailed studies on morphological and clinical differ-
scribed in thymoma-associated cases. The disease
 ences between cats with and without thymoma have
presents with an interface mural folliculitis where lym-
not been conducted so far. It is not known, for exa m-
phocytes and few histiocytes target the follicular isth-
ple, whether higher severity of exfoliation is associated
mus and the infundibulum (Fig. 4.4.8) (Gross et al.
with a higher severity grade of interface dermatitis. It
1997; Power 1998; Declercq 2000; Scott et al. 2001).
 seems that cases of the so-called idiopathic feline mu-
The lymphocytic infiltrate may also be present in the
 ral folliculitis (Declercq 1995; Gross et al. 1997; Scott
sebaceous glands and a complete loss of sebaceous
et al. 200l) and feline sebaceous adenitis (Gross et al.
236  Inflammatory alopecias
ticoids and retinoids (Declercq 1995; Power 1998).
Cyclosporine has been used with success in two cats
(Wilhelm et al. 2005). Some cases of idiopathic feline
mural folliculitis resolved spontaneously (Declercq
1995, Marignac et al. 2003).
4.4.2.2 Canine and feline isthmic lymphocytic
mural folficulitis (pseudopelade-like folficufitis)
Isthmic mural folliculitis can be observed in con-
junction with demodicosis (see Section 4.1.3), der-
matophytosis (see Section 4.1.2), and canine seba-
ceous adenitis (see Chapter 4.8). However, it has also
been described independent of the above-mentioned
diseases. Lymphocytic mural folliculitis in dogs and
cats has been named “pseudopelade" because it bears
some clinical and morphological similarities to “pseu-
dopelade of Brocq" that describes a slowly progressive
cicatricial (scarring) alopecia in humans. The name
refers to the clinical similarity (pseudo) to alopecia
areata (pelade) on casual clinical inspection. How-
Fig. 4.4.8 Skin histology of feline exfoliative dermatitis and
 ever, since “pseudopelade" in humans represents the
mural folliculitis associated with a thymoma. Lymphocytes and
end stage of several diseases and thus is an ill-defined
histiocytes targeting the follicular isthmus and the infundibu-
Ium.
term, the canine and feline disease should rather be
summarized under the descriptive term “lymphocytic
mural folliculitis of the isthmus,” which clearly sepa-
o   s   
rates it from nonisthmic lymphocytic mural folliculitis.
presentation as thymoma-related cases, but without
 Isthmic lymphocytic mural folliculitis has been re-
 interface changes in the epidermis or the hair follicle
ported in cats and dogs and is apparently a very rare
wall. These cases may be particularly difficult to sepa-
disease (Gross et al. 2000; Olivry et al. 2000).
rate histopathologically from pseudopelade-like isth-
mic folliculitis (see Section 4.4.2.2). Other differential
4.4.2.2.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
diagnoses of feline lymphocytic mural folliculitis with
 Lymphocytic mural folliculitis of the isthmus is con-
exfoliative dermatitis are dermatophytosis (see Sec-
sidered an immune-mediated disease. Folliculotropic
tion 4.1.2) and epitheliotropic T-cell lymphoma (see
lymphocytes exhibit most commonly CD3 and CD8
Section 4.4.1.1).
and thus represent cytotoxic T-cells. Autoantibodies
 specific for the lower hair follicle were detected in the
4.4.2.1.3 Therapy
serum of affected patients. Immunoblotting demon
As already pointed out, patients should be carefully
 strated binding of these antibodies to multiple follic-
evaluated for any underlying disease. If a thymoma is
ular keratinocyte proteins, including hair keratins and
 present, surgical resection is the treatment of choice.
trichohyalin. However, as with alopecia areata, it is
Tumors that are noninvasive and easily excisable tu-
unknown whether the occurrence of autoantibodies
mors have a good prognosis with a median survival
s e  d e si nd  
time of almost 2 years (Withrow 2001). Cats with in-
event in the pathogenesis of this disease.
vasive tumors, however, representing approximately
15% of cases, often do not survive the perioperative
4.4.2.2.2 Diagnosis
period (Withrow 2001). Cats without a thymoma or
Clinically, the disease is characterized by focal or mul-
any other neoplasm are difficult to treat. Cases have
tifocal well-demarcated patches of alopecia that do not
both responded and failed to respond to glucocor-
show any signs of primary inflammation (Fig. 4.4.9).
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis237
lished therapy for isthmic mural folliculitis in cats and
dogs.
4.4.2.3 Equine finear alopecia
Bb  s ad s  r i
horses, but can also occur in other horse breeds (Fadok
1995).
4.4.2.3.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
Etiology and pathogenesis of equine linear alopecia
are not yet understood. A localized keratinization dis-
order was once suggested (Scott 1988), but nowadays a
 T-cell-mediated immunological reaction against fol-
Hg. 4.4.9 Isthmic mural folliculitis (pseudopelace) in a dog.
licular keratinocytes is favored. The cause of this im-
Multifocal well-demarcated patches of alopecia that do not
mune reaction is unknown, and an etiologic agent has
not been identified (Tscharner et al. 2000). Because of
Bergvall.)
the vertical orientation of the lesions, it was suggested
that an external factor “dripping" down the skin may
Scales and hyperpigmentation may be present. Hair
 be involved. However, no such factor has been docu-
loss progresses gradually. Whereas hair regrowth has
mented so far.
lie s apeadonasd, u u paodai uaaq ou
regrowth has been observed in dogs and cats. This
4.4.2.3.2 Diagnosis
might be a result of the different localization of fol-
Lesions may already be observed shortly after birth,
licular stem cells in different species. So far neither a
but most frequently occur between 1 and 5 years of
breed nor a sex predilection has been noted in cats
age. They are slowly progressive. Skin lesions consist
and dogs. Pruritus or systemic signs have not been re-
of one or more vertically orientated linear areas of
ported. In the single case report of a cat with lympho-
alopecia with varying degrees of scaling or crusting
cytic mural folliculitis of the isthmus, alopecic lesions
(Fig. 4.4.10). They are usually 2-10 mm wide and vary
were similar to the canine cases, but onychorrhexis
in length from a few centimeters to more than a meter.
and onychomadesis were seen in addition.
In some horses multiple hyperkeratotic and alopecic
The major histological finding in dogs is a mainly
 papules coalesce into linear bands. Anecdotal reports
lymphocytic infiltration that targets more or less ex-
 describe variants in quarter horses that are character-
clusively the follicular isthmus. Mural inflammation
ized by circular spots of alopecia rather than linear
may be mild to severe. Follicular keratinocytes may be
 ones. Circular and linear lesions may coexist in the
swollen or degenerated. Occasionally, inflammation
same horse. Common sites are the neck and lateral
extends above and below the follicular isthmus but
aspects of the thorax. Skin lesions are usually not as-
does not involve the hair bulb or the epidermis. A per-
sociated with pruritus. Since in some patients alopecia
ifollicular infiltrate composed of lymphocytes, plasma
predominates whereas in others hyperkeratosis is the
cells, and histiocytes is present around the isthmus. In
 most prominent clinical finding, it has been suggested
late-stage lesions, severe follicular atrophy and variable
 that equine linear alopecia may actually represent two
atrophy of sebaceous glands is seen and inflammation
separate disease entities (Fadok 1995).
is rather sparse. The epidermis is mildly hyperplastic.
The primary histopathological lesion is an in-
Histological findings in the single reported feline case
filtrative lymphocytic mural folliculitis with subse-
are similar.
quent damage of the follicular wall. Variable degrees
 of edema in the follicular wall may be present. In
4.4.2.2.3 Therapy
older (or more well-developed) lesions epithelioid
Due to the small number of cases that have been de-
 macrophages and giant cells may be seen infiltrat-
scribed in the scientific literature, there is no estab-
ing the outer root sheath of the affected follicles, thus
238  Inflammatory alopecias
our present knowledge of the disease, cure is impossi-
ble. Corticosteroid therapy (either topically or system-
ically) may slow down the progression oflesions, rarely
resolution may be achieved. In cases with significant
scaling and crusting any of the keratolytic shampoos
can be used on a regular basis (every 3-4 days)
4.4.2.4 Canine and feline folficular mucinosis
4.4.2.4.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
Follicular mucinosis is a very rare skin disease of the
dog and cat (Scott et al. 1987; Bell and Oliver 1995;
Gross et al. 2005). In humans with a morphologically
similar disease, follicular mucinosis is associated with
immunological dysfunction, lymphoma, leukemia, or
hematological disease (Mehregan et al. 1991; Cerroni
and Kerl 2004). About 50% of the cases are associated
with infiltration of a monoclonal population of T-
lymphocytes.
4.4.2.4.2 Diagnosis
Two cases of follicular mucinosis have been reported
in cats. In both cases, skin problems developed with-
Hg. 4.4.10 Equine linear alopecia with vertically orientated lin-
out associated internal lesions, and finally progressed
ear areas of alopecia, scaling. and crusting. (Courtesy of K)
to epitheliotropic lymphoma (Scott et al. 1987). The
Ber gvall.)
disease presents with a well-demarcated alopecia with
fine scaling on the head, ears, and neck (Scott et al.
2001).
representing a more histiocytic or granulomatous type
Three cases of follicular mucinosis have been re-
of mural folliculitis (see Chapter 4.5). The end stage of
ported in dogs.Allthree cases occurred in older retriev-
the process may result in complete follicular destruc.
ers. In one case, association with an epitheliotropic
tion and permanent nonreversible alopecia. Sebaceous
lymphoma was discussed, but could not be confirmed
 glands may be involved in the inflammatory process
after euthanasia (Walder et al. 2007). The two other
and may eventually undergo atrophy.
dogs have been described without further clinical ab-
Other histological findings are a regular or irreg-
normalities (Gross et al. 2001). In dogs lesions are
ular epidermal hyperplasia with a mild to severe or-
patchy to diffuse, widespread, scaly, and alopecic. The
thokeratotic hyperkeratosis. In some but not all cases,
head, trunk, and legs are most severely affected (Bell
 striking epidermal lesions resembling erythema mul-
and Oliver 1995). Hyperpigmentation may be seen.
tiforme are found. These are represented by apop-
 In all canine cases a perifollicular and intrafollicular
 totic keratinocytes and lymphocytic satellitosis. Other
 infiltrate composed of plasma cells and lymphocytes
epidermal lesions include diffuse spongiosis and ex-
was observed. Lymphocytes infiltrating the follicular
Ocytosis. Parakeratosis may be seen. Varying degrees
and sebaceous epithelium did not show any evidence
of perivascular eosinophilic dermatitis may also be
of atypia. Perifollicular and mural deposition of mucin
present.
is found, associated with epithelial degeneration and
cystic mucin-filled intraepithelial spaces. Lymphocytic
4.4.2.3.3 Therapy
s  n   p ss
Skin lesions are persistent and do not regress spon-
 and infundibulum. Follicular lesions in cats are similar
taneously. The owner should be informed that with
with moderate to severe epidermal hyperplasia.
Lymphocyticmural folliculitis239
In one canine case, an interface dermatitis has been
ers and their crossbreeds appear to be overrepresented.
described in addition to the follicular lesions ( Bell and
There is no sex or age predilection (Gross et al. 2005).
Oliver 1995). The interface dermatitis was composed
Clinical differential diagnoses depend on the extent
of a scant exocytosis of benign lymphocytes, associated
 of the alopecia and include demodicosis (see Section
with a compact orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis over-
4.1.3), dermatophytosis (see Section 4.1.2), alopecia
lying a mildly hyperplastic epidermis with basal cell
areata (see Chapter 4.7), follicular mucinosis (see Sec-
vacuolation and rare apoptotic cells.
tion 4.4.2.4), and lymphocytic mural folliculitis of the
isthmus (see Section 4.4.2.2).
4.4.2.4.3 Therapy
Skin scrapings and dermatophyte cultures are
 In humans follicular mucinosis can progress to a
mandatory for excluding demodicosis and dermato-
chronic condition or may resolve spontaneously
phytosis. Cytology in solely alopecic lesions is not
(Mehregan et al. 1991). In dogs and cats, both prog-
feasible. In crusted lesions an eosinophil-dominated
 nosis and therapy are insufficiently documented.
 inflammatory infiltrate is seen. Skin biopsies are re-
quired for diagnosis and reveal perifollicular and in-
 trafollicular inflammation composed of lymphocytes,
4.4.2.5 Canine eosinophilic mucinotic
histiocytes, and eosinophils. Mural folliculitis primar-
mural folficufitis
ily affects the isthmic region of the hair follicle and is
Eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis has so far
accompanied by intrafollicular and perifollicular mu-
 only been described in dogs. It shares clinically and
cinosis.
histologically some similarities with canine follicular
mucinosis (see Section 4.4.2.4), and it cannot be ruled
 out that these two diseases actually represent one dis-
References
ease entity (Gross et al. 2005). The clinical picture of
both diseases is similar. The histological differentiation
Abel EA, Nickoloff BJ, Shelby DM. 1986. Tumor stage mycosis
 between canine follicular mucinosis and eosinophilic
fungoides in a patient treated with long-term corticosteroids
mucinotic mural folliculitis is based on the fact that
for asthma and atopic-like dermatitis. Journal of Dermatologic
Surgery and Oncology 12:1089-1093.
in the latter perifollicular inflammation shows nu-
Affolter VK. 2007. Round cell tumors. ESVD Workshop om Skin
merous eosinophils (not seen in follicular mucinosis).
Oncology, Berne, pp. 70-72.
Furthermore, mucin deposition in eosinophilic mu-
Affolter VK, Moore PF. 2000. Lymphoid proliferations of the skin.
Workshop on Skin Immunology, St. Paul de Vence.
cinotic mural folliculitis is less abundant and more
AffolterVK,MoorePF,SandmaierBM.1998.Immunohistochem
perifollicular than intrafollicular (Gross et al. 2005). It
ical characterization of canine acute graf-versus-host disease
therefore needs to be differentiated from eosinophilic
and erythema multiforme. In: Kwochka EW, Willemse T, von
Tscharner C (eds), Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Pp. 103-
folliculitis (see Chapter 4.2).
115. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
In the dog one case of eosinophilic mucinotic mu-
Angarano DW. 1989. Dermatoses of the nose and the footpads in
ral folliculitis was observed in conjunction with a T-
dogs andcats.In:KirkRW(ed.),Kirk's CurrentVeterinary Therapy
cell lymphoma (Gross et al. 2005). Histopathology of
X, pp. 616-621. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Baker JL, Scott Dw. 1989. Mycosis fungoides in two cats. Jourmal of
other cases revealed a small number of Dermodex mites
the American Amimal Hospital Association 25:97-101.
 or mite fragments, suggesting that this disease might
Bastuji-Garin S, Rzany B, Stern RS, Shear NH, Naldi L, Roujeau JC.
represent a reaction pattern to a persistent parasitic
1993. Clinical classification of cases of toxic epidermal necrolysis,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and erythema multiforme. Archives
stimulus.
of Dermatofogy 129:92-96.
The clinical picture of eosinophilic mucinotic mu-
Beale KM, Bolon B. 1992. Canine cutaneous lymphosarcoma: ep-
ral folliculitis is predominated by alopecia, but may
itheliotropic and nonepitheliotropic, a retrospective study. In:
Ihrke PJ, Mason IS, White SD (eds), Advarces in Veterinary Der-
be highly variable in extension. Alopecia can be
matology, Pp. 273-284. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
patchy, partial, or generalized. It is moderately well
 Bell A, Oliver F. 1995. Alopecia mucinosa (follicular mucinosis) in
 demarcated and erythema, crusting, hyperpigmenta-
a dog. Veterinary Dermatology 6:221-226.
Bennion SD, Norris DA. 1997. Ultraviolet light modulation of au-
tion, and greasiness of the hair coat have been noted
toantigens, epidermal cytokines and adhesion molecules as con-
(Gross et al. 2005). In severe cases ulceration may
tributing factors of the pathogenesis of cutaneous LE. Lupus
6:181192.
be seen within alopecic areas. Despite the numerous
Bond R, Brownlie SE. 1992. Drug eruption resembling erythema
eosinophils, pruritus is inconsistently found. Retriev-
multiforme major in a dog. Veterinary Dermatofogy 14:50-53.
240Inflammatory alopecias
Bryden SL, Burrows AK. 2004. Successful management of exfolia-
Gross TL, Stannard AA, Yager JA. 1997. Review article: an anatomical
tive cutaneous lupus erythematosus in three German shorthaired
classification of folliculitis. Veterinary Dermatofogy 8:147-156.
Haselen CWV, Toonstra J, Preesman AH. 1999. Sezary syndrome
Caciolo PL, Nesbitt GH, Patnaik AK, Hayes AA. 1984. Cutaneous
in a young man with severe atopic dermatitis. British Jourmal of
lymphosarcoma in thecat; areportof nine cases. American Jourmal
Dermatofogy 140:704-707.
of the Animal Hospital Association 20:491-496.
Hees IV, Mason KV, Gross TL, Burren VS. 1985. Levamisole-induced
Carpenter JL, Holzworth J. 1982. Thymoma in 1l cats. Jourmal of
drug eruptions in the dog. Jourmalof the American Animal Hospital
the American Veterinary Medical Association 181:248-251.
Association 21:255-260.
Cerroni L, Kerl H. 2004. Primary follicular mucinosis and associa-
Hinn AC, Olivry T, Luther PB, Cannon AG, Yager JA. 1998. Ery-
tion with mycosis fungoides and other cutaneous T-cell lympho-
thema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epider-
mas. Jourmal ofthe American Academy of Dermatology51:146-147.
mal necrolysis in the dog. Clinical classification, drug exposure,
de Lorimier LP. 2006. Updates on the management of canine epithe-
and histopathological correlations. Journal of Veterinary Aflergy
liotropic cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Veterinary Clinics of North
and Clinical Immunology 6:13-20.
America Small Animal Practice 36(1):213-218.
Huff JC, Weston WL, Tonneson MG. 1983. Erythema multiforme:
Declercq J. 1995. Lymphocytic mural folliculitis in two cats. Vlaams
a critical review of characteristic diagnostic criteria and causes.
Driergeneeskundig Tijdschrift 64:177.
Journal ofthe American Academy ofDermatology 8:763-773.
Declercq J. 2000. A case of diet-related lymphocytic mural folliculitis
Ihrke PJ. 1997. Cutaneous adverse drug reactions. Compendium of
in a cat. Veterinary Dermatology 1l:75-80.
Continuing Education 19(Suppl):87-92.
Delmage DA, Payne-Johnson CE. 1991. Erythema multiforme in a
Ihrke PJ, Gross TL. 1995. Ulcerative dermatosis of Shetland Sheep-
doberman on trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole therapy. foumal
dogs and Collies. In: Bonagura JD (ed.), Kirk's Current Veterinary
fSmall Animal Practice 32:635-639.
Therapy XII (Smafl Amimal Practice), Pp. 639-640. Philadelphia:
Fabbri P, Panconesi E. 1993. Erythema multiforme ("minus" and
WB Saunders.
"maius") and drug intake. Clinics in Dermatofogy 1l:479489.
Jackson HA. 2004. Eleven cases of vesicular cutaneous lupus erythe-
Fadok VA. 1995. Update on four unusual equine dermatoses. Vet-
matosus in Shetland sheepdogs and rough collies: clinical man-
erinary Clinics of North America: Equine Practice ll:105-110.
agement and prognosis. Veterinary Dermatology 15:37-41.
Favrot C, Olivry T, Dunston SM, Degorce-Rubiales F, Guy IS. 2000.
Jackson HA. 2006. Vesicular cutaneous lupus. Veterinury Clinics of
Parvovirus infection of keratinocytes as a cause of canine ery-
North Armerica 36:251-255.
thema multiforme. Veterirury Pathology 37:647-649.
Jackson HA, Olivry T. 2001. Ulcerative dermatosis of the Shetland
Fletcher CL, Orchard GE, Whittaker SJ. 2004. CD30+ cutaneous
sheepdog and rough collie dog may represent a novel vesicular
lymphoma in association with atopic eczema. Archives of Derma-
variant of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Veterinury Dermatof-
tology 140:449-454.
ogy 12:19-27.
 Florizoone K. 2005. Thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis in
Jackson HA, Olivry T, Berget F, Dunston SM, Bonnefont C, Cha-
a rabbit. Veterinary Dermatology 16:281-284.
banne L. 2004. Immunopathology of vesicular cutaneous lupus
Forster-Van Hijfte MA, Curtis CF, White RN. 1997. Resolution of
erythematosus in the rough collie and Shetland sheepdog: a ca-
exfoliative dermatitis and Malassezia pachydermatis overgrowth
 nine homologue of subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus in
in a cat after surgical thymoma resection. Jourmal of Smalf Animal
humans.Veterinary Dermatology 15:230-239.
Practice 38:451-454.
Keck G, Nash L, Buronfosse F, Peroux F. 1995. Accident cu-
Foster AP. 2004. Mural folliculitis {MF). 5th Worid Congress of Vet-
tane medicamenteux évoquant un érytheme polymorphe de
erinary Dermatology,Vienna, pp. 56-57.
type Steven-Johnson chez un berger allemand. Point Veterinaire
Fritsch PO, Elias PM. 1993. Erythema multiforme and toxic epider-
27:8183.
mal necrolysisn:FitzpatrickTB,Eisen,WolffK,re
Kovacs SO, Kovacs SC. 1998. Dermatomyositis. Jourmal of the Ammer-
IM, Austen KF (eds), Dermatology in General Medicine, 4th edn,
ian Academy of Dermatology 39:899-920.
Pp. 585-600. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lange-Vejlsgaard G, Ralfkiaer E, Larsen JK. 1989. Fatal cutaneous
Ginn PE, Mansell JEKL, Rakich PM. 2007. Skin and appendages.
Tcell lymphoma in a child with atopic dermatitis. Journal of the
In: Ginn, Kennedy's and Palmers Pathology of Domestic Animais.
American Acadermy of Dermatology 20:954-958.
Edinburg: Elsevier Saunders.
Ledesma GN, McCormack PC. 1986. Erythema multiforme. Clinics
Goldberg GN. 1987. Erythema multiforme controversies and recent
in Dermatofogy 4:70-80.
advances. Advamnces in Dermatology 2:73-90.
Loveday RK. 1959. Thymoma in a Siamese cat. Jourmal of South
Griffes JD, Mendelsohn DL, Rosenkrantz WS. 2004. Topical 0.1%
African Veterinary Medical Association 30:33-34.
tacrolimus for the treatment of discoid lupus erythematosus and
Marignac GL, Barlerin L, Guillot J, Mialot M, Delisles F, Scott DW.
pemphigus erythematosus in dogs. Jourmal of the Americam Ani-
2003. A case of seasonal lymphocytic mural folliculitis with spon-
mal Hospital Association 40(1):2941.
taneous resolution in a cat. Veterimary Dermatology 14:247.
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ. 1992. Hereditary lupoid dermatosis of
Mason KV. 1990. Cutaneous drug eruptions. Veterinary Clinics of
the German shorthaired pointer. In: Veterinary Dermatopathof-
North America 20:1633-1653.
ogy:A Macroscopic and MicroscopicEvaluationof Canine and
Mauldin EA, Morris DO, Goldschmidt MH. 2002. Retrospective
Feline Skin Diseases. St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier Health Science.
study: the presence of Malassezia in feline skin biopsies. A clini-
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. 2005. Skin Diseases ofthe
copathological study. Veterinary Dermatology 13:7-13.
Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathological Diagnosis. Oxford:
Medleau L, Shanley KJ, Rakich PM, Goldschmidt MH. 1990.
Black well Science.
Trimethoprim-sulfonamide-associated drug eruptions in dogs.
Gross TL, Olivry T, Tobin DJ. 2000. Morphologic and immunologic
Journal of the American Arimal Hospital Association 26:305-311.
characterization of a canine isthmus mural folliculitis resembling
Mehregan DA, Gibson LE, Muller SA. 1991. Follicular mucinosis:
pseudopelade of humans. Veterinary Dermatology 1l:17-24.
histopathologic review of 33 cases. Mayo Clinic Proceedings
Gross TL, Olivry T, Vitale CB, Power HT. 2001. Degenerative mu-
66:387-390.
cinotic mural folliculitis in cats. Veterinary Dermatology 12:279-
Moore PF, Olivry T. 1994. Cutaneous lymphomas in companion
283.
animals. Clinics in Dermatofogy 12:499-505.
Lymphocyticmural folliculitis 241
Moore PF, Olivry T, Naydan D. 1994. Canine cutaneous epithe-
Scott DW, Millr WHM. 1999. Erythema multiforme in dogs and
liotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) is a proliferative disor-
cats: literature review and case material from the Cornell Uni-
der of CD8+ T cells. American Jourmal of Pathology 144:421-429.
versity College of Veterinary Medicine (1988-1996). Veterinary
Noli C, Koeman JP, Willemse T. 1995. A retrospective evaluation of
Dermatology 10:297-309.
adverse reactions to trimethoprim-sulphonamide combinations
Scott DW, Walton DK, Slater MR. 1987. Immune-mediated der-
in dogs and cats. Veterinary Quarterly 17:123-128.
matoses in domestic animals: ten years after. Part I. Compendium
Olivry T, Luther PB, Dunston SM, Moore PF. 1999. Interface der-
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 9:424-435.
matitis and sebaceous adenitis in exfoliative cutaneous lupus
Scott DW, Yager JA, Johnston KM. 1995b. Exfoliative dermatitis in
erythematosus ("Lupoid Dermatosis") of German short-haired
association with thymoma in three cats. Feline Practice 23:8-13.
pointer. Proceedings of the 15th Meeting Acadermy of Veterinary
Sibilia J. 1998. Ro(SS-A) and anti-Ro(SS-A): an update. Revue du
Dermatology, Maui.
Rhumatisme (English Edition) 65:45-57.
Olivry T, Power HT, Woo JC, Moore PF, Tobin DJ. 2000. Anti-
Theaker AJ, Rest JR. 1992. Lupoid dermatosis in a German short-
isthmus autoimmunity in a novel feline acquired alopecia resem-
haired pointer. Veterinary Record 131:495.
bling pseudopelade of humans. Veterinary Dermatology ll:261-
Tscharner Cv, Kunkle G, Yager J. 2000. Linear alopecia (linear ker-
270.
atosis). Veterinary Dermatology 1ll:193-195.
Pascal-Tenorio A, Olivry T, Gross TL, Atlee BA, Ihrke PJ. 1997.
Turek MM. 2003. Cutaneous paraneoplastic syndromes in dogs and
 Paraneoplastic alopecia associated with internal malignancies in
cats: a review of the literature. Veterinary Dermatology 14:279-
the cat.Veterinary Dermatofogy 8:47-52.
296.
Pielop JA, Jones D, Duvic M. 2001. Transient CD30+ nodal
Vercelli A, Schiavi S. 1996. A case report of lupoid dermatosis in
transformation of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma associated with
a German short-haired pointer. In: Kwochka KW, Willemse T,
cyclosporine treatment. International Jourmal of Dermatology
Tscharner C.Von.(eds),Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
40:505-511.
Vol. 3, Pp. 466-467. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd.
Power HT. 1998. Newly recognized feline skin diseases. Proceed-
Vroom MW, Theaker MJ, Rest JR. 1995. Lupoid dermatosis in
ings of the14th Meetingof the AmericanAcademy ofVeterinary
five German short-haired pointers. Veterimary Dermatology 6:93-
Dermatology, San Antonio.
98.
Reedy LM, Mallett R, Freeman RG. 1973. Hidradenitis suppurativa
Walder EJ, Affolter VK, Moore PF. 2007. Short communication V:
ina female Shetland sheepdog. Veterinary Medicine, Smalf Animal
A case of alopecia mucinosa in a dog. Is this mycosis fungoides?
Chinician 68:1262.
Annual Meeting oftheIntermational Society ofVeterinaryDerma-
Risbon RE, de Lorimier LP, Skorupski K, Burgess KE, Bergman PJ,
tology ISVD, Lihue, Kauai.
Carreras J, Hahn K, LeBlanc A, Turek M, Impellizeri J, Fred R III,
Wendlberger U. 1999. Sebaceous adenitis in a cat. Kleimtierpraxis
Wojcieszyn IW, Drobatz K, Clifford CA. 2006. Response of canine
44:293-298.
cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma to lomustine (CCNU): a
White SD, Gross TL. 1995. Hereditary lupoid dermatosis of the
retrospective studyof46 cases(1999-2004).Jourmal of Veterinary
German shorthaired pointer. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds),
Intermal Medicine 20(6):1389-1397.
CurrentVeterinaryTherapySmalAnmalPractice,Pp.605606.
Rosenkrantz WS. 1993. Pemphigus foliaceus. In: Griffn CE,
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Kwochka KW, MacDonald JM (eds), Current Veterinary Derma-
White SD, Rosser E, Ihrke Pl. 1981. Bullous pemphigoid in a
tology, Pp. 154-164.St. Louis: Mosby Year Book.
dog: treatment with six-mercaptopurine. Jourmar of the American
Rottenberg S, von Tscharner C, Roosje PJ. 2004. Thymoma-
Veterinary Medical Association 185:683-685.
associated exfoliative dermatitis in cats. Veterinary Pathology
White SD, Rosychuk RAW, Reinke SI, Paradis M. 1992. Use of tetra-
41:429433.
cycline and niacinamide for treatment of autoimmune skin dis-
Rifenacht S, Ruess-Melzer K, Bley CR. 2007. Clinical and thera-
ease in 3l dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Asso-
 peutic aspects of skin tumors. ESVD Workshop om Skin Oncology,
ciation 200:1497-1500.
Bern, pp. 33-48.
Wiemelt SP, Goldschmidt MH, Greek JS, Jeffers JG, Wiemelt
Santoro D, Marsella R, Hernandez J. 2007. Investigation on the
AP, Mauldin EA. 2004. A retrospective study comparing the
association between atopic dermatitis and the development of
histopathological features and response to treatment in two ca-
mycosis fungoides in dogs: a retrospective case-control study.
nine nasal dermatoses, DLE and MCP. Veterinary Dermatology
Veterinary Dermatology 18:101-106.
15:341-348.
Schwartzman RM, Maguire HG. 1969. Staphylococcal apocrine
Wilhelm S, Grest P, Favrot C. 2005. Zwei Falle exfoliativer Dermati-
gland infections in the dog (canine hidradenitis suppurativa).
tis und Follikulitis bei Katzen mit histologischen Eigenschaften
British Veterimary Journal 125:121-127.
eines kutanen Lupus erythematodes. Tierdrztliche Praxis Kleir-
Scott DW. 1988. Large Anirmal Dermatofogy. Philadelphia: WB Saun-
tiere 33:364-369.
ders.
Winkelmann RK, Rajka G. 1983. Atopic dermatitis and Hodgkin's
 Scott DW, Manning TO, Lewis RM. 1982. Linear IgA dermatoses in
disease. Acta Dermato-Venereologica 63:176-177.
the dog: bullous pemphigoid, discoid lupus erythematosus and a
Withrow SJ. 2001. Thymoma. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds),
subcorneal pustular dermatitis. Cornefl Veterinarian 72:394 402.
 Small Amimal Clinical Oncology Pp. 646-651. Philadelphia: WB
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE. 1995a. Muller and Kirk's Small
Saunders.
Animal Dermatology, 5th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Withrow SJ, Vail DM. 2006. Withrow and MacEwen's Smafl Animal
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE. 2001. Muller and Kirk's Small
Clinical Oncology. Philadelphia: Elsevier Health Sciences Divi-
Anirmal Dermatology, 6th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
sion.
Scott DW, Miller WHJ, Goldschmidt MH. 1983. Erythema multi-
Yager JA, Wilcock BP. 1994. Color Atlas and Text of Surgical Pathofogy
forme in the dog. Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital Asso-
of the Dog and Cat: Dermatopathology and Skin Tumors, Vol. 1,
cation 19:453-459.
Ist edn. London: Mosby Year Book, Wolfe Publishing.
4.5
Histiocytic or granulomatous mural
folliculitis
Monika Welle and Lars Mecklenburg
Inflammation that focuses and invades hair follicle
 traz, cefadroxil, L-thyroxin, and various topical agents
walls at or below the isthmus is often dominated by
(Scott et al. 2001).
lymphocytes (see Chapter 4.4). Lymphocyte infltra-
The clinical picture of canine granulomatous fol-
tion into the follicular wall does not necessarily result
liculitis is very variable. The main clinical feature is
in destruction of the hair follicle, and it is most easily
well-circumscribed multifocal to coalescing alopecia
diagnosed in its early stage. There are some rare forms
on the face, the trunk, and the proximal extremities
of mural inflammation that are associated with a sig-
eventually spreading over the whole body (Fig. 4.5.1).
 nificant infltration of histiocytes, occasionall even
Some cases show surprisingly rapid progression of the
forming giant cels. Those forms of mural infltrative
disease with generalized alopecia developing within
folliculitis are mostly destructive and therefore can
less than 6 months. Besides pelage hair folicles, alope-
easily be confused with a furunculosis caused by a
cia may involve eyelashes as well. The alopecic skin
luminal folliculitis.
s o a s m sa a a s
Histiocytic mural folliculitis is a very rare finding in
 ing. Advanced cases will reveal a very shiny smooth
 domestic animals and is yet ill defined. It rather repre-
 alopecic skin with variable degrees of hypopigmenta-
sents a reaction pattern than one disease with a defined
tion (Fig. 4.5.2).
etiology. In the scientific literature, cases of destructive
Histopathology reveals a lymphohistiocytic infl-
lymphohistiocytic mural folliculitis are described in
trate that tightly surrounds hair follicles. It strikingly
cats, dogs, and deer only, but there are anecdotal (un-
centers around the follicular isthmus and the inferior
published) reports of further cases affecting horses,
segment, but may extend into the bulb and/or the in-
cattle, and goats.
fundibulum (Fig. 4.5.3). Histiocytes and lymphocytes
infiltrate into the follicular wall and accumulate be.
4.5.1 Canine granulomatous
tween the inner and the outer root sheath. In early
degenerative mural folliculitis
lesions, inflammatory cells are not located within the
hair canal, whereas later lesions may show disruption
Granulomatous mural folliculitis is very rarely re-
of the folicular wall and luminal folliculitis, merging
ported in dogs. There is only one case reported in the
into furunculosis. Intramural histiocytes are mainly
scientific literature (Scott 1999) and few additional
composed of large epithelioid cells, and occasionally
ones are mentioned in textbooks or abstracts (Gross 
multinucleated giant cells can be found within the fol-
and Schick 1993; Scott et al. 2001; Gross et al. 2005).
licular wall (Fig. 4.5.4). The inflammation extends into
The lack of sufficient data does not allow further sub-
the perifollicular mesenchyme and frequently obliter-
classification of this disease entity in the dog, but it is
 ates sebaceous glands. Additional changes that may
likely that etiology, pathogenesis, and prognosis vary
be found in cases of canine granulomatous mural fol-
between individual cases. Some published cases have
liculitis are perifolicular pyogranulomas, lupus-like
been associated with adverse drug reactions to ami-
interface dermatitis, erosions, and ulceration.
 244  Inflammatory alopecias
Fig. 4.5.1 Canine granulomatous folliculitis in a Collie. Rapidly
developing generalized alopecia. (Courtesy of P. White.)
Fig. 4.5.3 Skin histology of canine granulomatous folliculitis
Extensive inflammation targeting the hair follicles.
Canine granulomatous mural folliculitis is consid-
ered an immune-mediated disease and thus is best
treated with immunosuppressive or immunomodula-
tory drugs. Cyclophosphamide and prednisone have
been described to be effective. Many cases, however,
 will result in follicular atrophy and permanent loss of
adnexal structures.
4.5.2 Feline lymphohistiocytic
degenerative mural folliculitis with
intrafollicular mucinosis
A distinct alopecic disease in cats has been named fe-
line degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis (Gross 
Hg. 4.5.2 Canine granulomatous folliculitis in a Collie. Com-
Fig. 4.5.4 Skin histology of canine granulomatous folliculitis.
plete alopecia of the head, including eye lashes. (Courtesy of
Inflammation starts with histiocytes infiltrating into the follicular
P. White.)
wall.
Histiocytic or granulomatous mural folliculitis  245
et al. 2001). In contrast to follicular mucinosis (see
Section 4.4.2.4), no epitheliotropic lymphoma is as-
sociated with this entity. Etiology and pathogenesis of
feline degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis have
not been clarified yet. Some cats had antibodies to
feline immunodeficiency virus and none has shown
antibodies against feline leukemia virus.
The main clinical feature of this disease is alopecia.
Alopecia starts around the muzzle, is often symmet-
ric, and expands to involve the entire face. Progression
of alopecia can be very variable with rare cases pro-
gressing within a few months and others progressing
within 1-2 years. Alopecia can spread to neck, shoul-
Fig. 4.5.6 Skin histology of feline lymphohistiocytic degenera-
ders, trunk, and extremities. The alopecic skin is shiny
tive mural folliculitis with intrafollicular mucinosis. Lymphohis-
and feels rubbery. Occasional scaling may be seen. A
tiocytic inflammation effacing the isthmus of two hair follicles
 characteristic feature of most cases is a marked swelling
Note degeneration of follicle at right. (Reprinted with permis-
sion from Gross et al. (2001).)
of the facial skin including the eyelids, resulting in ble-
pharospasm (Fig. 4.5.5). Most cases show some degree
of lethargy, suggesting an underlying internal disease.
severely affected hair follicles have degenerated. In-
However, no consistent disease process could be iden-
flammation centers around the isthmus and upper in-
tified to be associated with degenerative mucinotic
ferior segment of hair follicles, but may also involve the
folliculitis so far.
 Histopathology reveals a perifolicular and intra-
infundibulum. A characteristic feature of the disease
 is intramural mucinosis that can occur in variable de-
mural infiltrate of histiocytes and lymphocytes. These
grees but is not pathognomonic (see Section 4.4.2.4).
   d    
Mixed inflammation may be observed in the superfi-
trophils (Fig. 4.5.6). Giant cells are usually not found
 cial dermis, and the epidermis may show acanthosis
in this disease, but may occur in granulomas once
and spongiosis. Chronic cases will show hair follicle
atrophy.
 Most cases that have been described in the literature
have not responded adequately to immunosuppressive
doses of corticosteroids, or other medications such as
antihistamines and medicated shampoos. Prognosis is
guarded, particularly iflethargy and weight loss occur
concurrently with alopecia. Many affected cats have
been euthanized for progressive hair loss and lethargy
within 2-8 weeks after diagnosis. However, since spo-
e snadeu e papuodsai aae suad aep
with aggressive immunomodulatory or immunosup
 pressive therapy is warranted in any case.
4.5.3 Granulomatous degenerative
 mural folliculitis in other species
Sporadic cases of granulomatous mural folliculitis in
Hg. 4.5.5 Feline lymphohistiocytic degenerative mural folliculi-
tis with intrafollicular mucinosis. Severe generalized alopecia
species other than cat and dog have been reported,
and swelling of the face. (Reprinted with permission from Gross
but none are published in the scientific literature. The
et al. (2001).)
authors have seen two cases of granulomatous mural
246  Inflammatory alopecias
folliculitis with degeneration of the hair follicle wal
 in goats. One case has been observed in a 3-year-old
female dwarf goat. Alopecia occurred very rapidly, af-
fecting more than 50% of the body surface within one
day. Within less than a week, alopecia was generalized.
The entire body surface was covered with thick dry ad-
herent scales, and the patient developed lethargy and
laminitis. No pathogen was found, and PCR (poly-
merase chain reaction) from skin biopsies for caprine
herpesvirus-2 (see below) was negative. Histopathol-
ogy revealed a mild mural infltrate in the follicular
infundibulum and a moderate infltration in the isth-
mus. The infiltrate was lymphohistiocytic with a mod-
erate amount of multinucleated giant cells. Intramu-
ral pustules were seen in the isthmus. Apoptotic ker-
atinocytes were present in the infundibular wall. The
moderate perifollicular infltrate was also lymphohis-
tiocytic. The other case occurred in a single 1.5-year-
old Spanish goat from a herd in Texas, United States,
that showed multifocal alopecia beginning on the
back. Alopecia progressed quickly and involved more
than 50% of the entire body surface within 6 weeks. It
finally involved the entire trunk, face, and extremities
(Fig. 4.5.7). In addition to alopecia, a severe dry hy-
perkeratosis with multifocal secondary pyoderma was
present. Histopathology revealed a severe perifollicu-
lar lymphohistiocytic infiltrate that centered around
the isthmus and the inferior segment of all hair fol-
licles. Lymphocytes and macrophages infiltrated the
follicular wall with occasional multinucleated giant
cells and epithelioid macrophages accumulating be-
tween the outer and inner root sheath (Fig. 4.5.8). The
 goat was euthanized at the owner's request without
further postmortem analysis.
 A histopathologically similar disease was described
in two sika deer from a zoo in Florida that were in-
fected with caprine herpesvirus-2 (caprine malignant
catarrhal fever virus, distinct from ovine herpesvirus-
Fig. 4.5.7 Granulomatous folliculitis in a goat. Extensive alope-
2). The animals presented with slowly progressive gen-
cia affecting head, trunk, and extremities.(Courtesy of R. Judd.)
eralized alopecia and a granulomatous mural folliculi-
tis comprising epithelioid macrophages and giant cells.
In addition to skin lesions, both deer showed perivas-
folliculitis in these two animals was indeed caused by
cular lymphohistiocytic inflammation consistent with
caprine herpesvirus-2.
malignant catarrhal fever in internal organs such as
 Chronic lesions of linear alopecia in the horse (see
kidney or reticulum (Crawford et al. 2002). Despite
 Section 4.4.2.3) may present with epithelioid cells and
the demonstration of viral DNA and histopathologi-
 giant cells infltrating the follicular wall and need to
cal findings consistent with malignant catarrhal fever,
be differentiated from primary histiocytic or granulo-
it is yet unknown whether the granulomatous mural
matous folliculitis.
Histiocytic or granulomatous mural folliculitis  247
References
cinotic mural folliculitis in cats. Veterinary Dermatofogy 12:279-
283.
Crawford TB, Li H, Rosenburg SR, Norhausen RW, Garner MM.
Gross TL, Schick RO. 1993. Dermatopathology of newly described
 2002. Mural folliculitis and alopecia caused by infection with
diseases. In: Ihrke PJ, Mason IS, White SD (eds), Advances in
goat-associated malignant catarrhal fever virus in two sika deer.
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 2, Pp. 417-420. Oxford: Pergamon
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 221:843-
Press.
847.
Scott DW. 1999. Folliculite murale granulomateuse chez le chien:
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, Affolter VK. 2005. Skin diseases of the
manifestation d'un accident medicamenteux cutene? Medecin
dog and cat. In:Gross TL, Ihrke PI (eds.), Clinical and Histopatho-
Veterinaire du Quebec29:154-156.
logic Diugnosis, pp. 474-477. Oxford: Blackwell Science.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffn CE. 2001. Muller and Kirk's Smalfl
Gross TL, Olivry T, Vitale CB, Power HT. 2001. Degenerative mu-
 Anial Dermatology, 6th edn, Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
856
1288
JQL
Necrotizing mural folliculitis
 Monika Linek and Lars Mecklenburg
Both feline herpesvirus and poxvirus infections in the
omega therapy in three cats (Gutzwiller et al. 2007). So
cat can be associated with massive necrosis ofepithelial
far antiviral therapy like acyclovir was not very effec-
cells, including the epidermis and the upper follicular
tive in cats and caused severe side effects (Caney 2005).
epithelium. Both diseases are, however, not primar-
Most recently famciclovir (20 mg/kg every other day),
ily alopecic but rather ulcerative and nodular, respec-
the oral form of penciclovir, has shown efficacy in
tively.
nine cats with feline herpesvirus- 1 infection and no
adverse effects have been reported (Beccati and Peano
2007). The authors of this chapter have successfully
4.6.1 Feline herpesvirus infection
used famciclovir in three cases of herpesvirus-induced
Feline herpesvirus- 1 usually targets the upper respi-
dermatitis.
ratory tract and causes rhinotracheitis and conjunc-
tivitis. It most likely persists in the trigeminal ganglia
4.6.2 Feline cowpox virus infection
where it can be reactivated by immunosuppression.
Skin lesions associated with feline herpesvirus are un-
Outdoor cats that have contact with rodents may rarely
common. Cats will present with alopecia, ulceration,
become infected with the cowpox virus that is mainly
and crusts at the muzzle, often in conjunction with
found in Europe, particularly in the United Kingdom
similar lesions at the periorbital skin and at the nasal
(Finn 1989). Outdoor cats may contract the virus from
planum (Fig. 4.6.1). In rare cases, other body regions
bites of woodland rodents, particularly voles.
can be affected as well. A coexisting stomatitis has been
The infected sites present with plaques or nod-
 described infrequently (Hargis et al. 1999; Hargis and
ules, eventually showing ulceration and crusts. The
Ginn 1999).
 forelegs, head, and neck are most commonly affected
 Histologically, feline herpesvirus-induced skin le-
(Fig. 4.6.3). Ulcerative stomatitis has been described,
sions are characterized by ulceration with marked
 and in rare cases does the virus spread to the upper
eosinophilic and neutrophilic inflammation and crust
respiratory tract (Godfrey et al. 2004; Schoniger et al.
formation. The epidermis adjacent to ulcers is mostly
2007).
hyperplastic and spongiotic. Necrotic keratinocytes
Histopathology shows massive necrosis of epi-
may be found in these areas as well as in the infundibu-
dermal and outer root sheath keratinocytes. Many
lar epithelium of hair follicles. In proximity to necrotic
cells demonstrate large eosinophilic intracytoplasmic
keratinocytes of the epidermis, hair follicle, or seba-
 viral inclusion bodies of variable size and shape (Fig.
ceous gland, viable cells with intranuclear inclusion
4.6.4). The dermal inflammation is dominated by
bodies may be found and will confirm the diagnosis
neutrophils.
(Fig. 4.6.2). In cases where inclusion bodies cannot be
 Feline cowpox virus-infected lesions can heal with-
demonstrated, immunohistochemistry or PCR (poly-
out therapeutic intervention within weeks of initial
merase chain reaction) allow further confirmation.
infection. Response rates to specific antiviral thera-
Spontaneous regression of mild lesions may oc-
pies such as interferons are not reported. Secondary
cur. Good success has been achieved with interferon-
bacterial infections should be treated appropriately. In
250  Inflammatory alopecias
Fig. 4.6.1 Feline herpesvirus-1-induced dermatitis. Alopecia
Fig. 4.6.3 Feline cowpox virus-induced dermatitis. Alopecia,
and crusts on the nose.
 ulceration, and crusts on the face.
[b]
Fig. 4.6.2 Skin histology of feline ulcerative dermatitis caused
Fig. 4.6.4 Skin histology of feline cowpox virus-induced der-
by feline herpesvirus-1. (a) Ulceration with diffuse eosinophilic
 matitis. Necrotizing folliculitis with eosinophilicintracytoplasmic 
and neutrophilic dermatitis; (b) extensive epithelial necrosis.
 inclusion bodies in follicular keratinocytes
Necrotizing mural folliculitis  251
cases where skin lesions are associated with respiratory
Caney S. 2005. Antiviral therapy in cats: current rationale and rec-
disease, the prognosis is guarded. Any stress and im-
omimendations. In Practice 27:454-457.
Finn JP. 1989. Cowpox in cats. Veterinary Record 125(16):426.
 munosuppression are to be avoided.
Godfrey DR, Blundell CJ, Essbauer S, Pfeffer M, Shearer DH, Rest
 It is very important to inform the owners about
 JR, Baker JF. 2004. Unusual presentations of cowpox infection in
the zoonotic potential of cowpox virus (Schulze et al.
cats. Journal of Small Animal Practice 45(4):202-205.
Gutzwiller ML, Brachelente C, Taglinger K, Suter MM,
2007). Nowadays, most humans become infected from
Wiessenbock H, Roosje P. 2007. Feline herpes dermatitis treated
cats, not cows ( what originally gave the virus its name).
with interferon omega. Veterinary Dermatology 18:50-54.
 Symptoms of cowpox virus infection in humans are
Hargis AM, Ginn PE. i999. Feline herpesvirus 1-associated facial
and nasal dermatitis and stomatitis in domestic cats. Veterinary
pustules on the hands. In very rare cases, however, the
Chinics of North America 29:1281-1289.
Hargis AM, Ginn PE, Mansell JEKL, Garber RL. 1999. Ulcerative
a serious threat to immunocompromised people.
facial and nasal dermatitis and stomatitis in cats associated with
feline herpesvirus 1. Veterinary Dermatology 10:267-274.
Schoniger S, Chan DL, Hollinshead M, Humm K, Smith GL, Beard 
References
 PM. 2007. Cowpox virus pneumonia in a domestic cat in Great
Britain. Veterinary Record 160(15):522-523.
Schulze C, Alex M, Schirrmeier H, Hlinak A, EngelhardtA, Koschin-
Beccati M, Peano A. 2007. Investigation of the effcacy of famciclovir
ski B, Beyreiss B, Hoffmann M, Czerny CP. 2007. Generalized fa-
 in the treatment of feline herpesvirus-1 infection. Veterinary Der-
tal cowpox virus infection in a cat with transmission to a human
matotogy 18:381.
contact case. Zoonoses Public Heaith 54( 1):31-37.
Alopecia areata
Desmond J. Tobin
Alopecia areata (AA) represents one of the most enig-
of AA-like hair loss but also on its associated immune
 matic of the common dermatoses, affecting approxi-
perturbations (Michie et al. 1990; Tobin et al. 1997b;
mately 2% of the general human population (Safavi et 
McElwee et al. 1998a, 2002, 2003, 2005b; Sundberg
al. 1995), and is also not uncommon in several non-
-s 1 ( e ia -g  e ia
human mammalian species (McElwee et al. 1998b;
ment of various treatment modalities (Shapiro et al.
Tobin and Olivry 2004). However, it is likely that inci-
1999; Freyschmidt-Paul et al. 2000, 2001, 2004; Tang
dence in both humans, and possibly also nonhuman
et al. 2003a,b, 2004; Verma et al. 2004). There has also
mammals, is much greater as minor forms will often
been some progress on the assessment of the immune
 go unnoticed (e.g-, especially in humans and animals 
status of other nonhuman mammals with AA-like dis-
with overlapping layers of long hair). Common to all
ease, particularly in dogs (Olivry et al. 1996; Tobin
subtypes of AA in allspecies is the selective, largely re-
1996, 2003; Tobin and Olivry 2004) and horses (Tobin
versible damage to the anagen hair follicle (Van Scott 
et al. 1998; Colombo et al. 2004).
1958; Messenger and Bleehen 1984; Messenger et al.
The striking clinical, immunohistopathologic, anti-
1986; Tobin et al. 1990, 1997a).
 genic, and treatment response similarities associated
AA-like disease has been reported in nonhuman
with AA-like hair loss in humans, nonhuman pri-
mammals including cats (Conroy 1979), horses (Con-
mates, rodents, dogs, and horses support the view that 
roy 1979; Scott 1988; Middlton and Church 1994;
this form of hair loss may have a common etiology in
Affolter and Cannon 1998; Tobin et al. 1998; Colombo
 these mammalian species. Indeed, antibodies to ana-
et al. 2004), cows (Paradis et al. 1988; Scott 1988; Scott
gen hair follicles in rats, mice, dogs, and horses appear
and Guard 1988), dogs (Olivry et al. 1996; Tobin et al.
to be not only similar but also cross-reactive with tis-
1996, 2003; Tobin and Olivry 2004), and in nonhu-
sues from different species (McElwee et al. 1998b).
man primates (Conroy 1979; Eichberg and De Villez
This observation is likely to reflect a high level of anti-
1984; Beardi et al. 2007). However, the poor charac-
 gen conservation in the hair follicles of many mam-
terization of many of these cases prevents assessment
malian species.
of their scientific or clinical value. Still, animal mod-
els, including outbred animals, are likely to be valuable
4.7.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
for the dissection ofthe common pathways underlying
the pathogenesis of AA and for the development and
In humans, AA can present with a broad phenotypic
 evaluation of therapies for AA. Indeed, much of the
spectrum affecting predominantly the anagen-rich ar-
recent progress in AA research has emerged not from
eas of skin, for example, the scalp (Fig. 4.7.1a and b).
studies on human cases, but is instead due to the de-
However, any hair-bearing region of the body can be
velopment of animal models for human AA. The best
affected. Mild forms manifest as patchy hair loss (so-
characterized of these include the inbred rodent mod-
called patchy AA) that may resolve spontaneously, re-
els of the C3H/HeJ mouse (Sundberg et al. 1994) and
main as patchy disease, or progress to complete loss
the DEBR rat (Michie et al. 1991). Both models have
of all scalp hair (alopecia totalis) or all head and body
 provided useful data not only on the complex genetics
hair (alopecia universalis) (Fig. 4.7.1).
254  Inflammatory alopecias
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.7.1 Phenotypic variation in human alopecia areata. (a) Common patchy alopecia areata variant affecting scalp of an adult
male (Courtesy of Dr. D.A. Fenton); (b) less common alopecia areata totalis variant affecting scalp of a young child (Courtesy of
Upjohn Company.)
It is the view of this author that newcomers to AA
Despite the sometimes strident claims to the con-
research should be issued with a disclaimer to inter-
 trary in both the clinical and scientific literature, the
pret the pre-1990s AA literature with considerable
 etiology and indeed precise pathogenesis of AA re-
caution because of its highly confusing and contra-
mains unresolved. An immune-mediated pathogene-
dictory nature. This situation emerged in large part
sis is clear and AA is associated with a number of im-
due to inconsistency in study design and execution.
mune abnormalities (Tobin and Bystryn 1995, 2000).
Specifically, much of the earlier data was based on
 Some of these are nonselective, while others are more
small numbers of patients, poorly or uncontrolled
 specific and point to an immune abnormality selec-
studies, on differences whose significance were not
tively targeting a component of the hair follicle when
analyzed statistically, and on results that are often
in the anagen phase of the hair growth cycle. There
contradictory. However, part of this apparent confu-
are indications of possible organ-specific autoimmu-
sion may be due to the possibility that not all cases
nity in some individuals (Tobin et al. 1994; McEl-
of AA represent manifestations of the same disease
wee et al. 1999b; Kalish and Gilhar 2003; Gilhar and
entity.
Kalish 2006), though nails and eyes are also com-
 Increasing evidence, especiall from powerful ge-
monly targeted. Despite this, most recent research
netics data, suggests that AA may represent several eti-
supports the view that the disease process is exe-
ologic entities with multiple confounding epigenetic
d se so a q aund p
factors. For example, higher occurrence in identical
 of a pathomechanism driven by CD4+ lymphocytes.
twins, siblings, as well as high kindred expression over 
 This folliculotrophic lymphocytic infiltration appears
several generations all point to some contribution of
to respond to an interferon-y-induced upregulation
inherited factors. Still, with a positive family history
 of MHC class I and I in the lower hair follicle during
of AA of less than 50%, other factors are clearly also
 stages of early hair growth that are coincident with
involved.
the reconstruction of its pigmentary unit. It has been
Alopecia areataZ
255
205
86
67
45
Hg. 4.7.2 Antibodies to hair follicles in
human alopecia areata. (a) Indirect im-
munofluorescence analysis of circulat-
ing serum lgG antibodies to outer root
sheath keratinocytes of an anagen scalp
hair follicle; (b) immunoblotting analysis 
of circulating serum lgG antibodies to 6
M urea-extracted proteins from scalp hair
follicles; (c) target antigen identification
in human alopecia areata; hair follicle-
44
 specific keratin (44/46 kDa) wasimmuno-
precipitated with five AA sera, separated
by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with
a monoclonal antibody (AE13) raised to
(c)
123
3
hair follicle-specific keratin; five control
sera from normal healthy subjects.
AA
Control
 proposed that this reflects a disease-associated collapse
1994; Tobin 1997, 2003), where they can be found at
 nu une amot a u lnad au, jo
titers far higher than in patients with other disorders of
licle (Gilhar et al. 2007) (see Section 1.2.4). Thus, in
the hair folicle, including scarring alopecia (Fig. 4.7.2a
immunogeneticall predisposed individuals the hair
 and b). Several hair follicle-associated antigens have
follicle may be attacked by an immune system (stim-
been identifed in the serum from patients including
ulated by an unknown trigger/response to autoanti-
hair follicle-specific keratins (44/46 kDa) (Fig. 4.7.2)
gen) where hair follicle anagen-associated antigens
and trichohyalin, and these have been localized to the
having lost the cover of their former immunoprivi-
keratogenous zone of the growing hair folicle. How-
lege are now targeted by a full-blown anti-hair follicle
ever, it is not clear which, if any, of these targeted hair
immune response. This vulnerability to immune at-
follicle antigens are immunodominant in the precipi-
tack may be further heightened if the production or
tating stage of the disease. It is not yet known whether
 function of local immunosuppressive cytokines and
 Or not these have any pathogenic potential, as has been 
neurohormones (e.g-, α-MSH) is deficient. A further
demonstrated for bullous pemphigoid. Thus, the role
neuroimmunological link in the pathogenesis of this
played by circulating antibodies to hair follicle-specific
common hair loss disorder was suggested by increased
 antigens remains to be resolved.
substance P-positive fibers in early AA lesions. More-
The treatment of AA remains very diffcult (Ross
 Over, substance P itself triggered a transit of hair folli-
 and Shapiro 2005). There is no cure, and still no ap-
cles from anagen to catagen with associated activated
 proved medication. Despite this, a broad range of
CD8+ T-cells (Siebenhaar et al. 2007).
treatment modalities can be used, including topi-
Circulating antibodies (IgG) to hair follicles are also
 cal, systemic, and intralesional corticosteroids; topi-
 a prominent feature of AA in humans (Tobin et al.
cal immunotherapy; topical minoxidil; anthralin; and
256  Inflammatory alopecias
C3H/HeJ "alopecia areata" mice
(a)
{b
Focal
Scalp
Universal
Focal
Scalp
Universal
DEBR rats. (Courtesy of Dr K. McElwee.)
 psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA). Despite several
The main immune-associated findings in the
a pii aieds on i su ii ss
C3H/HeJ AA mouse model include the observations
fects from spontaneous recovery, which usually occurs
that depletion of CD4+ or CD8+ T-cells using mon-
within 1 year of an AA episode.
oclonal antibodies permit hair regrowth, demonstrat-
Much of AA research today is conducted on in-
ing that these T-cell subsets are required to maintain
bred rodent models, in particular the C3H/HeJ mouse
the AA (McElwee et al. 2005a), and that removal of
and to a lesser extent the Dundee experimental bald
either CD4+ or CD8+ T-cells enables hair regrowth
rat (DEBR) (Fig. 4.7.3). Both models exhibit striking
(McElwee et al. 1996b, 1999a; Carroll et al. 2002). The
phenotypic similarity with AA in humans and other
rodent models of AA also exhibit an abnormal autoan-
mammals. As with most other species examined to
tibody response to the hair follicle (Fig. 4.7.5) (McEl-
date, AA first appears usually on the head and face,
wee et al. 1996a). Importantly, in many cases the pres-
and progresses to the flanks and back. Spontaneous
ence of antibodies to hair follicles appears before the
ao  pe rea  se s inn
onset of clinically apparent hair loss. Thus, these may
in female mice than in males. Two substrains of the
not be produced as a secondaryresponse to hair follicle
DEBR rat exist (black and brown hooded) and both
damage in AA, as is generally considered most likely.
show similar AA phenotype in about 40% of animals.
Some of the antibodies in both C3H/HeJ mice and
Like in affected humans, nail abnormalities can be de-
humans with alopecia areat react to antigens of 44/46
tected in about 15% of affected females and about 5%
kDa, which were identified as hair follicle-specific ker-
in affected males (McElwee 2004). A hair-pull test will
atins (Tobin and Bystryn 1996) (Fig. 4.7.5d).
reveal the presence of pathognomonic “exclamation
mark" hairs in both models. Importantly for a human
4.7.2 Canine alopecia areata
AA model, both rodent models exhibit similar and
characteristic AA histopathology, that is, peri- and in-
It is difficult to accurately estimate the frequency of
trabulbar lymphocytic infltration of anagen hair fol-
AA in dogs due to the very limited number of case
licles (Fig. 4.7.4). Indeed, the immunophenotype of
reports (most reporting just single cases) on spon-
 AA-like hair loss reported in these models, including
taneous AA-like hair loss in dogs in the literature.
for both cell-mediated and humoral factors, is very
Moreover, as many conditions can lead to loss of
similar to that in human AA (McElwee et al. 1998b,
hair, it is not always clear if the diagnosis was un-
2005b). A particularly interesting finding is that AA
equivocally that of AA. Differential diagnosis for ca-
can be experimentally induced in C3H/HeJ mice by
nine AA includes mural lymphocytic folliculitis of
grafting lesional skin from an affected mouse to a his-
the isthmus (see Section 4.4.2.2), demodicosis (see
tocompatible recipient (McElwee et al. 1998a).
Section 4.1.3), dermatophytosis (see Section 4.1.2),
Alopecia areata 257
(a)
Hg. 4.7.4 Histology of alopecia areata. (a) Peri- and intrafollicular mononuclear celinfiltrates in C3H/HeJ mice (Courtesy of Dr J
(Aueduoy uyoldn jo Asauno) eieae epadoje uewny ui sae lu! lian (a) (bagpuns
staphylococcal folliculitis (see Section 4.1.1), and is
loss onset was highly variable ranging from 1 to 11
chemic alopecias such as dermatomyositis (see Sec-
years (median: 5 years), with a minority of dogs
tion 3.4.2) and rabies vaccine-associated alopecia (see
(the Dachshunds) developing AA in young adulthood
Section 3.4.3). AA-like hair loss has been reported
(i.e., by 2 years of age). The male-to-female ratio was
 in several breeds including Bernese mountain dog
0.79, mimicking the female bias in other AA-affected
(Scarff 1993), Dachshund (Conroy 1968, 1979; Muller
species, and most subjects had been either castrated or
et al. 1983; Gross et al. 1992), Doberman Pinscher
 spayed. Spontaneous and complete hair regrowth oc-
(Scarff 1993; Noli and Toma 2006), German Shep-
curred, however, only in the majority of subjects. Inter
herd dog (Olivry et al. 1996), Magyar Vizsla (Conroy
estingly, such regrowth was commonly of white hair, a
1979), Miniature Poodle (Conroy 1979), English Set-
feature also seen in humans and rodents with AA ( Mes-
 ter (Alhaidari 2003), and in several mixed-breed dogs
senger and Bleehen 1984). Nineteen of the 25 dogs
(Guernsey 1985; Yager and Wilcock 1994; Scott et al.
with AA were reported as purebred and included four
1995; Olivry et al. 1996; Tobin et al. 1996).
German Shepherd and crosses, three Dachshunds
There is only a single large-scale study in the lit-
two Beagles, two Setters, and two Labrador Retriever
erature (Tobin et al. 2003) where AA-like hair loss
crosses. The remaining subjects represented cross-
in 25 client-owned dogs was systematically assessed
breeds. Although reference populations were not avail-
using agreed AA-associated clinical, histological, and
 able for comparison, the Dachshund breed may ap-
immunological criteria (Olsen et al. 1999, 2004). Hair
 pear predisposed to develop AA, as this breed seems
258  Inflammatory alopecias
205
98
60
Fig. 4.7.5 Antibodies to hair follicles in
rodent alopecia areata. (a) Indirect im-
46
 munofluorescence analysis of circulating
AA
Control
 C3H/HeJ AA serum IgG antibodies to in-
(c)
 ner root sheath keratinocytes of an an-
agen mouse hair follide; (b) indirect im-
munofluorescence analysis of circulating
 DEBR rat serum IgG antibodies to outer
root sheath keratinocytes of an anagen
rat hair follicle (courtesy of Dr K. McEl-
wee);: (c) immunoblotting analysis of cir-
culating C3H/HeJ serum IgG antibod-
ies to 6 M urea-extracted proteins from 
mouse hair follicles; (d) target antigen
identification in rodent alopecia areata;
hair follicle-specific keratin (44/46 kDa)
was immunoprecipitated with C3H/Hel
AA sera, separated by SDS-PAGE and
44/46
immunoblotted with a monoclonal anti-
body (AE13) raised to hair follicle-specific
keratin; (1) AA serum immunoprecipi-
1
2
tate, upper band represents mouse IgG;
(2) fetal bovine serum immunoprecipitate
(b)
(d)
(control).
 overrepresented when all cases reported previously are
Tobin et al. 1990; Gilhar et al. 2001). Similarly, in sub-
examined altogether.
jects with variable coat color, hair loss usually occurs
first in dark brown or black areas, again presumed to
correlate with the preferential targeting of pigmented
4.7.2.1 Diagnosis
hair and the relative sparing of nonpigmented hair in
Canine AA lesions usually consist of spontaneously
humans with AA (Messenger and Bleehen 1984; Tobin
et al. 1990).
time of diagnosis (Fig. 4.7.6). Lesions usually develop
 Laboratory assessment of the immune status of
first on the face and head (muzzle, chin, forehead, pe-
some of these dogs has been carried out using as-
riocular, ears), in common with the bias toward scalp
juapou pue ueuq on pandde ssoul on reius sies
and beard in human AA. Facial lesions usually exhibit
AA research, and include histopathologic and im-
a bilateral symmetry. Hair loss may also be seen on
munopathologic examinations. The histologic hall-
the legs and in some cases hair loss can progress to a
mark of AA is the so-called “swarm of bees" mononu-
more generalized distribution In a minority of cases
clear cell infiltrate focused more or less in and around
the growth of white hair (i.e., leukotrichia) may pre-
the anagen hair bulb (Van Scott 1958) (Fig. 4.7.7a). Ca-
 cede the first alopecic lesion and supports the grow-
ing belief that the hair bulb melanocyte is a target
count, mimicking the high telogen counts in human
cell population in AA (Messenger and Bleehen 1984;
AA. Marked inflammation of the hair bulb is observed
Alopecia areata 259
(a)
(b)
 oa (e) bop pagsson lopegen ui ssol liey aey pue dliens leo eeae eadoe auen ui uoeea jidouaud g't't b
pigmented skin; (b) dog with non-pigmented skin. (Courtesy of Dr T. Olivry.)
 in a majority (though not in all) of lesional anagen
and the presence of circulating antibodies (IgM and
hair follicles. In our recent large-scale study (Tobin
 IgG) to hair follicle-specific antigens. IgG deposits are
et al. 2003) the extent of the mononuclear cell infil-
especially found atthe edge of active lesions (Fig. 4.7.8)
trate was graded as mild in about 50% of hair follicles,
(Tobin and Bystryn 1995; Tobin et al. 2003), where they
moderate in 10%, and severe in 3% of hair follicles.
usually bind to the lower hair follicle glassy membrane
Similarly, peribulbitis was seen in around 44% of hair
and connective tissue sheath, but also within the fol-
follicles, and was graded as mild in 33%, moderate
licular papilla, medulla, outer root sheath or hair ma-
in 10%, and severe in 1% of hair follicles. Distorted
trix, as well as dermal plasma cells. In a study of dogs
 dystrophic hair shafts were a feature in about a quarter
with progressive, nonscarring, AA-like hair loss, we
of the affected dogs examined. In lymphocytic mural
 reported that sera of four affected dogs contained IgG
folliculitis of the isthmus (see Section 4.4.2.2) by con-
antibodies (some with titers of up to 2,560) that re-
trast, lymphocyte epidermotropism targets the mid
 acted with components of the lower anagen hair folli-
hair follicle sections, with involution of lower hair fol-
cle, especially the inner root sheath, outer root sheath,
licle segments. The skin of AA affected dogs reveals a
and medula (Fig. 4.7.9a and b) (Tobin et al. 1996).
 predominantly T-lymphocyte infltration, with T-cell
Anti-hair follicle antibody reactivity was not detected
numbers increasing proximally from the isthmus (in
in normal healthy dogs, nor in the sera taken from
about 50% of dogs) to the inferior hair follicle segment 
dogs with inflammatory skin disease due to demodico-
(in most dogs) to the hair bulb (in aldogs). The sever-
sis. Interestingly, anti-hair follicle antibody reactivity
ity of infiltration can be mild to severe in hair bulbs
in canine AA sera was similar when incubated against
and around the lower hair follicle. To date, only lim-
either normal human or murine skin, indicating the
ited lymphocyte immunophenotyping has been per-
conservation of AA target antigens across different
formed on lesional canine AA skin (Olivry et al. 1996),
mammalian species. Furthermore, in a larger study
and the CD4+ to CD8+ T-cell ratio appears to be 1:3
of 14 dogs with AA-like hair loss (Tobin et al. 2003),
to 1:4, respectively (McElwee et al., 1998b) (Fig. 4.7.7c
AA sera contained high titer antibodies (>l:500) to
and d). As with AA in humans, T-cells that infiltrate
multiple hair follicle structures including inner root
the hair bulb epithelium itself are more commonly
sheath, outer root sheath, matrix, and precortex.
 CD8+, while CD4+ cells predominate in the peribul-
While immunofluorescence provides detailed in-
bar T-cell infltrates. These lymphocytes expressed the
formation of the histologic localization of target anti-
α/ β T-cell receptor.
gens, greater characterization (e.g., molecular weight)
Like in the human and rodent disease, canine AA is
  e   s n go
associated with the deposition of both immunoglobu-
ting analysis (Tobin et al. 1994). Using sera from
lin (antibodies) and complement around hair follicles,
four AA-affected dogs, we found IgG antibodies that
260Inflammatory alopecias
CF
b
Fig. 4.7.7 Histopathology and immunohistopathology of canine alopecia areata. (a) Peri- and intrafollicular mononuclear cell
infiltrates with associated disrupted follicular angle; (b) peri- and intrafollicular CD3-positive lymphocytes (pan-T cell); (c) peri-
and intrafollicular CD4-positive lymphocytes; (d) peri- and intrafollicular CD8-positive lymphocytes. (Modified from Tobin D], et al.
(2003).)
Alopecia areata  261
that canine AA serum IgG antibodies can selectively
 immunoprecipitate the trichohyalin protein (200-220
kDa) from crude extracts of total hair follicle protein
(Fig. 4.7.9d). The involvement of trichohyalin as a tar-
get autoantigen in many species with AA-like hair loss
is a particular note. Trichohyalin is an intermediate
filament-associated protein family and in the hair fol-
licle is believed to be necessary for correct alignment of
keratin filaments of the inner root sheath and medulla
(O'Guin et al. 1992). It is likely that defects of inner
root sheath differentiation (an anagen-specific event)
may result in defective hair shaft formation.
 Unlike autoantibodies in pemphigus vulgaris and
 myasthenia gravis, the pathogenic potential of anti-
 hair follicle autoantibodies in canine AA remains un-
clear. However, as they may occur prior to the onset
 of clinical hair loss, it is possible that they are not the
 result of a secondary event in response to a preexist-
ing immune insult that was itself cell mediated. We
have attempted to assess the pathogenic potential of
 anti-hair follicle antibodies in canine sera via their pas-
sive transfer into anagen skin of naive mice (Tobin et
al. 2003). High titer anti-hair follicle IgG was purified
Fg. 4.7.8 Direct immunofluorescence analysis of IgG antibody
from the sera ofAA-affected dogs and twice weekly ad-
deposition in anagen hair bulb, decorating the basal lamina sep-
arating the follicular dermal papilla from the hair bulb matrix.
Note the perifollicular distribution of IgG-positive plasma cells.
four C57BL/10scsn mice. While both IgG from AA and
Inset: higher magnification of basal lamina. (Modified from
normal dogs delayed regrowth of hair in and around
Tobin DJ, et al. (2003).)
the site of IgG administration, administration of "AA"
IgG appeared to result in an up to 2 week increased de-
lay of anagen reentry compared to mice administered
reacted intensely with hair follicle proteins of 200-220
with control normal IgG (Tobin, unpublished data).
kDa and also with multiple antigens in the 50-60 kDa
 However, passive transfer of human AA serum failed
range (Fig. 4.7.9c and d). Comigration immunoblot-
to inhibit hair growth when administered to human
ting studies suggested that the reactivity to a 200-220
scalp transplants to nude mice (Gilhar et al. 1992).
kDa doublet represented binding to the inner root
sheath and medulla-rich protein trichohyalin (Tobin
4.7.2.2Therapy
et al. 1996), while some of the other targeted proteins
in the 50-60 kDa range were likely to represent ker-
As in humans and rodents with AA, hair regrowth is
atins. We expanded this studyto assess anti-hair follicle
most commonly spontaneous in canine AA. In resis-
antibody reactivity in a large number of dogs affected
tant cases, however, treatment with oral glucocorti-
with AA-like hair loss (Tobin et al. 2003), where the
coids or cyclosporine can be aftempted. Like in their
sousoiaiau pue buons e pareaai ule sisieue
human correlates, immunosuppressive therapy is suc-
pattern of anti-hair follicle reactivity in canine AA
cessful in stimulating hair regrowth in dogs, including
serum IgG to multiple antigens between 40 and 60 kDa
in those not showing spontaneous regrowth. In a large
and to a 200-220 kDa doublet. Some of these targeted
case series (Tobin et al. 2003) treatment with immuno.
hair folicle antigens were identified by selective im-
suppressive doses of prednisone ( 1-2 mg/kg/day) or
munoprecipitation assay, in which canine circulating
pe ot palodai sem (aep/ay/a 0i-s) auodsooa
antibodies immunoprecipitate specific target antigens
to remission of clinical signs. Specifically, the utility
(Tobin et al. 1996, 2003). To date, we have determined
of cyclosporine in Pincher dogs with AA has been
262   Inflammatory alopecias
(a)
220 -
220 kD :
112-
86 -
57 -
A
B
C
(d)
Canine AA
Canine
PBS
(c)
sera
control sera
Fig. 4.7.9 Antibodies to hair follicles in canine alopecia areata. Indirect immunofluorescence analysis of circulating canine serum IgG
:alog lieu diens uewnu e jo yieaus poo laino (a) alog yieu asnou uabeue ue jo saouieay yieaus poon auui (e) oi sapoiue
(c) immunoblotting analysis of circulating canine serum IgG antibodies to 6 M urea-extracted proteins from human hair follicles;
with AE15 antitrichohyalin antibody. separated by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted. Lane A shows the positive control, lane B the 
canine AA serum immunoprecipitate, and lane C fetal bovine serum as negative control.
confirmed recently (Noli and Toma 2006). For some
target cell(s) and the antigens therein are likely to be
dogs, in the latter study, treatment could be discon-
conserved in nature. However, the melanocyte defect
tinued after a few months without relapse, though
 may be more severe/long lasting in canine AA (Tobin
 permanent hair loss in untreated cases is also rare.
et al. 2003) compared to other species, as hair may fail
 Interestingly, regrowing white hair occurs in the ma-
 to repigment even after several molts. This observa-
jority of canine AA cases examined to date, resem-
tion is particularly interesting as melanocyte stem cells
bling human AA, and confirming the involvement of
 are thought to reside in the hair bulge (Nishimura et
melanogenic melanocytes located in the anagen hair
al. 2002), a site not thought to be targeted in AA as
bulb in this disorder (Messenger and Bleehen 1984;
 evidenced by the ability of the hair follicle to reenter
Tobin et al. 1990; Gilhar et al. 2001). Thus, the AA
successive cycles (Tobin et al. 1999).
Alopecia areata 263
(a)
Hg. 4.7.10 Phenotypic variation in equine alopecia areata. (a) Body: (b) facial; (c) focal hair loss in horses with alopecia areata.
(Courtesy of Dr Z. Alhaidari.)
4.7.3 Equine alopecia areata
A recent case describes an AA-like disorder in a 13-
year-old chestnut thoroughbred with an 8-year history
The literature contains just a handful of reports of
of alopecia that was described as multifocal, nonin-
AA in horses (Middleton and Church 1994; Affolter
flammatory, and nonpruritic (Colombo etal. 2004). In
and Cannon 1998; Tobin et al. 1998; Black et al. 2001;
this case the mane and tail were also severely affected,
Colombo et al. 2004). Still, there are striking similari-
and it was the view of the authors that the clinical
8
 ties between equine AA and AA-like disease in humans,
entity termed “mane and tail dystrophy” may indeed
 rodents, and dogs. It is generally reported that AA be-
be a variant of AA. Importantly, hair follicles in the
gins on the head and face (Fig. 4.7.10), though it may
gluteal region of this animal exhibited classical peri-
also be restricted in horses, affecting just the mane
and intrabulbar lymphocyte infltration (Fig. 4.7.11b).
and tail. As in other species, the clinical course of AA
Another case of equine AA-like hair loss has been de-
in horses is extremely variable (Stannard 2000). Skin
scribed by Conroy and colleagues (Conroy 1979) in
biopsies from recently developed areas of alopecia will
a palomino horse with broadly similar clinical and
reveal the typical lymphocytic bulbitis (Fig. 4.7.11a),
histopathologic findings. We have reported on the im-
with the degree of inflammation varying from follicle
munopathologic features of a 13-year-old male Ap-
to follicle. In chronic lesions, however, bulbitis may
 paloosa horse in which alopecia started 2 years prior
be very difficult to demonstrate. In fact, the presence
to initial visit to the veterinarian (Tobin et al. 1998).
of apoptotic cells within the hair follicle matrix, the
Hair loss was first observed on the cheek, extending
 presence of dysplastic hair shafts, or the presence of a
to the intermandibular area, face, lateral aspects of
subtle increase in peribulbar fibrous tissue warrant the
the neck, and shoulders. Although the hair grew back
request for further sections or even additional biopsies
spontaneously after 18 months, it fell out again after
in order to verify AA (Stannard 2000).
2 months (at which time biopsies were taken). The hair
264 Inflammatory alopecias
(a)
(b)
220-
220-
118-
85-
50-
45-
(c)
34
(d)
(e)1
Fig. 4.7.11 Histopathology. immunohistopathology. indirect immunofluorescence and immunoblot analysis of equine alopecia
areata. (a) Peri- and intrafollicular mononuclear cell infiltrates; (b) peri- and intrafollicular CD3-positive lymphocytes (pan-T cell):
(c) indirect immunofluorescence analysis of circulating equine serum lgG antibodies to outer root sheath of a human scalp hair
follicle; (d) immunoblotting analysis of circulating equine serum IgG antibodies from two affected horses to 6 M urea-extracted 
extractable hair follicle antigens with whole equine AA serum (1), or with AE15 antitrichohyalin antibody (2); 6 M urea-extractable 
hair follicle antigens were immunoprecipitated with whole equine AA serum (3), or with whole equine normal serum (4), and then 
separated by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with AE15 antitrichohyalin antibody. (Modified from Tobin DJ, et al. (1998).)
Alopecia areata 265
 regrew spontaneously over the body 4 months after the
References
veterinary consultation, but started to fall out again a
year later. Indirect immunofluorescence analysis indi-
Affolter VK, Cannon AG. 1998. Alopecia universalis in a horse.
Proceedings of the 14th AAVD and ACVD Meeting, San Antonio,
cated that the equine AA serum reacted intensely with
Texas, pp. 91-92.
the hair follicle inner root sheath, outer root sheath,
Alhaidari Z. 2003. Alopecia areata in a mixed breed 9-year-old En-
and precortex of equine hair follicle, not unlike AA in
glish setter. Annales de Dermatologie et de Venereologie 130(4):
416.
other species assessed to date (Fig. 4.7.11c). Moreover,
Beardi B, Wanert F, Zoller M, Freyschmidt-Paul P, Bodemer W, Kaup
immunoblotting analysis revealed antibodies to a 200-
FJ. 2007. Alopecia areata in a rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta).
220 kDa doublet (presumptive trichohyalin antigen)
Journal of Medical Primatology 36(3):124-130.
Black SS, Rashmir-Raven AM, Williams S. 2001. Equine clinical
and to antigens of 40-60 kDa (Fig. 4.7.11d,e). The
snapshot #4.Compendium on Continuing Education for the Prac-
former doublet could be immunoprecipitated by the
ticing Veterinarian 23:758.
serum and was successfully identified as trichohyalin.
Carroll JM, McElwee KJ, King LE, Byrne MC, Sundberg JP. 2002.
Gene array profiling and immunomodulation studies defne a
Moreover, IgG fractions of serum obtained from this
cell-mediated immune response underlying the pathogenesis of
horse appeared to retard hair regrowth in an area
alopecia areata in a mouse model and humans. fournal of Irnves-
around the administration site of treated mice, even
tigative Dermatology 119(2):392-402.
 13 weeks after the first administration. Surprisingly,
Colombo S, Keen JA, Brownstein DG, Rhind SM, McGorum BC,
Hill PB. 2004. Alopecia areata with lymphocytic mural folliculitis
the treated skin contained telogen hair follicles often
affecting the isthmus in a thoroughbred mare. Veterinary Derma-
without associated shafts, despite the presence of ana-
tology 15(4):260-265.
Conroy ID. 1968. Alopecia in dogs and cats. fournal of the American
 gen hair follicles in the remaining dorsum skin.
Animal Hospital Association 4:200-209.
While the above equine AA study remains prelim-
Conroy ID. 1979. Alopecia areata. In: Andrews EJ, Ward BC, Altman
inary, it demonstrates that antibodies to hair follicle
NH(eds), Spontaneous Animal Model of Human Disease, Pp. 30-
31. New York: Academic Press.
antigens are a feature ofAA-like hair loss in horses, and
Eichberg IW, De Villez RL. 1984. Alopecia totalis in a chimpanzee.
also that some reactivities (e.g-., against trichohyalin)
Journal of Medical Primatology 13(2):81-88.
are similar to those previously observed in canine AA.
Freyschmidt-Paul P, Happle R, Hoffman R. 2004. Alopecia areata in
animal models-new insights into pathogenesis and treatment of
 Further, this pilot study provided preliminary evi-
a T-cell-mediated autoimmune disorder. Journal der Deutschen
dence that such antibodies may disrupt hair regrowth
Dermatofogischen Gesellschaft 2(4):260-273.
when passively transferred into C57BL/6 mice, sup-
Freyschmidt-Paul P, Seiter S, Zoller M, Konig A, Ziegler A, Sund-
berg IP, Happle R, Hoffmann R. 2000. Treatment with an anti-
 porting the view that anti-hair follicle antibodies in
CD44v10-specifc antibody inhibits theonset of alopecia areata in
AA may have some pathogenic potential.
C3H/Hel mice.fournal ofInvestigative Dermatology115(4):63-
 Treatment of equine AA is diffcult and reports on
657.
Freyschmidt-Paul P, Ziegler A, McElwee KJ, Happle R, Kissling S,
its efficacy are limited. Systemic corticosteroids have
Sundberg JP, Hoffmann R. 2001. Treatment of alopecia areata
produced minimal response only. Since spontaneous
in C3H/HeJ mice with the topical immunosuppressant FK506
remission can occur, it is most often recommended
(Tacrolimus). European Journal of Dermatology ll:405-409.
Gilhar A, Kalish RS. 2006. Alopecia areata: a tissue specifc autoim-
not to treat affected horses (Stannard 2000).
mune disease of the hair folicle. Autoimmunity Reviews 5(1):64-
69.
Gilhar A, Landau M, Assy B, Shalaginov R, Serafimovich S, Kalish
4.7.4 Bovine alopecia areata
RS. 2001. Melanocyte-associated T-cell epitopes can function as
autoantigens for transfer of alopecia areata to human scalp ex-
AA is rare in catle (although it may be seen with a
plants on Prkdc(scid) mice. Journal of Investigative Dermatology
higher incidence in some specific cattle breeds). Very
117:1357-1362.
Gilhar A, Paus R, Kalish RS. 2007. Lymphocytes, neuropep-
few cases are described in the literature. One includes 
tides, and genes involved in alopecia areata.Clinical Investigation
a case in a Holstein cow (Paradis et al. 1988) that was
117(8):2019-2027.
Gilhar A, Pillar T, Assay B, David M. 1992. Failure of passive transfer
characterized as an asymptomatic multifocal, nonin-
of serum from patients with alopecia areata and alopecia univer-
flammatory alopecia. The diagnosis of AA was con-
salis to inhibit hair growth in transplants of human scalp skin
firmed by skin biopsies. The latter revealed peribulbar
grafted on to nude mice. British Journal of Dermatology 126:166-
lymphocyte infltrates that affected the anagen hair
171.
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ. 1992. Alopecia areata. In: Gross
follicles only. Like in other species, AA-like disease in
TL, Irhke PJ, Walder EJ (eds), Veterinary Dermatopathofogy——A
a pue aisnouods seadde o paqiosap si smo
Macroscopic and Microscopic EvaluationofCanine and Feline Skin
Disease, p. 291-292. St. Lowis: Mosby Year Book.
wax and wane. It may also involve the eyelashes with
Guernsey GE. 1985. Alopecia areata in a dog. Canadian Veterinary
spontaneous regrowth (which can be white).
Journal 26:403.
266   Inflammatory alopecias
Kalish RS, Gilhar A. 2003. Alopecia areata: autoimmunity-the ev-
S. 2002. Dominant role of the niche in melanocyte stem-cell fate 
idence is compelling. Journal of Investigative Dermatology. Sym-
determination. Nature 416(6883):854-860.
posium Proceedings 8(2):164-167.
Noli C, Toma S. 2006. Three cases of immune-mediated adnexal
  o    s t  a
skin disease treated with cyclosporin. Veterinary Dermatology
the Dundee Experimental Bald Rat (DEBR). In: Chan LS (ed),
17(1):85-92.
Animal Models of Inflammatory Skin Diseases, Pp. 451-467. Boca
O'Guin WM, Sun TT, Manabe M. 1992. Interaction of trichohyalin
Raton: CRC Press.
with intermediate flaments: three immunologically defined
McElwee KJ, Boggess D, King LE Jr, Sundberg JP. 1998a. Experimen-
 stages of trichohyalin maturation. Journal of Investigative Der-
tal induction of alopecia areata-like hair loss in C3H/Hel mice
matology 98:24-32.
using full-thickness skin grafts. Journal of Irnvestigative Dermatof-
 Olivry T, Moore PF, Naydan DK, Puget BJ, Affolter VK, Kline AE.
ogy 111:797-803.
 1996. Antifollicular cell-mediated and humoral immunity in ca-
McElwee KJ, Boggess D, Olivry T, Oliver RF, Whiting D, Tobin
nine alopecia areata. Veterinary Dermatology 7:67-79.
DJ, Bystryn J-C, King LE, Sundberg JP. 1998b. Comparison of
Olsen E,Hordinsky M, McDonald-Hull S,PriceV, Roberts J, Shapiro
alopecia areata in human and non-human mammalian species.
J, Stenn K. 1999.Alopecia areata investigational assessmentguide-
Pathobiology 66:90-107.
lines. National Alopecia Areata Foundation.Journal ofthe Amer-
McElwee KJ, Freyschmidt-Paul P, Hoffmann R, Kissling S, Hum-
ican Academy of Dermatology 40(2 Pt 1):242-246.
mel S, Vitacolonna M, Zoller M. 2005a. Transfer of CD8+ cells
 Olsen EA, Hordinsky MK, Price VH, Roberts JL, Shapiro J, Can-
induces localized hair loss whereas CD4+/CD25— cells promote
feld D, Duvic M, King LE Jr, McMichael AJ, Randall VR,
 systemic alopecia areata and CD4+/CD25+ cells blockade dis-
Turner ML, Sperling L, Whiting DA, Norris D, National Alope-
ease onset in the C3H/He] mouse model. Journal of Investigative
cia Areata Foundation. 2004. Alopecia areata investigational as-
Dermatology 124:947957.
sessment guidelines-Part I. National Alopecia Areata Founda-
McElwee KJ, Hoffmann R, Freyschmidt-Paul P, Wenzel E, Kissling
tion. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology51(3):440-
S, Sundberg JP, Zoller M. 2002. Resistance to alopecia areata in
447.
C3H/HeJ mice is associated with increased expression of regu-
 Paradis M, Fecteau G, Scott DW. 1988. Alopecia areata (Pelade) in
latory cytokines and a failure to recruit CD4+ and CD8+ cells.
a cow. Canadian Veterinary Journal 29(9):727-729.
Journal of Investigative Dermatology 119(6):1426-1433.
 Ross EK, Shapiro J. 2005. Management of hair loss. Dermatologic
McElwee KJ, Niyama S, Freyschmidt-Paul P, Wenzel E, Kissing
Chinics 23(2):227-243.
S, Sundberg JP, Hoffmann R. 2003. Dietary soy oil content and
 Safavi, KH, Muller SA, Suman VJ, Moshell AN, Melton LJ. 1995. In-
soy-derived phytoestrogen genistein increase resistance to alope-
 cidence of alopecia areata in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1975-
cia areata onset in C3H/HeJ mice. Experimental Dermatology
1989. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 70:628-633.
12(1):30-36.
Scarff DH. 1993. Disorders of pigmentation, Chapter 3. In: Locke
McElwee KJ, Pickett P, Oliver RF. 1996a. The DEBR rat, alopecia
PH, Harvey RG, Mason IS (eds), Manual of Smalf Animal Derma-
areata and autoantibodies to the hair follicle. British Journal of
tology, Pp.83-89.British SmallAnimalVeterinary Association:
Dermatology 134(1):55-63.
Cheltenham, Glouchestershire, UK.
McElwee KJ, Spiers EM, Oliver RF. 1996b. In vivo depletion of
Scott DW. 1988. Large Anirmal Dermatology. Philadelphia: WB Saun-
CD8+ T-cells restores hair growth in the DEBR model for alope-
ders.
cia areata. British Journal of Dermatology 135(2):21l-217.
Scott DW, Guard CLG.1988.Alopecia areata in a cow. Agri-Practice
McElweeKJ,Spiers EM,OliverRF.1999a.Partial restorationofhair
9:16-19.
growth in the DEBR model for alopecia areata after in vivo deple-
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE. 1995. Small Animat Dermatology,
tion of CD4+ T-cells. British Journal of Dermatology 140(3):432-
 5th edn, pp. 61l-613. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
437.
 Shapiro J, Sundberg IP, Bissonnette R, McElwee KJ, McLean DI,
McElwee KJ, Tobin DJ, Bystryn J-C, King LE, Sundberg JIP. 1999b.
Carroll JM, Oliver RF, Tang L, Lui H. 1999. Alopecia areata-
Alopecia areata: an autoimmune disease? Experimental Derma-
like hair loss in C3H/HeJ mice and DEBR rats can be reversed
tology 8(5):371-379.
using topical diphencyprone. Journal of Investigative Dermatofogy.
McElwee KJ, Yu M, Park SW, Ross EK, Finner A, Shapiro J. 2005b.
Symposium Proceedings 4(3):239.
What can we learn from animal models of alopecia areata? Der-
Siebenhaar F, Sharov AA, Peters EM, Sharova TY, Syska W,
matofogy 211(1):47-53.
Mardaryev AN, Freyschmidt-Paul P, Sundberg JP, Maurer M,
MesseneAGBlehn984.lpeciaareata:lightandelt
Botchkarev VA. 2007. Substance P as an immunomodulatory neu-
microscopic pathology oftheregrowing whitehair. British fournal
 ropeptide in a mouse model for autoimmune hair loss (alopecia
of Dermatology 110:15s-162.
areata). Journal of Investigative Dermatology 127:1489-1497.
Stannard AA. 2000. Alopecia in the horse—an overview. Veterinary
terations in the hair growth cycle and correlation with follicular
Dermatology 11(3):191-203.
pathology. British Journal of Dermatology 114:337-347.
Sundberg JP, Boggess D, Silva KA, McElwee KJ, King LE, Li R,
Michie HJ, Jahoda CA, Oliver RF, Johnson BE. 1991. The DEBR
Churchill G, Cox GA. 2003. Major locus on mouse chromosome
rat: an animal model of human alopecia areata. British fournaf of
17 and minor locus on chromosome 9 are linked with alope-
Dermatology 125:94-100.
cia areata in C3H/HeJ mice. Journal of Irnvestigative Dermatotogy
Michie HJ, Jahoda CA, Oliver RF, Poulton TA. 1990. Immunobj-
120(5):771-775.
ological studies on the alopecic (DEBR) rat. British Journal of
Sundberg JP, Cordy WR, King LE. 1994. Alopecia areata in ag-
Dermatology 123:557-567.
ing C3H/HeJ mice. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 102:847-
 Middleton DJ, Church S. 1994. Alopecia universalis in a horse.
856.
Veterinary Dermatology 67:67-79.
Tang L, Cao L, Sundberg JP, Lui H, Shapiro J. 2004. Restoration
Muller GH, Kirk RW, Scott DW. 1983. Small Animal Dermatology.
of hair growth in mice with an alopecia areata-like disease using
 Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
topical anthralin. Experimental Dermatology 13(1):s-10.
Nishimura EK, Jordan SA, Oshima H, Yoshida H, Osawa M,
Tang L, Lui H, Sundberg IP, Bissonnette R, I McLean D, Shapiro J.
Moriyama M, Jackson IJ, Barrandon Y, Miyachi Y, Nishikawa
 2003a. Restoration of hair growth with topical diphencyprone in
Alopecia areata 267
mouse and rat models of alopecia areata. Journal of the American
T. 2003. A natural canine homologue of alopecia areata in hu-
Academy of Dermatology 49(6):1013-1019.
mans. British Journal of Dermatology 149(5):938-950.
Tang L, Sundberg JP, Lui H, Shapiro J. 2003b. Old wine in new bot-
Tobin DJ, Hann SK, Song MS, Bystryn J-C. 1997a. Hair follicle
tles: reviving old therapies for alopecia areata using rodent mod-
structures targeted by antibodies in patients with alopecia areata.
els.JournalofInvestigativeDermatology.SymposiumProceedings
Archives of Dermatology 133(1):57-61.
8(2):212-216.
Tobin DJ, Olivry T. 2004. Spontaneous canine model of alopecia
Tobin DJ. 1997. Morphological analysis of hair follicles in alopecia
areataIn:ChanLS(ed.),AnialModesofHumanIfammatoy
areata. Microscopy Research and Technique 38:443-451.
Skin Disease, Pp. 469-482. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Tobin DJ. 2003. Characterization of hair follicle antigens targeted by
Tobin DJ, Olivry T, Bystryn J-C. 1996. Anti-trichohyalin antibodies
the anti-hair follicle immune response in alopecia areata. Journaf
 in canine alopecia areata. In: Kwochka KW, Willemse T, von
of Investigative Dermatology. Symposium Proceedings 8(2):176-
Tscharner C (eds), Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Pp. 355-
181.
364. Boston: Butterworth Heinemann.
Tobin DJ, Alhaidari Z, Olivry T. 1998. Equine alopecia areata au-
Tobin DJ, Orentreich N, Fenton DA, Bystryn J-C. 1994. Antibodies
toantibodies target multiple hair follicle antigens and may alter
to hair follicles in alopecia areata. Journal of Investigative Derma-
hair growth in passive transfer studies. Experimental Dermatology
tofogy 102:721-724.
7:289297.
Tobin DJ, Slominski A, Botchkarev V, Paus R. 1999. The fate of 
Tobin DJ, Bystryn J-C. 1995. Immunity to hair follicles in alopecia
hair follicle melanocytes during the hair growth cycle. Journal of
areata. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 104(5 Suppl):13S-
Investigative Dermatology. Symposium Proceedings 4(3):323-332.
14S.
Tobin DJ, Sundberg JIP, King Jr LE, Boggess D, Bystryn J-C. 1997b.
Tobin DJ, Bystryn J-C. 1996. Alopecia areata is associated with
Autoantibodies to hair follicles in C3H/HeJ mice with alopecia
antibodies to hair follicle-specific antigens located predominantly
areata-like hair loss. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 109:329-
in the proliferative region of hair follicles. In: Neste DIl, Randall
333.
VA (eds), Hair Research for the Next Millennium, Pp. 237-241.
Van Scott EJ. 1958. Morphologic changes in pilosebaceous units and
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
anagen hairs in alopecia areata. Journal of Investigative Dermatof-
Tobin DJ, Bystryn J-C. 2000. Immunology of alopecia areata. In:
ogy 31:35-45.
Camacho FM, Randall VA, Price V (eds), Har and Hair Disor-
Verma DD, Verma S, McElwee KJ, Freyschmidt-Paul P, Hoffman R,
ders: Research, Pathology and Management,Pp. 187-201. London:
 Fahr A. 2004. Treatment of alopecia areata in the DEBR model us-
Martin Dunitz.
ing cyclosporin A lipid vesicles. European Journal of Dermatology
Tobin DJ, Fenton DA, Kendall MD. 1990. Ultrastructural ob-
14(5):332-338.
 servations on the hair bulb melanocytes and melanosomes in
Yager J, Wilcock BP. 1994. Lymphocytic folliculitis resembling hu-
acute alopecia areata. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 94:
man alopecia areata and universalis.In:Color Atlas and Text of
803-807.
Surgical Pathology of the Dog and Cat, Pp. 196-197. Mosby Year
Xiago iIN AaspurT 'Ns uoisuna 'dd layinT 'Hs raupuey fa u!qel
 Book Europe Limited (Wolfe).
1
Sebaceous adenitis
Monika Linek
Sebaceous adenitis is an uncommon skin disease that
1995; Scott et al. 2001). It is most likely that SA is
has most extensively been described in the dog ( Rosser
an autoimmune disease, particularly since immuno-
1992; Dunstan and Hargis 1995; Mueller et al. 2001;
histochemical studies have shown that the major cell
Scott et al. 2001). It has also been reported to occur in
 populations in SA are MHC class II positive dendritic
cats and rabbits, although it is not yet clear whether
cells and CD4+, CD8+ T cells. These are effector cells
the disease and its etiology and pathogenesis are in
in cell-mediated autoimmune diseases (Rybnicek et
fact identical in all species (Scott 1989; Baer et al.
al. 1998; Linek et al. 2005). B cells and autoantibod-
1993; Bellangeon and Theau 2000; White et al. 2001).
ies against sebaceous glands have not been detected.
 The common feature of the disease is an inflammatory
The hypothesis that SA is a cell-mediated autoimmune
infiltration affecting the sebaceous glands and finally
resulting in their destruction. Alopecia in this disease
and macrophages during immunomodulating therapy
Occurs by hair shafts that break easily, most likely due
with cyclosporin A (Linek et al. 2005).
to a decreased amount of sebum produced from the
 Secondary sebaceous gland destruction with simi-
sebaceous glands.
lar clinical hyperkeratosis can occur with generalized
Feline SA is presented with multifocal annular
demodicosis (see Section 4.1.3), leishmaniasis, severe
alopecia and adherent scales. One report describes a
 granulomatous and histiocytic foliculitis (see Chapter 
similar condition in domestic rabbits.
4.5), and other rare diseases (Gross et al. 2005).
4.8.1.2 Diagnosis
4.8.1 Canine sebaceous adenitis
4.8.1.2.1 Clinical presentation
4.8.1.1 Etiology and pathogenesis
 Young adult to middle-aged dogs are most commonly
Sebaceous adenitis (SA), in senso stricto, is a rare
affected and no sex predilection has been reported.
idiopathic skin disease. It is most commonly identi-
The clinical features, distribution, and severity of
fied in Standard Poodles and Akitas where an autoso-
SA vary among different breeds and dogs. However,
mal recessive mode of inheritance has been proposed
silvery white dandruffand scales that adhere to the hair
(Rosser et al. 1987; Hargis 1991; Scarff 2000; Reichler
shafts ("follicular casts") are the common key feature.
et al. 2001). It is also seen in Vizslas, German Shep-
 Follicular casts are most likely the result of the lack
herd Dogs, English Springer Spaniels and Hovawarts,
of sebum in the infundibular part of the hair follicle
and has been diagnosed in various other breeds and
where epidermis-like keratinization and desquama-
mongrel dogs (Carothers et al. 1991; Stewart et al.
tion occurs (Sousa 2006).
1991; Mueller et al. 2001; Tevell et al. 2008). The exact
 In long-coated dogs (with Standard Poodles, Aki-
pathogenesis is still unknown. A primary structural
tas, and Samoyeds being the most extensively studied
defect within the sebaceous gland and its duct or ab-
examples) the first sign of disease is a frond-like fol-
normalities in lipid metabolism have been proposed
licular cast protruding from the hair follicle that en-
but have not been proven yet (Dunstan and Hargis
sheathes the hair shaft with tenacious keratinaceous
270  Inflammatory alopecias
Hg. 4.8.1 Sebaceous adenitis in a Hovawart. Note the dull and
Fig. 4.8.2 Skin histology of canine sebaceous adenitis. Note
brittle hair coat associated with extensive symmetric multifocal
 sparse perifollicular inflammatory cells at the isthmus level of
alopecia caused by broken hair shafts.
the hair follicles and loss of sebaceous glands.
debris. When epilated, the follicular casts typically
surround the root of the hair. In Standard Poodles
tion with chronicity of the disease. In the early phase,
 the disease starts most often on the dorsal muzzle and
 discrete perifollicular inflammatory cells are present
temporal region, spreading to the dorsal neck and tho-
at the isthmus level of hair follicles (Yager and Will-
rax. In Akitas and Hovawarts a more extensive sym-
cock 1994; Gross et al. 2005). Later on, the most com-
metric and multifocal alopecia occurs (Reichler et al.
 mon finding is a nodular, granulomatous to pyogran-
2001). It is characterized by broken hair shafts and is
ulomatous inflammatory reaction around the seba-
associated with a dull and brittle hair coat (Fig. 4.8.1).
 ceous glands. Sebocytes are destroyed and may no
 As the disease progresses, it may generalize, and sec-
longer be detectable in histological sections. However,
ondary bacterial folliculitis with pruritus and malodor
hair follicles themselves and the apocrine sweat glands
is common at this stage.
are not affected by the inflammation. The inflamma-
Short-coated dogs such as Vizslas have a strikingly
tory infiltrate consists of histiocytes, lymphocytes, and
different clinical presentation (Carothers et al. 1991;
neutrophils (Gross et al. 2005; Linek et al. 2005). In
 Stewart et al. 1991). Lesions tend to be nodular with
long-coated breeds, a marked orthokeratotic hyperk-
 arciform and coalescing areas of alopecia giving the
eratosis and follicular plugging are detectable within
coat a moth-eaten appearance and fine nonadherent
the follicular infundibulum, whereas in short-coated
scaling predominately on the trunk. As additionally
breeds, the hyperkeratotic changes tend to be milder
cyclical edematous facial swellings occur, some authors
(Gross et al. 2005). In advanced stages of the disease,
suggest that this form of SA is a separate disease (Gross
the sebaceous glands are completely destroyed and
et al. 2005).
the inflammatory reaction may vanish (Fig. 4.8.2).
 The differential diagnoses include not only pri-
Telogenization of hair follicles or follicular atrophy
mary seborrhea and seborrheic dermatitis, vitamin
may occur. If a secondary staphylococcal infection is
 A-responsive dermatitis and ichthyosis, but also gen-
 present, suppurative folliculitis or furunculosis will be
eralized demodicosis (see Section 4.1.3) and dermato-
found.
phytosis (see Section 4.1.2). Bacterial folliculitis and
furunculosis could be considered in nodular disease.
4.8.1.3 Therapy
4.8.1.2.2 Histology
Considering that SA is a skin disease that has no im-
The histopathological abnormalities in dogs with SA
pact on the general health status and life expectancy of
 are variable, and their character changes in associa-
the patient (except for secondary pyoderma), treating
Sebaceous adenitis  271
SA needs to take into account owner compliance, han-
chronic cases. Life-long treatment is necessary since
dling, safety, and costs. The main goal of treatment is
discontinuation of cyclosporin A has been observed
both restoration of the barrier function of the skin
to be associated with relapse ofthe disease (Linek et al.
and restoration of hair coat quality. In general, SA
2005). Larger clinical trials comparing the efficacy of
 cannot be cured and long-term management therapy
 different treatment options for SA, however, are still
is required. A variety of treatment protocols have been
 outstanding.
published (Kwochka 1989; White et al. 1995; Rosser
2000; Linek et al. 2005).
References
4.8.1.3.1 Topical therapy
Baer K, Soulberg N, Helton K. 1993. Sebaceous adenitis-like disease
A high success rate is achieved with the regular use
in two cats. Veterinary Pathology 30:437.
of antiseborrheic shampoos followed by topical oil
 Bellangeon M, Theau V. 2000. Adenite sebacée chez un lapin. Pra-
 soaks and application of humectant sprays. One study
tique Medicale et Chirurgicale de lAnimal 35:697-699.
used cyclosporin once daily as a topical solution mix-
Carothers MA, Kwochka KW, Rojko JL. 1991. Cyclosporine-
responsive granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in a dog. Jour-
ing an oral micro-emulsified solution with water 1:10
nal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 198:1645-
(Patterson 2005).
1648.
Dunstan RW, Hargis AM. 1995. The diagnosis of sebaceous adenitis
in standard poodle dogs. In: Bonagura JD (ed.), Kirk's Current
4.8.1.3.2 Systemic therapy
Veterinary Therapy XI, pp. 619-622. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Various systemic treatments have been explored to
Gross TL, Ihrke PI, Walder EL, Affolter VK. 2005. Sebaceous adenitis.
In: Gross TL, Ihrke PI (eds), Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd
stop the inflammatory destruction of sebaceous glands
edn, pp. 186-188. Oxford: Blackwell Science.
and to permanently restore their function. Admin-
Hargis A. 1991. Sebaceous adenitis. Proceedings of the 7th Annual
istration of corticosteroids at anti-inflammatory or
College ofVeterinary Dermatoogy, pp. 8788.
immunosuppressive doses has been reported to be
Kwochka KW. 1989. Retinoids in dermatology. In: Kirk RW (ed.),
 effective in some short-coated dogs but had no ef-
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy X, Pp. 553-560. Philadelphia:
fect in others (Rosser et al. 1987; Carothers et al.
WB Saunders.
Linek M, Boss C, Haemmerling R, Hewicker-Trautwein M, Meck-
1991). Synthetic retinoids have been used for their
lenburg L. 2005. Effects of cyclosporine A on clinical and histo-
anti-inflammatory properties, their effects on ker-
logic abnormalities in dogs with sebaceous adenitis. Journai ofthe
atinocyte differentiation, and their effect on seba-
American Veterinary Medical Association 226(1):59-64.
Marshall C, Williams J. 1990. Re-establishment of hair growth, skin
ceous glands. They have also been reported to be
pliability and apparent resistancetobacterial infection affer os-
effective in Vizslas, but achieve lower success rates
ing fish oil in a dog with sebaceous adenitis. In: Tscharner VC,
in other breeds (Kwochka 1989; White et al. 1995).
Halliwell REW (eds), Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 1,
Synthetic retinoids are given at a dose of 1 mg/kg
Pp. 446-447. London: Bailliere Tindall.
Mueller RS, Bettenay SV, Vogelnest LJ. 2001. Sebaceous adenitis
orally once or twice a day, and improvement should
in three German Shepherd dogs. Australian Veterinary Practice
be seen within 6 weeks. Thereafter, the administration
31:110-114.
 frequency can be decreased. Oral supplementation of
Patterson S. 2005. Topical cyclosporine in sebaceous adenitis. In:
Kwochka KW, Rosenkrantz WS (eds), Shampoos and topica ther-
vitamin A at 10,000-30,000 IU twice daily has been
apy p.382.Oxford: Blackwell.
studied in one report to produce clinical improve-
Reichler IM, Hauser B, Schiller I, Dunstan RW, Credille KM, Binder
H, Glaus T, Arnold S. 2001. Sebaceous adenitis in the Akita: clinj-
ment within 3 months (Sousa 2006). Oral administra-
cal observations, histopathology and heredity. Veterinary Derma-
tion of essential fatty acids can also ameliorate clin
tofogy 12:243-253.
ical signs (Marshall and Williams 1990). Oral treat-
 Rosser EJ. 1992.Sebaceous adenitis. In: Bonagura JD, Kirk RW (eds),
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI, Pp. 534-536. Philadelphia:
ment with cyclosporin A (5 mg/kg once a day) has
WB Saunders.
been reported to be effective as well (Carothers et al.
Rosser EJ. 2000. Therapy for sebaceous adenitis. In: Bonagura JD,
1991; Linek et al. 2005). Cyclosporin successfully re-
o d a s   sn
573. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
 Rosser EJ, Dunstan RW, Brenn PT. 1987. Sebaceous adenitis with
 hair follicles with sebaceous glands, suggesting some
hyperkeratosis in the standard poodle: a discussion of 10 cases.
sebaceous gland recovery. It seems that treatment in
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 23:341-
345.
the early phase of the disease (i.e., when there is still
Rybnicek J, Affolter VK, Moore PF. 1998. Sebaceous adenitis: an
considerable inflammation) is more efficient than in
immunohistological examination. In: Kwochka KW, Willemse T,
 272  Inflammatory alopecias
Tscharner VC (eds), Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3,
Tevell EH, Bergvall K, Egenvall A. 2008. Sebaceous adenitis in
Pp.539-540. Oxford:Butterworth Heinem ann.
Swedishg,arerosctivtuf0casectaVe
Scarff DH. 2000. Sebaceous adenitis in standard poodles. Veterinary 
Scandinavica 50:11.
Record 146:476.
White SD, Linder KE, Schultheiss P, Scott KV, Garnett P, Taylor
Scott Dw. 1989. Adénite sebacee granulomateuse chez un chat. Le
M, Best SJ, Walder EJ, Rosenkrantz W, Yaeger JA. 2001. Seba-
Pointe Veterinaire 21:107-111.
ceous adenitis in four domestic rabbits ( Oryctolagus cuniculus) .
Scott DW, Miller WH Jr, Griffin CE (eds.) 2001. Small animal der-
Veterinary Dermatology 1l(1):53-60.
matology. In: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 6th
White SD, Rosychuk RA, Scott KV, Hargis AM, Jonas L, Tret-
edn.,p.738-742. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
tien A. 1995. Sebaceous adenitis in dogs and results of treat-
Sousa CA. 2006. Sebaceous adenitis. Veterinary Clinics of North
ment with jsotretinoin and etretinate: 30 cases (1990-1994).
America, Small Animal Practice 1:243-249.
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 207:197-
Stewart LJ, White SD, Carpenter JL. 1991. Isotretinoin in the treat-
200.
ment of sebaceous adenitis in two vizslas. Journal of the American
Yager JA, Willcock BP (eds). 1994. Surgical Pathology of the Dog and
Animal Hospital Association 27:65-71.
Cat. London: Mosby Year Book.
17-Hydroxyprogesterone, 135, 148
Apoptosis, in erythema multiforme, 233
Clinical examination, 65, 67-68
Acantholytic cells, 74, 222-223
Apoptosis, in feline exfoliative dermatitis,
Clipping, in dermatophytosis, 202
Acral lick granuloma, 196
87, 235
Clipping, in post-clipping alopecia, 163
ACTH, 25-26, 28, 32, 132-133, 148
Apoptosis, in interface mural folliculitis, 87
Chow Chow, 119,148,163
ACTH stimulation test, 66-67, 75, 125, 133,
Apoptosis, in lupus erythematosus, 232
Club hair, 19, 2122, 51, 8284, 161
135, 139-141, 154, 169, 196
Atrophy, hair follicle, 84, 86, 180-181, 189,
Clumped melanin, 71, 106
ACTH stimulation test, in canine
245
Coagulase-negative bacteria, 195, 199
hyperadrenocorticism, 135
Auto-antibodies, in hypothyroidism,
Coat color, 11-13, 26, 28, 68-69, 107-108,
ACTH stimulation test, in feline
121-122,127
150, 258
hyperadrenocorticism, 140
Avermectine, 208
Coat color dilution, 12,28, 41, 105, 107-108
ACTH stimulation test, in iatrogenic
Azathioprine,181,223,232,234
Collie, 180
hyperadrenocorticism, 138-139
Color dilution alopecia, canine, 105
Adverse drug reaction, in histiocytic or
Bacterial folliculitis, 194-200
Color mutant alopecia, canine, 105
granulomatous mural folliculitis, 243
Bald thigh syndrome, in Greyhounds, 165,
Comedo,85-86
Age of onset, in diagnostic approach to
173
Compound hair follicles, 80
alopecia, 66-67
Beta-lactam antibiotics, 199
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia-like
Aging, hair follicle, 25
Biopsy, 66-67, 75-79
syndrome, in alopecia X, 148
Alaskan Malamute, 65, 164, 174
Biopsy-responsive alopecia, in alopecia X,
Congenital Alopecia, bovine, 96, 98,
Alopecia areata, 66-68, 88, 253-265
148
100-101
Alopecia areata, bovine, 265
Biotin deficiency, 116
 Congenital progressive alopecia, in Polled
Alopecia areata, canine, 256-262
Black hair follicle dysplasia, canine, 103-105
Hereford cattle, 99-100
Alopecia areata, equine, 263-265
Botryomycosis, 198
Copper defciency, in ruminants, 115
Alopecia areata, human, 254-255
Corticosteroid-induced alopecia,
Alopecia areata, rodent, 256, 258
65
iatrogenic,138-139
Alopecia totalis, 253
Bulbitis, in alopecia areata, 88
Corticotropin releasing hormone, 135
Alopecia universalis, 253
Bulge region, hair follile, 31,4445, 81
Cortisol, 66-67, 75, 125, 132-135, 137-142,
Alopecia X, canine, 148-154, 167
148-149, 154
Alopecia, inflammatory, 193-265
Castration-responsive alopecia, in alopecia
Cowpox virus infection, feline, 249-251
Alopecia, non-inflammatory, 93-188
X, 148
Culicoides hypersensitivity, equine,
Alopecia, scarring, 189
Catagen, 17-19, 81-82
218-219
Alopecia, traumatic, 185-188
Chemotherapy-induced alopecia, in hair
Culture, dermatophyte, 72
 American Hairless Terrier, 110
follicle dystrophy, 177-179
Culture, microbiological, 76, 198
Amitraz, 208-210, 243
Chesapeake Bay retriever, 65, 172-173
Curly coated retriever, 53, 173
Anagen, 12, 17,19, 25, 71, 80, 82
Chinese crested dog, 84, 96-99
Cushing's disease, canine, 132
Antibiotics, in pyoderma, 199
Chlorhexidin, 202
Cushing's disease, feline, 139
Aplasia, hair follicle, 93-96
Clindamycin, 199
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus, 229-230
274Index
Cyclic follicular dysplasia, in canine
Eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis,
Folliculitis, granulomatous, 243-246
recurrent flank alopecia, 69,156
mucinotic, 239
Folliculitis, infltrative, 88, 243
Cytology, 74
Epithelial strand, 19-20, 81-83, 85, 134,
Folliculitis, interface, 193, 231
Cytology, acantholytic keratinocytes, 74,
144, 182
Folliculitis, luminal, 87, 193-194, 243
222, 224
Epitheliotropic lymphoma, 228-229, 235
Folliculitis, lymphocytic, 193, 207, 244
Cytology, eosinophils, 74, 215
Epitheliotropic lymphoma, classical form,
Folliculitis, mucinotic, 245
Cytology, fne needle aspiration, 66, 74
229
Folliculitis, mural, 87, 227-239
Cytology, giant cells, 74-75
Epitheliotropic lymphoma, d'emblee form,
Folliculitis, pustular, 221-226
Cytology, impression smear, 74, 198
229
Folliculitis, rhabditic, 209
Cytology, pyoderma, 66-67, 74
Epitheliotropic lymphoma, exfoliative
Folliculitis, with bacteria, 87, 195
Cytology, tape preparation, 74
erythroderma, 228, 235
Folliculitis, with demodex mites, 207
Epitheliotropic lymphoma, mucocutaneous 
Folliculitis, with dermatophytes, 87
Dachshund, 165
lesions, 228
Folliculitis, with intraluminal organism,
 D'emblee form, in epitheliotropic
Epitheliotropic lymphoma, pagetoid
193-210
lymphoma, 229
reticulosis, 229
Footpads, in pemphigus foliaceus, 222
 Degenerative granulomatous folliculitis,
Epitheliotropic lymphoma, scaly plaques or
FT4,67,75, 119, 121-126, 128
243, 245
nodules, 228
Furunculosis, 68, 74, 87-88, 145, 189,
 Demodex canis, 204
Epitheliotropic lymphoma, ulcerative form,
195-196, 200, 205, 209-210, 215, 243,
 Demodex cornei, 204
228
270
 Demodex felis, 204
Equilibrium dialysis, in hypothyroidism,
Furunculosis, post-grooming, 195
Demodex gatoi, 204, 206-207
124-126
 Furunculosis, pyotraumatic, 196
Demodex injai, 204-205
Erythema multiforme, 232-234
Demodicosis, 65-67, 73, 85, 87, 159, 193,
Estrogen receptor, 82, 132, 150
German short-haired pointer, exfoliative
195, 198, 204-209
Estrogen, in therapy of canine pattern
cutaneous lupus, 232
Densitiy, hair coat, 4950
alopecia, 167-169
Goiter, 119, 122, 128-129
Depigmentation, 69, 223, 228, 230
Euthyroid Sick Syndrome, 121-122,
Granulomatous and histiocytic mural
Dermatomyositis, canine, 179-180
125-128
folliculitis, 243-246
Dermatophilus congolensis, 197
Exfoliative cutaneous lupus, 232
Granulomatous degenerative mural
Dermatophytosis, 200-204
Exfoliative dermatitis, feline, 234-235
folliculitis, 243-246
Dermatophytosis, culture, 72-73
Exfoliative erythroderma, 221, 235
Greyhound, 65, 105, 110, 125, 130, 165,
Dermatophytosis, environmental
Exfoliative erythroderma, in epitheliotropic
173174
decontamination, 203-204
lymphoma, 228
Griseofulvin, 202-203
Dermatophytosis, therapy, 201-204
Growth hormone-responsive alopecia, in
Diagnostic approach to alopecia, 65
Facial bacterial folliculitis,bovine, 198
alopecia X, 148
Diethylstilbestrol, 143, 145
 Facial eosinophilic furunculosis, canine,
Discoid lupus erythematosus, canine,
215-216
Hair bulb, 8, 12, 21-22, 25-31, 44, 51-53,
229231
Fading hair follicles, 84, 177
7172, 8083, 85
 Domestic animals, in hair follicle research,
Fibrous connective tissue sheath, 81
Hair cycle, 17, 56
59-60
Finasteride,in therapy of canine pattrn
Hair cycle abnormalities, canine, 169-174
 Domestication influence, hair follicle,
alopecia, 167-168
Hair density, 49-50
46, 54
 Fine needle aspirations, 74
Hair fber, 33-39
 Drug administration, in diagnostic
Flame follicles, 83, 152
Hair follicle aging, 25
approach to alopecia, 68
 Flank alopecia, in canine recurrent flank
Hair follicle anatomy and physiology, dog
 Drug-induced pemphigus foliaceus,
alopecia, 155-160
and cat, 57
221-223
Feece rot, 198
Hair follicle anatomy and physiology, horse,
Dysplasia, dental, 93-99, 105, 110
Fuoroquinolone antibiotics, 199
59
Dysplasia, hair follicle, 96109
Folic acid defciency, 115
Hair follicle anatomy and physiology,
 Dysplasia of the hair follicle pigmentary
Follicle-stimulating hormone, 143 
humans, 59
unit, 66, 110
Follicular mucinosis, canine and feline,
Hair follile anatomy and physiology.
Dysplastic morphogenesis, 82
238239
laboratory rodents, 59
Dystrophy,hair follicle, 84,177183
Follicular mucinosis, eosinophilic, 239
Hair follicle anatomy and physiology, large
Folliculitis, 74, 86-87, 194-200, 227-235,
ruminants, 58
Ectodysplasin, 5-6, 93
243-246
Hair follicle anatomy and physiology, Pig,
Enilconazol, 202
Folliculitis, as a bystander, 227-235
58-59
 Environmental decontamination, in
 Folliculitis, bacterial folliculitis,
Hair follicle anatomy and physiology, small
dermatophytosis, 203-204
194-200
ruminants, 58
 Eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis,
Folliculitis, degenerative, 243-246
Hair follicle aplasia, bovine X-linked with
canine facial, 217
Folliculitis, eosinophilic, 215-219
dental dysplasia, 94-95
Index 275
Hair follicle aplasia, canine X-linked with
Idiopathic linear pustular acantholytic
Melatonin, in therapy of canine recurrent
 dental dysplasia, 94
dermatosis, canine, 223-224
flank alopecia, 160
Hair follicle aplasia, without dental
Immune privilege, hair follicle, 25
Methicillin-resistant staphylococci, 199
dysplasia, 95-96
Inferior segment, hair follicle, 81
Mexican hairless dog, 97-98
Hair follicle cycling, molecular
Infltrative mural folliculitis, 87
Miconazole, 202
mechanisms, 22-23
Infundibular hyperkeratosis, 85-86
Microbiological culture, 76
Hair follicle dysplasia, congenital, 99
 Infundibulum, hair follicle, 80
Microsporum, 72-73, 200
Hair follice dyslasia,equine,101
Inner root sheath, formation, 8-10
Milbemycin, 208-209
Hair follicle dsplasia, feline, 101
Inner root sheath, hair follicle, 8-10, 19, 80
 Minoxidil, in therapy of canine recurrent
Hair follicle dysplasia, in Weimaraners,
Interdigital furunculosis, 196
flank alopecia, 160
108-109
Interface mural folliculitis, 87
Mitotane, in therapy of canine alopecia X,
Hair follicle dysplasia, with hair shaft
Mucinosis, in feline degenerative mural
154
formation, 99-101
folliculitis, 244-245
Mitotane,in therapy of canine
 Hair follicle dysplasia, without hair shaft
Iodine deficiency, 121
hyperadrenocorticism, 136-137
formation,96-99
Irish Water Spaniel, 65, 169-171
Morphea, 189
 Hair follicle immune privilege, 25
Ischemic dermatopathy following vaccine
Morphogenesis, hair follicle, 3-12
Hair follicle morphology,18-21, 5759
administration, 180-181
 Mosquito bite hypersensitivity, feline,
Hair follicle pigmentary unit, development,
Isthmic lymphocytic mural folliculitis,
216-218
11-12
236-237
Moxidectin, 208-209
Hair follicle pigmentation, 56, 61,
Isthmus, hair follicle, 80-81
Mucinosis, in canine eosinophilic mural
103-109
Itraconazole, 203
folliculitis, 239
Hair follicle subtypes, 17, 80
Ivermectin, 208-209
Mucinosis, dermal, 123
Hair follicle types, 43
Mucinosis, follicular, 238-239
Hair growth cycle, 17-23
Keeshound, 148
 Mural folliculitis, feline lymphohistiocytic
Hair keratins, 35-36
Keratins, hair, 35-36
degenerative, 244-245
Hair luck test, 69-71
Ketoconazole, 203
 Mural folliculitis, canine eosinophilic
Hair matrix lipidosis, in Rottweilers, 109
mucinotic,239
Hair shaft, formation, 10-11
Levothyroxine, 127-128
Mural folliculitis, canine granulomatous
Hairless cat, 101-102
Lichenification, 69
degenerative, 243-244
Hairless Iberian pig, 96, 98
Lime sulphur, 202
 Mural folliculitis, granulomatous, 243
Hairless mutation, 101
Linear alopecia, equine, 237-238
Mural folliculitis, histiocytic, 243-246
Herpesvirus infection, feline, 218, 249
Lipidosis, in Rottweilers, 109
 Mural folliculitis, in pseudopelade, 236-237
High dose dexamethasone suppression test,
Localized scleroderma, in morphea, 189
Mural folliculitis, infltrative-type, 87
67, 135, 140
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test,
 Mural folliculitis, interface-type, 87
Histiocytic mural folliculitis, 243
134135, 140
Mural folliculitis, lymphocytic, 227-239
Histopathology, crush artefacts, 77
Lufenuron, 203
Mural folliculitis, necrotizing, 88, 249251
Histopathology, sampling technique, 77
Luminal folliculitis, 87, 193
Mural folliculitis, pustular, 88, 221-224
Hyperadrenocorticism, 132-141
Luteinizing hormone, 143
Mycobacteria, 74, 196, 198
Hyperadrenocorticism, canine, 132-138
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis, as a
Mycosis fungoides, 227
Hyperadrenocorticism, feline, 139-141
bystander of similar epidermal lesions,
Hyperestrogenism, canine, 142-148
227-234
 Necrotizing mural folliculitis, in feline
 Hyperestrogenism, in intact bitches, 145 
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis,
herpesvirus infection, 249
Hyperestrogenism, in male dogs, 146
autonomous, 234-239
 Necrotizing mural folliculitis, in feline
Hyperestrogenism, in neutered female dogs,
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis, with feline
cowpox virus infection, 249-251
145
exfoliative dermatitis, 234-235
Neuroectodermal dysplasia, 105
Hyperpigmentation, 69, 123, 132, 148, 153,
Lymphohistiocytic degenerative mural
Non-thyroidal illness, 125-126
157, 195
folliculitis feline, 244245
Nude mice, 99
Hypervitaminosis, 116
Nutrition, in diagnostic approach to
Hyposomatotropism, in alopecia X, 148
Macroconidia,73
alopecia, 68
Hypothyroidism, 119-129
Malformation, hair follicle, 83
Hypothyroidism, canine, 120-128
Mane and tail dystrophy, equine, 263
Ontogeny, hair follicle, 3-12
Hypothyroidism, equine, 129
McKenzie toothbrush method, 72
O,p'-Dichlordiphenyldichlorethan, in
Hypothyroidism, feline, 128-129
MDR-1 gene, 208
mitotane, 136
Hypotrichosis and anodontia defect, in
Melanoderma, in Yorkshire Terriers, 166
Outer root sheath, hair follicle, 19, 81
cattle, 94
Melatonin, in therapy of canine alopecia X,
Hypotrichosis, bovine lethal, 103
152154
Pagetoid reticulosis, in epitheliotropic
Hypotrichosis, bovine viable, 103
Melatonin, in therapy of canine pattern
lymphoma, 227-229
Hypotrichosis, ovine, 110
alopecia, 167-168
Paraneoplastic alopecia, feline, 182-183
276 Index
Pattern alopecia, canine, 164-168
Pyoderma, topical therapy, 198
Thyroglobulin, 119, 121
Pattern analysis, in histopathology, 79
 Pyotraumatic furunculosis, 196
Thyroglobulin, auto-antibodies, 121,127
Pattern baldness, in canine pattern alopecia,
Thyroid hormone, 24, 56, 119-127
164
Recurrent flank alopecia, canine, 155-160
Thyroid hormone, auto-antibodies, 66, 121,
 Pattern, in hair follicle arrangement, 44
Retinoic acid, in therapy of canine
127
Pattern of hair loss, 69
hyperadrenocorticism, 138
Thyroid peroxydase, 119
Pelodera (syn. Rhabditis) strongyloides, 209
Rhabditic folliculitis, 209
Thyroid ultrasonography, 127
 Pemphigus erythematosus, 223
Rottweiler, 109
Thyroiditis, autoimmune, 120, 127
 Pemphigus foliaceus, 221
Thyroid-stimulating hormone, 119, 121,
 Pemphigus foliaceus, canine, 223-224
Seasonal flank alopecia,in canine
129
 Pemphigus foliaceus, caprine, 221
flank alopecia, 156
Thyrotoxicosis, 126, 128
 Pemphigus foliaceus, equine, 222
Sebaceous adenitis, 269
Thyrotropin, 119
 Pemphigus foliaceus, feline, 222
Secondary hair follicle, 43-44
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 233
 Pemphigus foliaceus-like drug reaction, 221
Secondary hair germ, 22, 82
Traction alopecia, canine, 181
Perifolliculitis, 87
Selenium intoxication, in ruminants,
TRH stimulation test, 125-127
Peruvian hairless dog, 98-99
116
Trichilemmal keratinisation, 53, 82-84,
 Peruvian inca orchid dog, 98-99
Semihairlessness, in cattle, 100
103, 151, 159
Pigmentation, hair, 25-32
Sertoli cell tumor, 146147
Trichogram, 71
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism,
Sex hormones, in hair growth, 24
Trichomalacia, 37, 39, 115-117, 170
132
Sezary syndrome, 228
Trichophyton, 200
 Placode formation, hair follicle, 4-7
Siberian Husky, 150, 174
Triodothyronine, 119
Plush-coated dogs, 65, 148
Skin development, 4
Trilostane, in therapy of canine alopecia X,
Pomeranian, 148, 163
Skin scraping,66-67
154
 Pont Audemer Spaniel, 174
Skin scraping, deep, 73
Trilostane, in therapy of canine
 Portuguese Water Dog, 171-172
Sphynx cat, 101-102
hyperadrenocorticism, 141
Post-clipping alopecia, canine, 163
 Spiculosis, in Kerry Blue Terriers, 99
TSH stimulation test, 127-129
 Post-grooming furunculosis, 195
Staphylococcus, 195
Postrabies vaccination panniculitis, canine,
Stem cells, hair follicle, 23-24
Urinary cortisol:creatinine ratio, 133-134,
180-181
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 233
140, 149
 Post-traumatic alopecia, feline, 181-182
Straelensiosis, 209
Urticaria, allergic, 218
Primary hair follicle, 43-45
 Straelensia cynotis, 209
Primary hypothyroidism, 120-121
Sulfonamids, potentiated, 199
Vaccination, in dermatophytosis, 204
Pruritus, 186-188
Summer eczema, 218
Valle del Belice sheep, 102-103
 Pseudo-Cushing's syndrome, in alopeica X,
Superficial bacterial folliculitis, 195-196
Variations, in hair coat and hair follicle
148
Superficial skin scraping, 73
structure, 49-57
Pseudomonas, 195-196, 198
Sweet itch, 218
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus,
 Pseudopelade, of Brocq, 189, 236
 Systemic lupus erythematosus, 229-231
231232
Pseudopelade-like folliculitis, 236-237
Vibrissae hair follicles, 80
 Psychogenic alopecia, feline, 185-186
Telogen, 19, 71, 82
Vitamin A deficiency, 58, 116
 Punch biopsy, 77
Telogen defluxion, in telogen efluvium,
 Pustular folliculitis, 221-224
161
Weimaraner, 108-109
 Pyoderma, canine, 195-196
Telogen effluvium, canine, 161-162
Whisker hair follicles, 80
Pyoderma, equine, 197-198
Telogen effluvium, ovine, 163
Wood's light, 72
Pyoderma, feline, 196-197
Terbinafine, 203
Wool slip, in ovine telogen efluvium,
Pyoderma, ovine, 198-199
Thallium intoxication, 116
162-163
Pyoderma, systemic therapy,
Thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis,
199-200
234-236
Yorkshire terrier, 65, 105, 166