ColourReviewof
LEARN·REVISE·REINFORCE
Small
Animal
Dermatology
Karen A.Moriello
Clinical cases
Problembased
Fullyillustrated
MANSON
PUBLISHING
-000.jpg
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Abbreviations
ACTH adrenocorticotrophic hormone
GSDP German Shepherd dog deep
AgNOR(count) argyrophilic nucleolar
pyoderma
organizer regions (count)
IDST intradermal skin testing
ANA antinuclear antibody
IgA immunoglobulin A
BCG anti-Mycobacterium bovis
IMintramuscular
BO bullae osteotomy
IV intravenous
BP bullous pemphigoid
KOH potassium hydroxide
CSD cat scratch disease
MCT mast cell tumor
CT computerized tomography
MICminimum inhibitory concentration
DEJ dermoepidermal junction
PCR polymerase chain reaction
DIF direct immunofluorescence
PCNA proliferating-cell nuclear antigen
DLH domestic longhaired (cat)
PDH pituitary-dependent
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
hyperadrenocorticism
DSH domestic shorthaired (cat)
PF pemphigus foliaceus
DTM dermatophyte test medium
PNU protein-nitrogen unit
EBethidium bromide
PO oral
EBS epidermolysis bullosa simplex
RNA ribonucleic acid
EMG electromyography
SC subcutaneous
FADflea allergy dermatitis
SLE systemic lupus erythematosus
FeLV feline leukemia virus
SPF sun protection factor
FIV feline immunodeficiency virus
TAE tris-acetate-EDTA
FNA fine needle aspiration
TBE tris-borate-EDTA
FSA feline symmetrical alopecia
TECA total ear canal ablation
GABA-aminobutyric acid
TSH thyroid stimulatinghormone
GAPDHglycerol-3-phosphate
TSS toxic shock syndrome
dehydrogenase
UCCRurinary cortisol:creatinine ratio
Copyrighted material
-001.jpg
Self-Assessment Colour Review of
Small Animal
Dermatology
Karen A. Moriello DvM DACVD
DepartmentofMedical Sciences
SchoolofVeterinaryMedicine
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Wisconsin,USA
MANSONPUBLISHING/THEVETERINARYPRESS
Copyrightedmateria
-002.jpg
Dedication
To Mark and Ethan
Thanks TEAM!
OSU!
Acknowledgements
Any clinical text is partly the creation of the author and partly the creation of other
unnamed contributors’who have influenced the author either directly,or indirectly.
With that in mind,I would like to thank the following people:Drs.Richard
Halliwell, Gail Kunkle,and Valerie Fadok,my mentors,colleagues, and friends.Drs.
Danny cott,BillMiller, and Craig Griffinwho are currently entrusted withkeeping
the“bible’ofveterinary dermatology current and updated.This book was an
invaluable aid in preparation of this text.And last,but not least,Dr. Douglas J.
DeBoer,my friend and colleague since we joined thefaculty at theUniversity of
Wisconsin in 1986.
I would also like to thank the following people forreviewing and editing this text:
Dr.Lane Hansen (Class of 2003); Dr.Angela Kadwig (Class of 2003); Dr Jesse
Sondel (Class of 2003);Dr. Michele Turek,DACVO;Dr.Melissa Wallace,DACVIM;
Dr. Erin Dickerson.
Second impression2006
Third impression 2007
Fourth impression 2007
Copyright 2005Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN:978-1-84076-048-4
All rightsreserved.No part of this publicationmay bereproduced,stored ina retrieval systemor
transmittedin any form orby anymcanswithout thewritten permissionof the copyright holder
orinaccordancewiththeprovisionsof theCopyrightAct1956(asamended),orundertheterms
of anylicencepermittinglimited copying issued by the CopyrightLicensingAgency,3334Alfred
Place,London WC1E 7DP,UK.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal
prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from theBritish Library.
For full details of all MansonPublishing Ltd titles pleasewrite to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Tel:+44(0)2089055150
Fax:+44(0)20 82019233
Email:manson@mansonpublishing.com
Website:www.mansonpublishing.com
Commissioningeditor:Jill Northcott
Project manager:Paul Bennett
Copy editor:RuthMaxwell
Page layout:InitialTypesetting Services
Colour reproduction:Tenon&Polert Colour Scanning Ltd,HongKong
Printed in China by New Era Printing Company Ltd
Copyrighted material
-003.jpg
Preface
This book is a general review of veterinary dermatology in a case-based format. The
book reviews the most common skin diseases encountered in clinical practice.I have
tried hard to include the most common skin diseases,and a few obscure ones that a
clinician will encounter from time to time.It is not within the scope of this book to
review every skin disease in detail.If more information is needed on a particular
disease or some aspect of it,thereaderisreferred to the latest edition of the Textbook
ofSmall Animal Dermatology (DW Scott,WH Miller,C Griffin [eds].WBSaunders,
Philadelphia).
KarenA.Moriello
Picture acknowledgements
Picture acknowledgements in veterinary dermatology can be difficult to credit.This is
because veterinary dermatologists swap slideslike collectors swap baseball trading
cards. In the process of many swaps² the original owner of the slide is often lost
because slides aregifted’from one person to another. Over the last 20yearsI have
been the beneficiary of many‘slide gifts’ from my mentors,resident mates,and
colleagues.I have tried to credit the original owner of the slide or institution where
the slide originated,if possible.I apologize if someone recognizes a slide of theirs and
they were not credited.In those cases,I hope the original clinician of record is
pleased with the way in which the illustration was used, and I would like to thank
them now.
The cases in this book originate in one way or another from the teaching material
and/or dermatology training programs.I would specifically like to acknowledge the
following institutions:The School ofVeterinary Medicine,University of Wisconsin
Madison,Madison Wisconsin,USA.The School ofVeterinary Medicine,University
of California-Davis,Davis California,USA.The College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville Florida,USA.The School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania,Philadelphia Pennsylvania,USA.The College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University,Ithaca NewYork,USA.
I would like to thank the following people for generously allowing me to use cases
from their slide collections: Dr.Douglas J.DeBoer, University of Wisconsin-
Madison;Dr. Gail Kunkle,University of Florida; Dr.William Miller, Cornell
University; Dr.David Vail, University of Wisconsin-Madison;Dr. Stuart Helfand,
University of Wisconsin-Madison;Dr.Michele Turek,University of Wisconsin-
Madison.
3
Copyrightedmaterial
-004.jpg
Broad classification of
cases
Note: cases may appear in more than
immunological and autoimmune disease
one category
5,32,38,40,53,159,168,180,206，
209,220,225
allergy,hypersensitivity,and atopy 9,46,
inherited,congenital,and breed-related
50,52,56,62,63,72,85,98,105,
disorders 6,13,38,40,43,54,78,
119,139,146,150,169,171,188,
94,138,158,168,186,198,209
200,208
keratinization disorders 20,43,51,66,
alopecia 13,21,30,45,55,71,95,114,
103,113,148,162,174,177,193,
122,127,158,204
205
anal sac disease 117,178
miscellaneous 14,23
bacterial infections 4,6,17,24,25,29,
mite infestations 16,60,68,69,73,96,
39,42,49,58,66,70,77,83,84,87,
112,120,136,144,166,183,196,
93,95,96,102,123,124,127,139,
218,227,229
141,148,160,164,166,190,228
neoplasia 2,7,19,28,61,67,75,90,
diagnostic techniques and procedures 41,
106,111,126,127,130,142,154,
47,57,63,64,76,88,92,97,116,
156,173
131,137,144,149,153,154,155,
nutritional186,193,210
172,179,199,215,219
ocular and periocular disorders 46,82,
drug actions and therapeutics 27,101,
168
133,151,170,201,207
parasites (excluding mites) 1, 8,9,26,
drug concentration calculations 15,115,
34,44,80,100,105,119,128,133,
135,147,163,212,226
165,187,230
drugreactions,sideeffects,and toxicitis
pigmentation (skin/hair)53,121,145,
18,74,114,129,151,170,189
158,185,198,222
ear and ear pinna disease 16,30,33,63,
psychogenic/behavioral disorders 36,
79,97,125,137,150,152,174,176,
164,182,203
188,196,197,202,213
seborrhea20,29,103,113,162,176,
endocrine disorders 22,70,81,109,152,
205,221
184,217
skin structure and function 31,65,157,
eosinophilia 50,134,161,169
216
feet,pad,and claw disorders 1,3,8,32,
sun damage 48,61,90, 91,209
49,59,107,146,160,177
systemic disease, signs of5,14,23,38,
fungalinfections 11,12,35,42,59,86,
95,103,127,132,140,141,167,
99,104,108,118,137,139,143,
181,192,210,211,223,225
150,175,179,182,199,224
ulceration 62,89,191,208
granulomatous disorders 140, 141,195,
wounds,burns,trauma 3,10,51,54,62,
209,210,211,214,224
91,102,123,141,223
4
Copyrighted material
-005.jpg
I:Question
1While practicing small animal
medicine ina warm subtropical
climate, one morning in June a
6-year-old mixed breed dog was
examined for the complaint of
intense pedal pruritus.Prior to
this episode,the dog had no
history of previous skin diseases.
Except for the feet,which were
wetfrom constant chewing and
licking, the dog’s skin was other-
wise normal.The dorsal and
interdigitalareas were normal;the
doghad chewed most intensely on
the plantar surface and at the
junction of the pad and haired
skin.The feet were swollen, self-
Ib
traumatized,and in multiple sites
the hard cornified padwas mis-
sing（1a）.Themedical record
revealed that the client practiced
good preventive care(including
monthlyflea control andmonthly
heartworm prevention with a
product with label claim to pre-
vent intestinal parasites）.The dog
waswalkedseveral times a day,
and three or four times a week it
visited a local parkwhereit could
run freely.Incidentally，the owner complained of intensely pruritic feet;she wore
sandals to the park (1b).
i.The final diagnosis in this case was‘hookworm dermatitisWhat other differential
diagnoseswere most likely considered,what dermatological diagnostic tests were
probably done at the time of presentation,and what is the general pathogenesis of
this disease?
ii.What should the owner be toldwhen she askswhy the dog's heartworm medi-
cation didnot prevent this infestation,and howbest should thedogbetreated?
ii.The pathogenesis of hookworm dermatitis has been studied with natural and
experimentalinfestationswithUncinaria stenocephala.Whatwere thosefindings,
where is this parasite most commonly found,andwhat host is itsreservoir?
5
Copyrighted material
-006.jpg
I:Answer
1 i. In addition to hookworm dermatitis,Pelodera dermatitis, demodicosis, and
contact dermatitis were the most likely differential diagnoses.The acute onset of
lesions and the lack of a history of previous skin disease made atopic dermatitis
unlikely. Skin scrapings were negative in this dog ruling out Demodex and Pelodera,
which are easily found on skin scrapings.In most cases of hookworm dermatitis,skin
scrapings are negative. Impression smears and/or cytological scrapings of material
from the nailbed and interdigital areas were performed to lookfor bacterial and/or
Malassezia yeast infection.The history,clinical findings, and diagnostic testing made
the diagnosis of hookworm dermatitis most likely.In hookworm dermatitis,the larvae
of Ancylostoma or Uncinaria are present on grass and in the soil of contaminated
areas in the spring and summer,and percutaneously invade the skin of dogs (and
people). Intense pruritus can occur if the dog is exposed to large numbers of larva.
This is a disease of dogs kenneled on grass or earth runs where sanitation is poor. In
dogs, cutaneous lesions are most common with the larvae of U. stenocephala.
i.Heartworm medications donot provide complete protection against hookworm
dermatitis because therapeutic concentrations are only present for a short time after
the once monthly administration, allowing the dog to be at risk for an infestation.
Short-term use of glucocorticoids will alleviate the pruritus.Ivermectin (200 μg/kg PO
q24h) has been used to kill migrating larvae.For long-term control, the use of
heartworm preventatives should be continued;however,it ismost important tokeep
the dog away from unsanitary areas. This parasitic disease is easily prevented by good
sanitation (daily removal of feces) and exercising the dog in a clean area.There is an
increasing occurrence of this disease in urban areas where off-leash dog exercise parks
have become popular.A fecal examination should be done, and the dog treated for
hookworms with an appropriate antihelmintic even though it is receiving a
heartworm preventive with claims to prevent intestinal parasites.
ii.Experimental and natural infections with U.stenocephala indicate the third stage
larvae will readily enter skin in contact with the ground (Matthews,1981;Scott et al.,
 2001a). Larvae can be found in contaminated soil and also on dew-laden gras. Infec-
tive larvae will enter the skin via hair follicles or areas of desquamation.The most
common sites of penetration are at areas of normal *wear and tear': bony prominences
of elbows,hocks,margins of the footpads and haired skin,nail beds,and the ischial
tuberosities. Larvae enter the skin at the stratum corneum. They push against the rigid
epidermal cells and move forward in an undulating motion. The larvae move about
2-3mm a day in the skin following paths of least resistance.The dermis does not seem
to hinder their progress, and after larvae pass through the tissues, the cells reunite
leaving little evidence of their presence.Histological examination of infested tissue is
remarkably similar tohypersensitivity reactions'Tracks of larvae may be found,but
larvae themselves are rare.Ancylostoma spp.is the canine hookworm parasite most
commonly found in subtropical or tropical regions of the world. U. stenocephala is
more commonly found in cooler climates,where it is primarily a fox parasite.
6
Copyrightedmaterial
-007.jpg
2,3:Questions
2A5-year-oldmaleNor-
wegianelkhound dogwith
generalized confluent dermal
masses is shown (2）.The
tumors are firm to fluctuant,
well-circumscribed, dermal to
subcutaneous masses varying
in size from 0.5->5.0cm.
Some of the lesions have
visible pores openingonto the
surface of the skin;the pores
arefilledwith cutaneousplugs.
The dog is otherwise healthy.
i.What is the most likely diag-
nosis,what treatment options
are available,and what is the prognosis?
i.What is this theorigin of these tumors?
iIf thistumorwere aspiratedwhatwoulda cytological examinationbeexpected
to find?
3Thelocal firedepartment
rescued an adult cat from the
attic of a house on fire.The
heat was so intense the floor
vinyl beneath the cat's hind
pawsmeltedandadheredto
his fur.The firemen cut the
vinyl floor from beneath the
cat and brought thecat to the
veterinary clinic with its paws
adhered to the flooring.Under
anesthesia,the melted floor
vinylwasremovedfrom the
cat's fur. The cat's paws were
burned (3）.The skin beneath
the wounds was erythematous
and bled during the debride-
ment.
i.Is this a partial or full thick-
ness burn?
ii.How should this patient's burnsbe managed?
ii.What is erythema ab igne?
Copyrighted material
-008.jpg
2,3:Answers
2 i.Keratoacanthoma (also called an intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma). This is a
benign neoplasm that can be solitary ormultiple.Norwegian elkhound and keeshond
dogs are predisposed to the generalized form. Single lesions can be confused with
cutaneous horns or epidermal cysts because they look similar. These lesions are
differentiated by histological examination of tissue.Solitarykeratoacanthomas can be
treated by surgical excision, cryotherapy, electrotherapy, and observation without
treatment.Multiple lesions are usually too numerous for surgicalexcision.Oral
retinoids (isotretinoin 1-3 mg/kg PO q24h) have been successful in the treatment of
multiple keratoacanthomas in some dogs.Treatment responses may take up to
3months and,if effective,need life-long administration. Considered benign prolifer-
ations of skin epithelium, these lesions are benign,non-invasive, and do not met-
astasize.Dogs with generalized lesionshave a strong tendency to develop new tumors
at other sites. The generalized form is believed to have a hereditary basis in dogs.
i.These tumors originate from the superficial epithelium between hair follicles
although somemay originate from adnexa.
ii. Cytologically, these tumors are characterized by keratin debris, rafts of
keratinocytes,keratin bars,cholesterol crystals,and inflammatory cells if the mass
has ruptured. These tumors can be difficult to differentiate from inclusion cysts.
3 i.This is a partial thickness burn.These burns involve the epidermis and superficial
dermis. In full thickness burns, there is complete destruction of the epidermis, dermis,
skin glands, and hair follicles.
i. The wounds should be cleaned and debrided as needed. Daily hydrotherapy
2-3 times a day will help remove dead tissue and exudates. Because the hair coat of
many patients obscures the skin, the full extent of this cat's burns may not be visible
for up to 72 hours. The fluid and electrolyte balance must also be monitored. This
cat's pawswere treated daily with silver sulfadiazine ointment and bandages changed
twice daily. The paws healed, and the cat functioned normally. Patients caught in
housefiresmay have significant heat and/or smoke damage to their respiratory tract.
ii.Erythema ab igne,also called chronic moderate heat dermatitis,is an
erythematous reticular macular dermatitis that occurs at the site of repeated exposure
to moderate heat (Walder and Hargis, 2002). It is a type of a chronic burn. In
animals,there is erythema and hyperpigmentation at the site,and alopecia is
common. Lesions may have an irregular, linear appearance. The most common
sources of‘moderate heat’ that small animals may encounter include open fires,heat
lamps,electric blankets,electric heating pads,hot water bottles,and steam radiators.
It is also observed in dogs and cats that sleep on sun-heated driveways or on sun-
heated concrete.
8
Copyrighted material
-009.jpg
4,5:Questions
4A circular crusted lesion was
foundon the abdomenof a dog
(4）.The owner reports the lesion
was a small redbumpyesterday,
and today there is this crusted
lesion.
i.What are these lesions called?
i.What other skin disease(s） can
this lesion be mistaken for
clinically?
ii. What is superficial spreading
pyoderma?
5 The owners of an adult
Labrador retriever dog with a
history of chronicnasal derma-
titis’presented the dog for an
emergency examination.Until
now,the owners had refused all
recommendations for diagnostic
testingtodeterminethecauseof
the nasal crusting shown (5). The
crusting has been present for
almost 2years,and it did not
seem to beproblematicto the
dog.Thedogispresentedtoday
with the complaint of epistaxis.
Closer questioning of the owners
reveals the epistaxis is arecent development and has happened on at least two other
occasions.On physical examination,the dogisnormal except for the skin.There are
no signs of petechial hemorrhage on any of the mucousmembranes.Dermatological
examination reveals thickadherent crustingon the dorsum of the nose and bilateral
ulceration of the nares.The blood appears to be coming from these ulcerative areas.
Therewasnoexposuretorodenticides.
i.What are the differential diagnoses?What must alsoberuled out?
i.What diagnostic tests should be performed on this patient?
ii.If this patient had presented for the problem of chronicnasal crusting without any
evidence of erosions and ulcerations of the nares,what benign hereditary disease
should be considered?
9
Copyrighted material
-010.jpg
4,5:Answers
4i.This lesion is called an epidermal collarette,and is representative of a superficial
bacterial pyoderma.It results from the rupture of an intact pustule.After the pustule
ruptures, a crust develops and spreads in a circular fashion creating a‘collar of crust.
There may or may not be a ring of erythema at the margin.As the lesion heals, the
center often becomes hyperpigmented.
ii.Epidermal collarettes are commonly misidentified as ‘ringworm lesionsor
dermatophytosis. Skin scrapings should be done to rule out demodicosis.If there are
other dermatological signs consistent with dermatophytosis, a fungal culture should
be performed.Pending fungal culture,the patient is best treated with a minimum of a
21 day course of antibiotics; treatment should continue for 1 week past clinical cure.
If skin scrapings and fungal cultures are negative and the patient does not respond to
appropriate antibiotic therapy, a skin biopsy is indicated to rule out other rare causes
of these lesions (e.g. PF).
i. Superficial spreading pyoderma is a bacterial pyoderma characterized by large
epidermal collarettes with an erythematous,mild exudative/crusted leading edge.
What is unique about this clinical form of superficial pyoderma is the lack of
pustules; lesions are extensive and pustules are conspicuously absent. In the author's
experience this form of bacterial pyoderma is often seen in longhaired dogs,especially
collie and Shetland sheepdogs, and lesions are common on the trunk.
5 i. The recurrent epistaxis may be due to the skin disease; however, an underlying
coagulopathy must be ruled out.The symmetrical nature of the ulcerative nares and
nasal crusting is most consistent with lupus erythematosus, pemphigus erythematosus
or foliaceus (early onset),epitheliotrophic lymphoma, drug reaction,and contact
dermatitis.
i.A coagulopathogy should be ruled out before obtaining skin biopsy specimens of
the depigmented area of the nares and the crusted planum nasale. In this case, a
mucosal bleeding time was normal, as was a platelet count.After determining the dog
did not have a coagulopathy, skin biopsies were obtained under general anesthesia.
Unlike other skin diseases, the best lesions to sample areolderlesions.In this case,a
biopsy was obtained from the crusted and depigmented areas. To avoid excessive
hemorrhage, biopsy specimens should not be taken from the center of the nose as
there is a large vessel in this area.
This was a case of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. This disease can be treated
with a variety of drugs including glucocorticoids,Vitamin E,tetracycline and
niacinamide, and other immunosuppressive anti-inflammatory drugs.
ii. Hereditary nasal parakeratosis of Labrador retriever dogs.
10
Copyrighted material
-011.jpg
6,7:Questions
6Thelateral thighofa 4-year-old German shepherddogis shown after the haircoat
was clipped (6）.The dog was presented because of fever,depression,lameness,and
“hard skin'.Upon examination,thehard skin’was found to be diffuse exudation
matting the hair coat.The skin was painful to the dog.
i.What is the clinical term for these lesions,and what diagnostics should be
performed?
ii.What is the significance of thebreed of the dog in this case?
i.What immunological abnormalities have been found in German shepherd dogs
with this disease?
7Thelateralabdomenofa5-
year-old English bulldog is
shown.The owners were present-
ing thedogforevaluationof a
solitary,well-circumscribed,
raised lesion (7).The lesion was
firm on palpation and was
observedtoswellandbecome
edematous after manipulation.
Whatskintumorismostlikelyto
exhibit this behavior?
11
Copyrighted material
-012.jpg
6,7:Answers
6i.Deep pyoderma.The hallmarks of deep pyoderma are pain,fever, matting of the
hair coat,blood and pus exuding from the lesion,and/or necrosis of tissue. Skin
scrapings should be done to rule out demodicosis, the most common cause of deep
bacterial pyoderma in the dog. Impression smears should be taken to look for bacterial,
fungal, or other infectious agents.It is important to note the presence of cocci,rods,
and/or a mixed infection as this may impact initial treatment recommendations pending
culture and sensitivity.The presence of large numbers of extracellular bacteria not being
engulfed by neutrophils suggests a defect in the skin immune system.This can also be
observed in dogs that have received glucocorticoid therapy.Finally, this could suggest
bacterial overgrowth and be of no significance to the dog.
In the author's experience,however, impression smears with this pattern are
almost never of *no significance to the patient.Bacterial overgrowth is always due to
some underlying change in the skin’s environment. Bacterial culture and sensitivity of
the exudates should be done, especially if the dog has received previous antibiotic
therapy or glucocorticoids,and/or a mixed population of bacteria on cytological
examination of exudates is confirmed. This is a cost effective diagnostic test because
resolution of the infection willrequire 4-12 weeks of antibiotis. Skin biopsy should
also be performed to rule out other causes of deep pyoderma, such as superficial or
deep fungal infections.
i. This is a case of GSDP.This syndrome is poorly understood and the cause is
unknown. It has been proposed to be caused by a defect in the skin immune system of
certain breedinglines of German shepherddogs,and thereis often a familial history of
severe deep pyoderma. This is a disease of middle-aged dogs. Lesions can occur any-
where but are most common on the rump, dorsal back,ventral abdomen, and lateral
thighs.All above-mentioned diagnostic tests are indicated, as well as a thyroid function
test. Treatment involves clipping of the hair coat, whirlpool soaks in antibacterial
solutions (e.g. chlorhexidine),and long courses of antibiotics.Fluoroquinolone
antibiotics may be especially useful because they are concentrated in inflammatory cells
and are effective in the presence of exudates,granulation tissue,and fibrosis.Incomplete
response to antibiotic therapy and/or frequent relapses are common.Neutering and
removal from the breeding program of affected dogs and their offspring are suggested.
ii.A small number of affected dogs were studied and found tohave increased numbers
of CD8+ and decreased numbers of CD4+ and CD21+ lymphocytes, in addition to low
serum IgA concentrations. Skin biopsies from affected dogs showed a markedly lower
number of lymphocytes in the skin than in cases from other breeds (Scott et al., 2001b).
7 MCT. Canine MCTmay enlarge after manipulation due to degranulation of mast
cells.
12
Copyrighted material
-013.jpg
8,9:Questions
8 This adult dog was presented
with lameness and foot chewing.
Physical examination revealed a
nonweight-bearing lameness of
the right foreleg.The dog was
placed in lateral recumbency,and
an orthopedicexaminationwas
done to try to localize the pain.
The digits were examined; large
numbers of foreign objects were
found interdigitally and on the
plantar surface of the paw (8).
i.What is the diagnosis and
treatmentplan?
ii.After treating the dog appro-
priately,the dog is still lame.On
physical examination, the dog is
sore,stiff,andreluctanttomove.Thedogssomewhatlethargicandhasalow-grade
fever(39.4°C[103°F]).What other diseases might be tested for that may be related to
the previously diagnosed problem?
ii.what are the most common zoonotic diseases transmitted by this parasite,and
howare owners atriskforcontractingthese diseases?
9 This cat was presented for the com-
plaintofhair loss and overgrooming in
the caudal thigh region (9）.The owner
reports that the cat often jumps up,
growls,and starts bitingand grooming
itself.Flea combing was negative for
fleas or flea feces.A clinical diagnosis of
FADwasmade,and the cat’s overgroom-
ing,hair loss,and odd behavior all
resolvedwhen thecatwas treatedwitha
monthly spot-on flea control product.
The ownerwants toknowhow thiscan
be a flea problem when fleas were not
foundonexamination.Whatshould she
betold?
13
Copyrighted material
-014.jpg
8,9:Answers
8 i. Severe interdigital tick infestation. Ticks are commonly found on paws between
the toes. In this patient, large numbers of ticks were present causing lameness. Dogs
with heavy infestations should be treated with a fipronil- or permethrin-based spray.
Topical sponge-on dips labeled for fleas and ticks can be used, and repeat
applications are needed for maximum efficacy. Single ticks can be removed manually
using a metal tick remover or forceps. Because of the risk of tick borne diseases,
injury to the dog, and incomplete removal of the tick's head,owners should be
cautioned against manual detachment of the ticks. In this case,manual removal of the
ticks would be impossible,even if the dog was heavily sedated or anesthetized.It is
more practical, humane, and safe to use a parasiticidal drug to kill the ticks. The
owner should be cautioned that there might be detached,engorged ticks present
around the home,kennel,on the dog, or on other dogs in the home.The home may
need to be treated to prevent a tick infestation.Finally, a recommendation should be
made for prevention of future tick infestations.Fipronil, amitraz-impregnated collars,
and selamectin (forDermacentor variabilis)can be used toprevent tick infestations.
ii. Given the dog's recent severe tick infestation, serious consideration must be given
to a possible tick borne infection that can cause polyarthritis.Serum titers for
ehrlichiosis,Rickettsia (Rocky Mountain spotted fever), and borreliosis (Lyme’s
disease)would be indicated in this patient.Diagnosis is often difficult because many
dogs will have positive antibody titers for these diseases. In many instances, a pre-
sumptive *definitive diagnosis’ is made after response to antibiotic therapy (e.g.
doxycycline).
ii. The definition of a zoonotic disease is one that is shared by people and pets, not
just transmitted from people to animals.The most common tick borne zoonoses are
Rickettsia rickettsia RockyMountain spotted fever),hrlichia spp.,Coxiellabuneti
(Q-fever),Borrelia burgdorferia (Lyme disease),and Bartonella henselae (CSD).
There are three major ways that people are at risk for contracting a tick borne
disease.First,direct exposure to an infected tick that bites,attaches,and transmits th
disease. Second, the pet can mechanically transport unattached ticks into the home,
etc. where they crawl around and find a human host. Third, contact with infected
hemolymph from the tick can transmit infective organisms. This is most likely to
occur when owners manually remove ticks from pets.
9 FAD is a hypersensitivity reaction.The irritation is so severe that the host (dog or
cat)bites and chews at the area where the bite occurred and seems tohunt the fleas
down’ in their hair coat. This is often seen as nibbling, corncob biting, or over-
grooming.Cats are particularlyvigilant about grooming their coat if theybecome
infested with fleas.
14
Copyrighted material
-015.jpg
10,Il:Questions
10A 2-year-old hound dog crossfrom
10
Florida was presented for examination of
nonhealing wounds on the skin.The dog
and ownerhad traveledextensivelyin the
USA,especially in the mid-western region.
The dog had been used for duck and
raccoon hunting 4-6months before the
lesionswere firstnoted.The lesions drained
a thick purulent exudate and were
moderately painful but cool to the touch.
On physical examination there was
generalized lymphadenopathy anddraining
lymph nodes (10),weight loss,and cough,
but ocular examination was normal.The
dogwas febrile and depressed.
i.What are the differential diagnoses?
ii.What is the most cost effective diag-
nostic approach using only in-house
diagnostic tests?
ii.Assuming the cause of the lesion and
lymphadenopathy has not been iden-
tified,what other diagnostic tests should
be performed?
11An impression smear of the
exudates of the dog in 10 is
shown(11).
i.What is the diagnosis,andwhat
are the treatment options?
ii. How did the dog most likely
contract this organism? Is this a
zoonosis?
ii.What is the prognosis for this
disease?
15
Copyrighted material
-016.jpg
10,Il:Answers
10i.The dog's dermatological problem is a nonhealingwound.The differential
diagnoses for nonhealing wounds in dogs are legion and include deep bacterial
infections, intermediate mycoses, deep mycoses, and neoplasia.The concurrent signs
of systemic illness (fever, depression,weight loss,cough, and lymphadenopathy)
suggest that the skin lesions are secondary to an underlying systemic illness such as
infection or neoplasia.
i.The most cost effective diagnostic tests are skin scrapings to rule out demodicosis;
impression smears to look for infectious agents; lymph node aspirate to determine if
the lymphadenopathy is reactive,neoplastic, or infectious; and thoracic radiographs.
The primary goal of these initial diagnostic tests is establish the cause of the illness.
Additional diagnostic tests such aslaboratory work (including complete blood
count) can be done to assess the dog's overall health once a diagnosis has been
made.
ii. Skin biopsies, lung aspirates, and serum titers for deep fungal organisms.
11 i. Canine blastomycosis. Note the septic inflammation and the broad-based, thick-
walled, budding yeast.The treatment of choice is itraconazole. It is more effective
than ketoconazole and is less toxic than the previous treatment of choice, ampho-
tericin B.The dog should be treated with 5mg/kg POq24h for at least 60days past
clinical cure.It is important to note that treatment will require months of therapy.
i.Blastomycosis is a dimorphic fungus. It is a soil saprophyte, and it transforms into
its yeast form in tissues at body temperature. The organism requires a special
environmental niche to survive.Where outbreaks of the disease have been inves-
tigated, the common factor is sandy, acid wetland areas.Dogs used for duck and
raccoon hunting are at greater risk, possibly because the organism is common near
waterways in the midwest, especially near beaver dams.The dams create wetlands
and marshes that are ideal duck habitat.The mode of infection is via inhalation, and
dogs are much more susceptible to the disease than people.
The disease is of limited zoonotic concern as most cases of animal-to-human
transmission have occurred due to traumatic inoculation.When owners and dogs
contract the disease, it is almost always because both were exposed to the same
environmental source.
ii. In general, the prognosis for dogs is good. The two most important prognostic
indicators are whether there is brain involvement and severity of lung disease.Dogs
with brain involvement usually die.The severity of lung infiltratesmay worsen within
the first few days of therapy, most likely due to the inflammation.Approximately
 50% of dogs with severe lung involvement die as a result of respiratory failure within
thefirst7days of treatment.
16
Copyrighted material
-017.jpg
12,13:Questions
12A5-year-oldWestHighlandwhiteterrier
12
with primary seborrhea ispresented forexam-
ination for the complaint of intensepruritus of
4wecks’ duration.The diagnosis of primary
seborrheawasmade severalyears ago,and the
symptoms managed successfullywith aggressive
shampoo therapy.In the past,pruritus has not
been amajor dermatologicalproblem forthis
dog.The owner reported that the pruritus began
shortly after the dogwas boarded for 3weeks.
Skin scrapings were negative for Demodex
mites,andno fleaswere found on flea combing;
the dog receives monthly spot-on flea control.
Therewasno obviousevidence ofpyoderma
(e.g.pustules,crusts）.Itis suspected that the dog
contracted scabies while at theboardingkennel
andis treatedwith ivermectin every 2weeks for
three treatments.Six weeks after the initial
examination,the owner returns with the dog
and complainsthatthepruritusisworse,and the
dog’s skin is severely seborrheic,malodorous,greasy, and erythematous (12).
Impression smears are collected from the neck,face,andnail beds.The exudate from
the cracks and crevices of the skin isvery oily.The slides are heat fixed and stained.
i.What commonmicrobialinfectionswould animpression smear of thisdogsskin be
expected to show?
i.Assuming these two common pathogens are found,how should these combined
infectionsbe treated?
ii.What is the proposed relationship between these two organisms?
13Apair of 8-week-oldLabrador
retriever puppies is shown (13).Both dogs
were born witha normal haircoat,but
over the last severalweeksone of the
puppies has lost its hair coat.Derma-
tological examinationrevealedthinningof
the hair coat on the puppy's forehead and
completelossofthehair coaton the
ventrum.
i.What is this condition called?
ii.What would a skin biopsy be expected
toshow?
ii.What other ectodermal defect is often
present in animals with this disorder?
17
Copyrightedmaterial
-018.jpg
12,13:Answers
12 i. Concurrent staphylococcal and yeast infections are very common in pruritic
patients, especially dogs with atopy and/or seborrhea.Malassezia spp.are commonly
found on impression smears of the skin, cytological preparations of nail bed debris, and
from the scrape preparations of debris from the cracks and crevices of the skin folds.
Dogs with disorders of keratinization or those that are predisposed to inflammatory
skin diseases commonly develop overcolonization of the skin withbacteria and yeast.
i.Assuming both are present in this patient,a minimum of 30 days of concurrent
treatment for both the bacterial and yeast infection is required. There are two aspects
of treatment in any patient with a concurrent bacterial and yeast pyoderma.First,
there is the immediate treatment of the yeast dermatitis. One approach is to treat
these infections topically with soaks and bathing with antifungal shampoos that
contain miconazole and chlorhexidine,ketoconazole,or selenium disulfide,
chlorhexidine alone, or enilconazole. Lime sulfur is an antifungal agent,but there are
no reports that it is effective in the treatment of yeast dermatitis.If topical treatment
alone is used, it needs to be frequent (3-4 times per week). A second treatment
approach is with the use of systemic antifungal agents such as ketoconazole or
itraconazole; griseofulvin is not effective against Malassezia. In the author's
experience, topical therapy alone is ineffective in dogs with severe pruritus due to
combined infections.If systemic therapy is used, at least 30 days of treatment with
ketoconazole or itraconazole (5-10 mg/kg PO q24h) is recommended,and a 30 day
course of oral antibiotics is also necessary. The second aspect of therapy is to deter-
mine what triggered the overgrowth of yeast in the first place.Primary Malassezia
infections are uncommon, and overgrowth of this organism is almost always
associated with an underlying pruritic and/or seborrheic disease.
ili. There appears to be a symbiotic relationship between staphylococci and yeast that
results in the production of growth factors and a mutually beneficial micro-
environment.The clinical evidence supporting this hypothesis is that dogs with mixed
populations (bacteria and yeast) fare better clinically when both organisms are treated
as compared to only one.
13 i. Congenital hypotrichosis, an ectodermal defect. It has been reported in many
breeds of dogs and cats.Affected animals may be born without hair or lose their hair
coat over the first 4-6 weeks of their life.The hair loss is symmetrical and typically
involves the temporal region,ears,caudal thighs, and ventrum.There is no treatment
for this disease.
i. The typical skin biopsy findings are either a complete absence of hair follicles or
hypoplastic hair follicles in significantly decreased numbers.
ii.The other ectodermal defect often present is abnormal dentition.
18
Copyrighted material
-019.jpg
14,15:Questions
14
14A 3-year-old male dog,imported from Portugal,is presented with a history of
developing lesions on the face 4 months ago (14).The dogwas examined by a
veterinarian andreportedto bein good health prior tobeing imported to theUSA
1year ago.The owner reports the dog has lost some weight,is less active,and has
mildly itchy scaly skin.On physical examination,marked exfoliative dermatitis is
noted onthehead,ears,andlegs.Inaddition,thereismilddigital hyperkeratosis and
paronychia.The dog also hasmild lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly.The initial
dermatological examination includes skin scrapings (negative for Demodex mites),
flea combing (negative for fleas and other ectoparasties),a dermatophyte culture
(negative), and impression smears of the skin. On the latter, a large numbers of
exfoliated keratinocytes,rare cocci,and rare Malassezia organisms were noted.A
working diagnosisof bacterial andyeastpyoderma ismade and a 30 day course of
oral antibiotics and topical miconazole shampoois prescribed.The lymphadenopathy
andsplenomegaly areworrisome andadditional diagnosticsarerecommended,which
the owner declines.At the end of therapy,the dogis no better and has lost another
4 kg (9 Ib). The owner reports that the dog is more pruritic.
i.What are the differential diagnoses?
ii.What diagnostic tests are indicated in this patient?
ii.One of the differential diagnoses in this case has two major clinical presentations
(cutaneous/mucocutaneous and visceral) and two major geographic distributions (Old
World andNewWorld).Briefly describe the two clinical presentations and key
differencesbetween thetwogeographicforms.
15Fortaz? (ceftazidime) is an injectable drug that is often reformulated by specialty
pharmaciestomake oticeardropsfor thetreatment ofresistantPseudomonas
infections.The concentration of the desired topical solution is 5mg/ml.Ceftazidime
comes in apowder form in a500mgvial.Howwould100mlof a 5mg/mlsolution
be compounded?
19
Copyrighted material
-020.jpg
14,15:Answers
14i.There are many causes of exfoliative dermatitis;however, the signs of systemic
illness in this patient help limit the differential diagnoses to lupus erythematosus,PF,
necrolytic migratory erythema, cutaneous lymphoma, and leishmaniasis.
i. Animals with skin disease and signs of systemic illness require an aggressive work-
up.In this patient,a complete blood count,serum chemistry profile,antinuclear ant
body test,lymph node aspirate, abdominal and thoracic radiographs, and bone
marrow aspirate were performed. This was a case of leishmaniasis, and it was diag-
nosed by finding organisms on skin biopsy, lymph node aspirate, and bone marrow
aspirate.This disease is a protozoal infection common in dogs and humans,but it can
be seen in cats and other animals.The disease has a worldwide distribution, but it is
endemic in the Mediterranean region and Portugal,South and Central America,and
in several areas of the USA.It is transmitted by bloodsucking sandflies and causes
 granulomatous inflammation, immune complex deposition, and related diseases.
Themost common skinfindings are exfoliative dermatitis with silvery white scales
on the face,ears,and legs.Nasodigitalhyperkeratosis can occur along with ulcerative
dermatitis. Signs of systemic illness are present in about 50% of all cases. This disease
is considered incurable and relapses are common.Meglumine antimonate has been
used to treat dogs with remission rates over 75%. Other drugs include sodium
stibogluconate and allopurinol.This is considered a zoonotic disease, and dogs may
be a reservoir of infection for people.
ii. In people, leishmaniasis has two major clinical presentations: cutaneous and muco-
cutaneous or visceral. In dogs, symptoms usually involve both the skin and viscera.
Old World leishmaniasis in dogs is caused almost exclusively by L. infantum or,
less commonly, L. tropica and is transmitted by sandflies. It is most common in the
Mediterranean basin and in Portugal. New World leishmaniasis is endemic in
northern and mid-South America, Central America, and is becoming more common
in Mexico,the states of Texas and Okalahoma, and the east coast of the USA.The
most common species associated with New World disease are L. mexicana (complex),
L.braziliensis (complex), and L. chagasi. Over 90% of dogs with overt disease have
cutaneous involvement and lymphadenopathy (Slappendel and Ferrer,1998).
15 Ceftazidine (500 mg vial) can be reconstituted in a 100 ml NaCl 0.9% IV bag to
make a solution of 5 mg/ml (500mg/100 ml = 5 mg/ml ceftazidime [powder volume
is insignificant at this volume]).
Note:The author uses ceftazidime for at least 4 weeks of therapy.The reconstituted
drug is only stable for 1 week when refrigerated.In order to treat the patient for
4 weeks,the solution is divided into four portions of 25 ml.The three vials of 25 ml
for treatment weeks 2, 3, and 4 are kept in the freezer at the patient’s home until
needed.
20
Copyrighted material
-021.jpg
16,17:Questions
16This3-year-oldindoor-outdoorcat
16a
was presented for a second opinion.
The owner had been to several
veterinarianswith the complaint that
the cat frequently shook its head and
scratched atits ears.Previous diag-
nostics included ear swabs for mites
(negative),cytological examination of
ear debris (no organisms found), and
flea combing (negative). The owner
practiced intermittent flea control.
Topical glucocorticoidsprovidedrelief,
but the cat's symptoms always
returnedwithin several days of discon-
tinuing therapy. On this occasion,the
cat was presented for severe self-
mutilation of the head and neck (16a).
Upon examination,severe linear
excoriations from the cats claws were
present on the cat's head and neck.The
ear canals appearednormal upon
16b
otoscopicexamination.Earswabswere
negative for mites and microbial
organisms.Dermatological examina-
tionoftheskinrevealederythematous
nail beds and interdigital erythema.
Skin scrapings of the head andnail bed
revealed the organism shown (16b).
i. What is the diagnosis and treat-
ment?
i.Whatisthezoonoticimplicationof
this infestation?
ii.Dogs and cats infested with this
organism oftenhave positiveintradermal skin testreactions towhichmite(s)andwhy
is this clinically significant?
17What areL-form bacteria?
21
Copyrighted material
-022.jpg
16,17:Answers
16 i.The organism is Otodectes cynotis (ear mite).Pruritus from ear mites can be due
to heavyinfestations or,asin this case,due to a hypersensitivityreaction tojust a few
mites. In some cases of ear mite infestations and/or hypersensitivity reactions, mites
may be found in and around the nail beds. In multiple animal situations, systemic
treatments may be the treatment of choice,e.g.spot-on fipronil, moxidectin
(0.2 mg/kg orally or subcutaneously twice at 10 day intervals), ivermectin (200 μg/kg
orally or subcutaneously twice at 10-14 day intervals),ivermectin or milbemycin
spot-on treatment for the ears, or selamectin (two treatments at 30 day intervals). In
this case,a product containing glucocorticoids would be appropriate to alleviate the
intense pruritus. The ears should be cleaned and treated with an appropriate product
for at least 4 weeks.Because the mites will migrate on the body, as happened in this
case,the cat should be treated with a flea control product tokill migrating ear mites.
Failure to do so may result in treatment failure. Concurrent treatment with a topical
ear mite treatment and flea control product resulted in resolution of the cat's pruritus.
i. Although rare, Otodectes cynotis is considered a zoonotic disease. Lesions in
people have been reported and consist of a papular eruption on the hands and arms
(Harwick,1978). In one anecdotal report (Lopez, 1993), a veterinarian took mite
infested ear mite debris and placed it into his own ear, on several occasions. He was
able successfully to infest himself with ear mites and reported intense itching.What
was most interesting was his observation that the miteswere most active at night and
could be heard chewing and moving around his ear. This suggests that ear mite
preparations would be best applied in the evening.On a more practical level,this also
suggests that veterinarians and owners cleaning the ears of pets with ear mite
infestations should practice excellent hand washing hygiene post-treatment.
ii.Cats and dogs infested with Otodectes cynotis may have positive intradermal skin
test reactions to the house dust mites,Dermatophagoides farinae and D.
pteronyssinus (Saridomichelakis,1999).These reported reactions become negative
after the earmite infestation is eradicated.This is clinically relevant because it would
lead to a ‘false positive’ reaction on an intradermal skin test and a misdiagnosis of
atopic dermatitis in a patient with a parasitic infestation.The importance of house
dust mites as causes of atopic dermatitis or asthma in cats is increasing, the most
likely reason being increased recognition of house dust mites as an allergen.
Therefore, car mite infestations should be ruled out as a poible cause of pruritus
before pursuing allergy testing and/or immunotherapy.
17 L-form bacteria are partially cell wall deficient bacteria that resemble Mycoplasma.
Most reported infections have been associated with abscesses and polyarthropathies.
22
Copyrightedmaterial
-023.jpg
18,19:Questions
18 This dog was presented
18
forunilateralperiocularin-
flammation(18).Three weeks
ago an infected meibomian
glandwas lanced and treated
with a topical ophthalmic
ointment.The meibomian
gland infection resolved,but
then the periocular area
became inflamed,and there
was no response to several
different antibiotic/gluco-
corticoid ophthalmic prepara-
tions. There was also no
response to a14 day course oforal antibiotics.Skin scrapings and fungal culture are
negative.
i.What is themost likely diagnosis?How could this be confirmed andwhat is the
best course of treatment?
i. What is a predictable drug reaction versus an unpredictable drug reaction?
i.List the common cutaneous patterns or conditions associatedwith adverse drug
reactions.
19A7-year-oldDLHwhitecatisexaminedfor
19
the complaint of multiple nonhealing wounds on
thelefthind leg（19),andFNAperformed torule
outa mast cell tumor.TheFNA isconsistentwith
anepithelialcell tumor.Histologicalexamination
of a skin biopsy specimen reveals that it themost
common skin tumors of cats.
i.What is it,andwhat are the most common skin
tumorsofcats?
i.What is the prognosisfor this tumor?
ii.Is the behavior of this tumor different in dogs?
23
Copyrighted material
-024.jpg
18,19:Answers
18 i. Localized drug reaction or irritant reaction to one ormore of the components in
the topical ophthalmic preparations.The unilateral acute nature of the lesions makes
allergic disease unlikely. If the lesions were bilateral, allergic disease (atopy or food
allergy) would be suspected. The diagnosis can be confirmed via provocative challenge
exposure.The best course of treatment is to discontinue all topical therapy to the
affected area. If this is a case of a localized drug reaction or an irritant reaction, the
lesion should quickly resolve.In this patient, a localized drug reaction was found to
topical neomycin sulfate, a drug present in all of the topical preparations used pre-
viously.Drug reactions to topical neomycin are very common,particularly in the ears.
ii.Predictable drug reactions are usually dose associated and are related to the
pharmacology of the drug.An example of this would be vomiting associated with
erythromycin administration.Unpredictable drugreactions are related toan
individual animal's immunological response to the drug or to genetic factors
associated with the breed. This type of drug reaction could be dose related. An
example of this is ivermectin toxicosis in collie dogs.Sensitivity is not uniform in the
breed, and toxicity in susceptible individuals can be dose related. Sensitive individuals
tolerate the low dose associated with heartworm prevention but not the high dose
needed for treatment of parasitic infestations.
ii.Common cutaneous patterns or conditions include urticaria-angioedema,macular-
papular eruptions,autoimmune-like disease,erythema multiforme,toxic epidermal
necrolysis,pruritusand self-trauma,njection sitereactions,allergiccontact dermatits
of the ears,vasculitis,fixed drug eruptions,and lichenoid skin disease.
19 i. Basal cell tumor, the most common skin tumor of cats.The most common skin
tumors of cats,in descending order,arebasal cell tumor,mast celltumor,squamous
cell carcinoma, and fibrosarcoma.
i.Basal cell tumors commonly occur on the head,neck, thorax,and limbs. Most
tumors are solitary, but they can be multiple. They are typically well-encapsulated,
well-demarcated, and hairless. The prognosis is good if the tumor is excised
completely. Basal cell tumors can be treated by surgical excision, electrosurgery,
cryosurgery, or observation without treatment. These tumors have a low incidence of
recurrence and tend not to metastasize.In this cat,the tumor was surgically removed,
however,wound closure was problematic due to the location.The cat required
several surgical procedures to close the defect.
ii.Basal cell tumors in dogs are less common (an estimated 4-12% of all skin
tumors), tend to occur in older dogs, and cocker spaniel and poodle breeds seem to
have an increased incidence. These tumors have a high mitotic rate for a benign
tumor.Rare recurrences have been reported in dogs.
24
Copyrightedmaterial
-025.jpg
20,2l:Questions
20A 1-year-old female cocker
20
spaniel dogwas presented for
head shaking and, more im-
portantly,because it‘stank’
(20）.Physical examination
revealed that the dog's hair
coat was greasy, a secondary
bacterial pyoderma(charac-
terized by intact pustules and
epidermal collarettes) was
present,and the footpads were
hyperkeratotic.The haircoat
on the face, interdigital areas,
andventralneck was matted
with a malodorous oily yellow material.Theselesions have been present since the dog
was 4months of age.The owner would like the skin disease resolvedso that the dog
could bebred.
i.What should the owner be told?
i.Which of the retinoids has been most been most effective in the management of
disorders of keratinization?
ii.Retinoids have also been used in the treatment of what other diseases?
21 A dog was presented to the surgery
21
department for a femoral fracture.During
the case management,the hair over the
lumbosacral area was clippedfor placement
of an epidural catheter for the purpose of
pain management. The fracture was
repaired and healedwithout problem.
However,the owners are distressed that the
hair has not regrown over the lumbosacral
area (21).Large breed dogs that have their
hair coatclipped over the lumbosacral area
may bepredisposed to what temporary
condition?
25
Copyrighted material
-026.jpg
20,2l:Answers
20 i.There are two important points to discuss with the owner.First, the dog has
severe seborrhea.The yellowish debris on the face,ears,and hair coat is consistent
with primary seborrhea. The history of lesion development when the dog was
<4 months of age strongly supports a diagnosis of primary seborrhea of cocker
spaniels. This dog's skin disease will be chronic and can be controlled, but not cured.
This dog will require life-long therapy for this skin disease that will include special
grooming (keeping the hair coat short),frequent bathing (2-3 times a week or more)
in medicated shampoos, and treatment of recurrent yeast and bacterial infections.
Second,is that primary seborrhea is an inherited disorder seen in many breeds of
dogs,including cocker spaniels.This dog has a particularly severe form of the disease,
especially since it started at such a young age.Breeding is not recommended. This
patientwas evaluated for dermatological and medical causes ofprimary seborrhea
and none were found.A final diagnosis was primary seborrhea along with secondary
bacterial and yeast pyoderma.Afterthe secondary infections were resolved, aggressive
topical therapy was required to control this primary disorder of keratinization.The
dog’s hair coat had to bekept short, the ears had to be cleaned daily,and topical otic
steroids instilled to control the seborrheic otitis.The owners had to bathe the dog
every other day without fail in a tar and sulfur shampoo, benzoyl peroxide shampoo,
or an antifungal shampoo,and these topical shampoos were alternated.
ii.The most commonly used retinoids in veterinary dermatology are isotretinoin,
etretinate (no longer available), and acitretin.Etretinate was very effective in the
treatment of primary idiopathic seborrhea of cocker spaniel and springer spaniel
dogs. It was not found to be very effective in West Highland white terrier, basset
hound, or collie dogs. This drug is no longer available because tissue residues in
people can persist for years,and the drug is very teratogenic.It has been replaced by
acitretin, a free radical metabolite of etretinate.
ii.Retinoids have been used to treat ichthyosis, squamous cell carcinoma,kera-
toacanthomas,sebaceous adentitis,cutaneous lymphoma,and color dilution alopecia.
21Post-clipping alopecia.This is an idiopathic skin condition characterized by the
failure of hair to regrow for as long as 12-24 months after clipping. It is usually seen
in large breed dogs with thick hair coats and tends to be localized to the dorsal
lumbosacral area. The etiology is unknown, but it is believed to be due to follcular
arrest.Additionally, the lack of hair regrowth is due to the long hair cycle of the hairs
of this area.It is commonly seen in dogs clipped to remove hair coat mats,but it is
observed in dogs clipped for the placement of catheters for epidural anesthesia,
myelograms,or surgery.
26
Copyrightedmaterial
-027.jpg
22,23:Questions
22a
22b
22A 2-year-old male castrated golden retriever dogwas presented for exercise
intolerance,weightgain,andexcesive shedding(22a）.Inaddition,theownerreported
the doghaslosthis obedience training²and sleeps all of the time.Physical examination
reveals an obese dogwith a heart rate of 45 beats per minute.The dog's face has a
tragic expression.Large clumps of hair are easily epilated from the hair coat (22b）.
i.What is themost likely cause of the dog’s clinical signs,andwhat diagnostic tests
should be performed?
ii.If one single diagnostic testwas availabletoperform in thispatient what would it
be,and how should it beinterpreted?
ii.In this patient,basalT3andT4were unusually elevated.What is themost likely
explanation?
23A young,adult male,out-
23
door catwas presented fora
second opinion.The owners
reported the cat had hada
nonhealing wound on the
hind leg for over 2 months
(23）.Previous skin biopsy
findingswere consistent with
a bacterial pyoderma;how-
ever,lesions didnot respond to appropriate antibiotic therapy.Impression smears of
thelesion and cultures didnotgrowany fungal or atypical mycobacterial organisms.
The lesion started with a bite wound,and over the last severalmonths had
progressed. On physicalexamination,periodontal disease and stomatitis were
present；however,the owners were not aware if this was a recent event.The only
otherfindings on physical examinationwere markedweight loss,mild dehydration,
and an oily matted hair coat.Before performing any further dermatological testing,
what screeningtests are indicated in thiscat?
27
Copyrighted material
-028.jpg
22,23:Answers
22 i. Canine hypothyroidism.The most common causes of naturally acquired hypo-
idiopathic thyroid necrosis and atrophy. Diagnosis of hypothyroidism can be difficult
and expensive,particularlyif thepatient is exhibitingnondermatological signs.Inthese
patients,complete blood counts,serum chemistry panels,urinalyses,and skinbiopsies
may be needed to narrow the differential diagnoses. In this patient,the clinical suspicion
is high; therefore,thyroid function testing would be an appropriate first diagnostic.
il. The single most reliable test for hypothyroidism is a thyroid biopsy (which is
impractical excluding situations where a tumor is expected).Although tempting in
this patient,response to thyroid hormone supplementation as a diagnostic test is not
recommended.Evaluation of thyroid hormone supplementation is unreliable since
thyroid hormone supplementation will produce changes in attitude,activity obesity,
and hair growth in nonhypothyroid dogs.Furthermore, the administration of a
thyroid hormone supplement to euthyroid dogs is not without risk; complications
from iatrogenic hyperthyroidism can occur.
Thyroid function testing using TSH is cost effective and routinely performed.
Unfortunately,bovine TSH is not available worldwide, and human TSH is too
expensive to be used routinely.Thus,thyrotropin releasing hormone is an alternative
function test. Normal dogs show a 1.2-fold increase in T4 above the baseline,
assuming thebaseline samples are within normal range.Because so many factors can
affect thyroid hormone concentrations, simultaneous measurement of multiple
thyroid hormone concentrations is recommended.Measurement of fT4
concentrations by dialysis is the most accurate single test, but this test is expensive
and not always available. In general, single measurements of T3 or T4 are rarely
diagnostic unless they are within the upper limits of normal.The author recommends
evaluating a combination of fT4, T4,and cTSH concentrations, along with
consideration of the dog's clinical signs.This dog was hypothyroid.
ii. If basal T4 and T3 concentrations were unexpectedly elevated, the most likely
explanationwouldbe thepresence of T3 and/orT4 antibodies.
23 This is a male outdoor cat with a history of a nonhealing wound. In addition, the
cat is showing early signs of systemic illness (i.e.weight loss,dehydration,matted hair
coat).It should be tested for FeLV and/or FIV.This cat was FeLV-positive and was
also severely anemic upon further testing. Skin diseases associated with both of these
two immunosuppressive feline viruses include recurrent bacterial skin infections,
nonhealing wounds,exfoliative dermatitis, generalized pruritus,recurrent abscesses,
chronic dermatophytosis, demodicosis, and oral disease.
28
Copyrightedmaterial
-029.jpg
24,25:Questions
24
24An intactpustule on theventral abdomen ofa dogwith a superficial bacterial
pyoderma is shown (24).
i.If a bacterial culture of thislesionwasperformed,what primary pathogen would be
expected to be found?What is the difference between‘resident’and‘transient’flora?
ii.What enzymes and toxins are producedbypathogenic staphylococci?
ii.What is the relationship between enzymes,toxins,and virulence factors in the
developmentofbacterialpyoderma?
25 A dogwas presented for a
25
‘rash’on the ventral abdomen
(25).Physical examination
revealedlesionsontheven-
trum,medial thigh,and lateral
thoraxregion.Closeexam-
ination of the patient revealed
intactapuleutuleu
pustules,and epidermal colla-
rettes.Skin scraping and flea
combings were negative.
i.What is the clinical diagnosis?
ii.This infection will require
21-30 days of antibiotic
therapy;infections are treated for at least 1week past clinical cure.Whatmakes an
‘idealantibiotic for treatment of bacterial pyoderma?
ii.List the antibioticsthat are suitableforfirst occurrence orempirical therapy,and
list the antibiotics that are suitable forrecurrent or deeppyodermas.
29
Copyrighted material
-030.jpg
24,25:Answers
24 i.Staphylococcus intermedius.This is a Gram-positive,beta hemolytic,coagulase-
positive cocci.This organism is probably the primary cutaneous pathogen of cats too.
Bacteria cultured from normal skin are considered to be normal inhabitants of the
skin. They may be resident flora (organisms that successfully multiply on healthy
skin) or transients (organisms that do not usually multiply on normal skin）.There is
debate as to whether or not S. intermedius is part of the resident or transient flora.
Regardless,overgrowth of normal bacterial flora thatresults in clinical disease
requiresmedical treatment.
ii.Toxins and enzymes produced by pathogenic staphylococci include toxin TSS-1
(toxic shock syndrome-1),which causes toxic syndrome in people;protein A,which is
able to bind the Fcportion of immunoglobulinswith pro-inflammatory effects;the
enzyme coagulase,which allows for the deposition of fibrin on bacterial cells
inhibiting the ability of neutrophils and macrophages; and beta-lactamase,which is
responsive for resistance against nonprotected penicillins (Noli, 2002).
ii. To date, no difference has been found between the toxins and enzymes from
bacterial isolates from healthy dogs and dogs with bacterial pyoderma. However, a
difference in the production of a virulence factor that facilitates the adherence of
bacteria to host skin has been noted. Pathogenic bacteria show increased adhesion to
extracellular matrixproteinswhen compared to bacteria fromnormal dogs
(McEwan,2000;Noli,2002).
25i. Superficial bacterial pyoderma.The clinical signs are classic for bacterial
ed sd se ed e o ss  r go e d s u 
pustule, crusted papule/pustule,and epidermal collarette.The most common clinical
signs of deep pyoderma areblood,pus,matting of the hair coat,and cutaneous pain.
These are absent, as are hemorrhagic bullae; therefore, a deep bacterial infection is
not present.
i.Antibiotics should have a spectrum of activity that includes Stapbylococcus
intermedius,reach high skin concentrations,be bactericidal,have few adverse effects,
should be easy to administer,unlikely to cause bacterial resistance,and be inexpens-
ive(Noli,2002).
ii.First occurrence superficial bacterial pyoderma cases can almost alwaysbe treated
empirically. The two most common reasons to do a bacterial culture and sensitivity in
these patients are the finding of a mixed bacterial population on cytological exam-
ination,or knowledge that the animal has a previoushistory of antibiotic therapy for
other reasons.Erythromycin,lincomycin, clindamycin,and trimethoprim-sulfa are
common first choice antibiotics for empirical therapy. Cephalosporin, amoxicillin
with clavulanic acid, and fluoroquinolone antibiotics are used in cases of deep
pyoderma.Treatment should be based upon culture and sensitivity in these cases.
30
Copyrighted material
-031.jpg
26,27:Questions
26 A 9-month-old cat was pre-
26a
sented for a routine health exam-
ination after being adopted from
an animal shelter.The unique
coloring of the cat's hair coat
especially impressed the owners,
particularly the“white tipson the
ends of the hairs (26a）.The
owners reported the cat to be
mildly pruritic.Flea combings
were done,and an organism was
found;several of the hairs with
white tipswere examined micro-
scopically.The only other pet in
the house was a dog, which was
unaffected.
26b
i.Amicroscopicview of awhite
tip’on the cat's coat is shown
(26b),and of an organism (26c)
foundon flea combingof the hair
coat.What are these organisms,
andhow should the catbe treated?
ii.Three days after treating the
cat,the owner calls. Both of her
children have been diagnosed with
‘what the cat has'! The owner is
very agitated that she wasnot
warnedof thezoonoticimplica-
tions.What are the zoonotic im-
26c
plications of this cat's infestation?
ii.What is the genus and species
of this organism,and what is
unique about it in cats?Why is
this parasite more common in the
winter than in the summer?
27What are the three major categories of animal shampoos?
31
Copyrighted material
-032.jpg
26,27:Answers
26 i. Louse and louse egg or ‘nit’ cemented to the hair shaft. This cat has pediculosis.
The cat should be washed to remove mechanically as many of the lice and louse nits
as possible prior to treatment.Removal of the louse nits can be facilitated with a rinse
of a 1:4 dilution of household white vinegar in water; this loosens the cement
attachment of the nit to the hair.A thorough washing with a flea shampoo should
follow.After the cat is dry, it should be treated for 30 days with a flea control
product labeled for use in cats.Topical spot-on products as sole therapy are best
avoided; a thorough spraying of the hair coat is needed. The author has found
fipronil spray repeated again in 30 days is very effective.Ivermectin is effective if used
at a dose of 200 μg/kg orally or subcutaneously every 2 weeks for 6 weeks.
Imidacloprid spot-on is effective,but it is important to repeat treatments and to
remove mechanically lice and louse eggsfrom the hairs to ensure eradication.
i. Lice are host specific, and the children were not infested from the cat.Lice can act
as an intermediate host for Dipylidium caninum, the dog tapeworm. Although rare,
people can become infected with D. caninum; this most commonly occurs in children
that play with infected dogs or cats (Turner, 1962). Infected people may develop
abdominal pain, anorexia, diarrhea,and anal pruritus.
ii.Cats have only one species of louse that infests them,the biting louse,Felicola
subrostratuas.The reproductive system of the louse is affected by temperature.In the
winter,the temperature in thehair coat andon the skin surface ismost conducive to
louse fecundity.In the summer, the temperature at the surface of the skin can be
significantly higher than the ambient temperature; the higher temperature at the skin
surface has an inhibitory effect on reproduction of lice.
27 Cleansing, antiparasiticidal, and medicated’ shampoos. The purpose of cleansing
shampoos is to remove dirt and debris from the hair coat.These are commonly sold
over the counter asgrooming shampoos'.Antiparasiticidal shampoos are essentially
‘flea shampoos'. They are essentially a cleansing shampoo with an added anti-
parasiticidal drug (e.g. pyrethrins). The amount of insecticide in the shampoo is too
small to be effective as a primary method of parasite control.Medicated’ shampoos
can be subdivided into several groups depending upon the primary activity or active
ingredient. Antimicrobial shampoos are used to treat bacterial or fungal (usually
Malassezia) infections. Common antibacterial agents are chlorhexidine and benzoyl
peroxide. Common antifungal shampoos may contain chlorhexidine,ketoconazole,or
miconazole.Antipruritic shampoos are usually a combination of a cleansing shampoo
and an anti-inflammatory agent such as 1% hydrocortisone, 2% diphenhydramine,
1%pramoxine,or colloidal oatmeal.Antiseborrheic shampoos contain salicylic acid,
sulfur, tar, or selenium sulfide.
32
Copyrightedmaterial
-033.jpg
28,29:Questions
28A10-year-oldmalemixedbreed
28
dog ispresented for evaluation of a
mass in the right axilla.The owners
report that the mass has been slow to
develop and hasbeen bothersome to
the dog only recently.The location and
size of themass are making it difficult
for the dog to walk.Physical exam-
inationrevealsa firm10cm diameter
mass in the right caudal axilla.The
skin over themass is freely moveable;
however,themass isfirmly attachedto
the tissue beneath.A FNA isperformed and it isnoted that the specimen disappears
after being dipped into the fixative.A tissue biopsy of the mass is obtained prior to
surgical removal.A photomicrograph of a sectionof the skinbiopsy is shown(28）.
i.Based uon thehistory,A findings,and skinbiopsy,whatisthediagnosis,and
what is the treatment of choice?A tentative diagnosis can often be made in-house.
How is that done?
iWhat is an infiltrative lipoma, and how does it differ from a lipoma?
ii.Is calcium chloride a treatment option in this case?
29The head andneckofa middle-
29
aged cocker spaniel dog with a history
of seborrhea are shown (29).The dog
was presented for evaluation of multi-
focal areas of hair loss and pigmenta-
tion.The hyperpigmentation is,in
fact,an area of thick crusting that can
bepeeledoff torevealanerythematous
moist area. Careful examination
revealed numerous other lesions like
this on the dorsum. Pustules, papules,
and epidermal collarettes are present
on the ventrum.This lesion is com-
monincockerspaniel dogs,especially thosewithprimary seborrhea.
i.What is the clinical diagnosis?What diagnostic tests are indicated?The owner has
financial constraints andrefuses diagnostic tests;what therapy should be rec-
ommended based upon the clinical diagnosis?
i.Whatwould the histological description of abiopsy specimen from a dogwith
primary seborrhea be expected toreport?
ii.What adverse effects can occur with the use of tar-based shampoos?
33
Copyrighted material
-034.jpg
28,29:Answers
28 i. Lipoma.This is the most common skin tumor of dogs with surgical removal
being the treatment of choice.Lipomas do not need to be surgically removed unless
e sr p r d  es ss 
area are common in dogs and can cause difficulties with locomotion. FNA of a
lipoma will often reveal an acellular aspirate that glistens.When the specimen is
placed into routine fixative, the lipid dissolves.
i.An infiltrative lipoma is an uncommon neoplasm with a predilection for the limbs.
These tumors, unlike the typical lipoma, are large, poorly circumscribed, soft, deep
masses that invade between muscles,fascial planes, tendons,and even into joint
capsules.These tumors are associated with dysfunction and pain.They are most
common in the Labrador retriever and doberman pinscher breeds. Complete surgical
excision is difficult.
ii. Intralesional injection of 10% calcium chloride will cause regression of the lesion,
but it is not recommended as a treatment because it causes irritation and necrosis.
29 i. Superficial bacterial pyoderma causing a ‘seborrheic plaque'. Diagnostic tests
should include skin scrapings for mites, impression smears to look for concurrent
yeast infections and,possibly,a dermatophyte culture.Treating skin diseases without
adequate confirmation of the diagnosis is always a lessthan satisfactory approach to
patient care. Canine pyoderma frequently is a clinical diagnosis;impression smears
are needed to see if there are concurrent yeast infections.
The most likely diagnosis in this dog is a bacterial infection with a possible
secondary yeast infection. These hyperpigmented seborrheic plaques are very common
in dogs with primary seborrhea and are caused by bacterial infections. Careful
examination of the patient may reveal scales piercing hairs,another common clinical
sign of a bacterial infection. One cost effective strategy would be to treat the dog with
oral cephalexin for 30 days and have the owner bathe the dog daily in ketoconazole
or a combination antibacterial/antifungal shampoo to treat for the presumed
secondary yeast infection.If there is inadequate response to therapy in 30 days,
diagnostic testingwill be needed.
i. In an uncomplicated case of primary seborrhea, the most common histological
findings would include: hyperplastic, superficial, perivascular dermatitis with ortho-
or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis. The thickness of the basal cell layer is usually
disproportionate to the thickness of the cornified epitheilium; the basal cell layer is
only1-3 cells thick while there is marked hyperkeratosis present.None of these key
clinical signs may be seen if the skin site surface is wiped,scrubbed, or tampered with
prior to biopsy.
ii. Tar is odorous, potentially irritating, photosensitizing, and carcinogenic (Scott et
al.,2001d).
34
Copyrighted material
-035.jpg
30,31:Questions
30
30A5-year-old dachshund dogwithbilateralpinnal alopecia is shown(30).Thehair
loss has been slowly progressive,is limited to the ear pinnae,and the dogis
nonpruritikinrapingsarenegativesarefungalcturekinbiopsyreveal
dimunitive hair follicles.
i.What is the most likely cause?
ii.There arefour classic syndromes in dogs with this disorder.What are they?
31 A photomicrograph of normal dog skin is
31
shown(31).
i.What are thethreemajor layersof theskin
and the layers of the epidermis?
ii. What adnexal structures are produced in
the skin?
i.What are tylotrich hairs,andwhere are
they located?
35
Copyrighted material
-036.jpg
30,31:Answers
30i.The most likely cause is canine pinnal alopecia or pattern baldness.This is a
commonly observed condition in such breeds as dachshunds,chihuahuas,Boston
terriers, whippets, and Italian greyhounds. It can also be seen in cats. The cause is
unknown,but it is most likely a heritable condition.No treatment is needed,as this is
considered a cosmetic disorder.There are anecdotal reports that the condition may
respond to oral melatonin (3-6 mg q8h).
i.The first syndrome is shown in this case, pinnal alopecia.The second syndrome
occurs in American and Portuguese water spaniel dogs and is characterized by hair
loss on the ventral neck, caudomedial thighs,and tail beginning about 6 months of
age. The third syndrome ocurs in greyhound dogs, and affected dogs lose their hair
on the lateral thighs.This must be differentiated from bald thigh syndrome in
greyhounds,which usually has an endocrine cause.The final syndrome is seen in
breeds such as dachshunds,Boston terriers,chihuahuas,whippets,Manchester
terriers, and greyhounds. At about 6 months of age, affected dogs lose their hair on
the post-auricular area, ventral neck, and ventrum (Scott et al., 2001h).
31i.The three major layers of the skin are the epidermis,dermis,and hypodermis
(subcutis or panniculus).The layers of the epidermis from proximal to distal are the
stratum basale,stratum spinosum,stratum granulosum,stratum lucidum,and
stratum corneum.The stratum basale,or basal layer rests upon the basement
membrane and is responsible for the production of new epidermal cells. In the
spinous or prickle cell layer, the keratinocyte cytoskeleton is produced.In the
stratum granulosum or granular layer, keratohyalin is produced and deposited. Cells
in this layer are flattened and basophilic, and granules’ can be seen in the
cytoplasm.Cells in the stratum lucidum orclear layer,are anuclear,and this layer
is rich in protein-bound lipids.This layer is best developed in footpads and can also
be seen in the nasal planum. It is not seen in other areas of the skin.The most distal
layer or stratum corneum,is the skin layer in contact with the environment.It is the
fully cornified layer and is made of flattened, anuclear, densely packed keratinocytes.
ii.The skin produces hairs and hair follicles, sebaceous glands, sweat glands,
specialized glands (i.e. anal sacs, tail gland, glands of the external ear canal, and
circumanal glands), claws,nails, and the horny layer of the skin.
ii. Tylotrich hairs are large hair follicles scatered throughout the body. The hairs are
larger than normal hairs and contain one large hair surrounded by a complex of
neurovascular tissue at the level of the sebaceous gland.They are believed to be rapid
adapting mechanoreceptors.
36
Copyrighted material
-037.jpg
32,33:Questions
32a
32b
32A5-year-old mixed breed dogwas presentedforlameness and sloughing
(onychomadesis)of all of thenails.The ownerreported that the lesions started on one
paw, and then gradually developed on all four paws over 2-3 months.Examination
revealed the nails were separating at the clawbed exposing thevascular corium
(quick)(32a,b).Nails that had sloughed and regrown were misshapen, soft
(onychomalacia),and brittle.The footpads were normal and there wereno other
signs of skin disease.Previous fungal cultures were negative,and the condition did
not respond to a 4week course oforal antibiotics.The thirddigit of an affected
dewclaw was amputated and submitted for histological examination.The biopsy
report found lichenoid interface dermatitis.
i.What is the most likely diagnosis?
i.How should this be treated?
i.List the most common parasitic,infectious,immune-mediated,and neoplastic
diseases that affect the claw.
33Theowner of the dogshown com-
33
plained the dog's ear tips ‘do not heal.
According to the owner,there is no
history of trauma to the ear tip.However,
the ear tips intermittently ulcerate,bleed,
crust,and then healvery slowly.The ear
margin is cracked,fissured,and slightly
deformed although muchof thelesion is
hidden because of the hair coat (33）.The
doghasno other history of skin disease.
i.What is this lesion?
ii.What is the most common etiology?
ii.How should this lesion be managed?
37
Copyrighted material
-038.jpg
32,33:Answers
32 i.Lichenoid interface dermatitis is most often associated with immune-mediated
diseases, particularly lupus. Lupoid dermatoses can be localized to the face (e.g.
‘classic’ cutaneous lupus-erythematosus), the face and skin, a region of the body
(nails), or generalized (i.e. systemic lupus erythematosus). In this case,the most likely
diagnosis is symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy.The biopsy findings are compatible
with lupoid dermatitis, and the lesions involve all four feet, hence the name
‘symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy'. Currently, it is unknown if this is a specific
disease entity or a reaction pattern. The latter is most likely, and there may be
numerous triggers. Overvaccination has been proposed as a possible cause, but no
evidence to confirm this has been published.Anecdotal reports indicate some of these
casesmay be triggeredbyfood allergies.
i.These dogs are very lame,and they often snag avulsed nails on carpeting or while
walking.The sloughing nail should be avulsed and removed under general anesthesia,
if necessary. Mild cases can be treated with a combination of tetracycline and niacina-
mide, or essential fatty acids (omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids). Severely affected
dogs respond to oral glucocorticoids within a few weeks. The author uses a combi-
nation of glucocorticoids and pentoxifylline for 4-6 weeks until the sloughing halts,
and then continues with pentoxifylline therapy alone.Although more expensive,
cyclosporin A is another option for therapy and may be as effective as prednisone.
Systemic anti-inflammatory therapyvaries dependingupon the severity of thelesions;
if therapy is stopped symptoms will recur, and if the underlying cause remains un-
known.
ii.Parasitic causes include demodicosis,hookworm dermatitis, and leishmaniasis.
Infectious causes include bacterial and yeast infections along with dermatophytes, such
as Trichophyton spp. infections.The intermediate and deep mycoses (blastomycosis,
cryptococcosis,and sporotrichosis) can also cause disease.Lupus erythematosus,
bullous pemphigoid, and pemphigus vulgaris can cause claw disorders while
pemphigus foliaceus usually causes purulent paronychia and footpad hyperkeratosis.
Neoplastic diseases associated with the claw include squamous cell carcinoma,
subungual keratoacanthoma,inverted papillomas,and sweat gland carcinomas.
33 i. Ear tip necrosis.
i. Vasculitis or thromboembolism.
ii.These cases are difficult to manage as cycles of active necrosis and healing occur
repeatedly. Laser surgery can repair the cosmetic defect, but there is a high risk of
lesions developing yet again. In cases of thromboembolism, surgery may be helpful.
Dogs with vasculitis may respond to glucocorticoids and/or pentoxifylline.
38
Copyrighted material
-039.jpg
34,35:Questions
34 The owners of a pet store presented
34
this puppy for examination for
primarily ‘behavioral reasons'. The
puppy was irritable,growling,restless,
and jittery'Upon careful questioning,
the owners reported that the puppy
scratched more than others in the litter.
Physical examination of the puppywas
normal except for the skin,which was
scaly,odorous,and clearly pruritic.
Macroscopicwhite organismswere
found when the puppy's thick coat was
parted (34).The organisms were slow moving and many were attached to the skin.
i.Whatis the most likely diagnosis,and how can the diagnosis beconfirmed?
i.This parasite is divided into two major groups.What are they，how does this
division affect the clinical presentation of the disease,and what is the most likely
species infesting this puppy?
ii.What other parasites can appear as white andmacroscopic?
35 An adult Himalayan cat was
35
presented for an emergency exam-
ination because the catwasvomiting
and not eating. The cat has a history
of eating string,and the owner was
concerned the cat had ingested another
linear foreign body. On physical
examination,no string was found in
the mouth.During the examination,
the catvomited a malodorous liquid
that smelled like feces.Palpation of the
cat's abdomen revealed a large amount
of feces in the large bowel.The owner
reported that thecat had had increas-
ing problems withhair ballsover the lastmonth.When questioned further,the owner
reported the cat hasbeen shedding more than normal and was pruritic.Diffuse
hyperpigmentation on the skin was noted along with a sparse hair coat (35).As the cat
was beingput back into its carrier,a raisederythematous lesionwasnoted on the
owner's arm.
i.What is the most likely cause of this cat‘s constipation andvomiting?What are the
most likely differential diagnoses for the skin disease presented?
i.What diagnostic tests should be recommended?
ii.What should the ownerbetold about herskinlesions?
39
Copyrighted material
-040.jpg
34,35:Answers
34i.Pediculosis or louse infestation.Lice are most common in animals that are
overcrowded and/or debilitated.This is often a disease of neglect.Infested animals
 often have a dirty matted hair coat and a 'mousey' odor. Diagnosis can be made via
visual examination because lice are large parasitic insects. Lice can be captured with
flea combs or via acetate tape preparations and examined with magnification.
i. Lice are divided into two suborders: Anoplura (sucking lice) and Mallophaga
(bitinglice).Biting lice move rapidly on the host, often scurrying into the hair coat
when parted for examination, while sucking lice move more slowly and are easier to
capture.Biting lice cause more irritation because they move aroundmore on the host
and feed on epidermal debris. Animals may be irritable and, if infested with a sucking
louse,anemic.Pruritus may range from mild to severe.Dogs are commonly infested
with one of two species of lice:Linognathus setosus (sucking louse)or Trichodectes
canis (biting louse). The latter may act as an intermediate host for the dog tapeworm,
Dipylidium caninum.Because these lice were slow moving and attached to the skin,
they were most likely sucking lice or L. setosus.
ii. Other parasites that can appear as *white’ are Dermanyssus gallinae (poultry
mite), Cheyletiella spp.,and Lynxacarus radousky.
35i.Hair impaction in the large colon.Pruritic cats and/or cats with skin diseases
thatmake the hairsfragile often have current problemswithconstipation and/or hair
balls, due to increased ingestion of hair.This cat's primary dermatological problem is
pruritus; therefore,the most likely differential diagnoses include: dermatophytosis,
fleas or flea allergy dermatitis, cheyletiellosis, demodicosis, atopy, and food allergy.
Yeast and bacterial pyoderma are possible causes of pruritus,but they aremost likely
to be secondary to another underlying disease. Bacterial pyoderma in cats is con-
sidered a ‘rare’ disease if one looks for the classic clinical signs expected in dogs:
intact pustules,epidermal collarettes,and multifocal areas ofhair loss.In the authors
experience, the most common symptoms of bacterial pyoderma in cats include
scaling, especially over the lumbosacral area, scales pierced by hairs, retained matted
hair coat, miliary dermatitis,and follicular plugging. Many of these cats have con-
current bacterial and yeast infections and respond to oral antibiotics and itraconazole.
i. Skin scrapings to rule out demodicosis, flea combings to look for fleas, lice, and
Cheyletiella mites, impression smears to look for yeast and/or bacteria, and a
dermatophyte culture.This cat had dermatophytosis due to Microsporum canis.
Hyperpigmentation of the skin is rare in cats and is seen most commonly in
dermatophytosis.A large tricobezoar was removed surgically, and the hairs were
culture-positive for M. canis.
ii.The owner should beinformed that this is a zoonotic skin disease andreferred to
her physician.
40
Copyrighted material
-041.jpg
36,37:Questions
36The owner of a 3-year-old
36
male cat with alesion presented
the cat for a first opinion.The
owner reports the lesion had
been present for over 1 year
and tends to come andgo,
always recurring in the same
area.The lesion is localized to
the cat's left lateral foreleg(36).
The owner has not developed
any skin lesions after handling
the cat,and the other two cats
in the house are normal.
i.Whatis thecat's dermatological problem,andwhat are the differential diagnoses?
i.What diagnostic tests areindicated?
ii.List the most commonly used drugs for the treatment of anxiety or compulsive
behavior in smallanimal dermatology, their drug class, and their mode of action.
37A middle-aged dog is
37
presented for the complaint of
hard skin'.The owners reports
the dog had developed‘rock
hard skin lumps’ over the last
6months.Most of the lesions
donot seem to bother the dog;
however,a few are very exuda-
tive and pruritic,and the dog
chews at these lesions.Physical
examination reveals a depres-
sed, panting, pot-bellied dog
with a history ofpolyuria,
polydipsia,and polyphagia.On
dermatological examination,there arenumerous erythematous areas of hair loss anda
white particulate material in these areas.Palpation of these areas reveals well-
demarcated raised hard plaques(37).These raised plaques aregeneralized but seem to
be most numerous on the dorsum and in the axillary and inguinal regions. The dog
traumatizes all of the sitesitcanreach,suggesting that the dogispruritic.Thehaircoat
is thinning.
i.What is themost likely diagnosis for the skin lesions?
i.How can the dogs’pruritus be accounted for?
ii.What other diseases could cause theselesions in the skin?
41
Copyrighted material
-042.jpg
36,37:Answers
36 i. The dermatological problem is a nonhealing wound. The differential diagnoses
include self-trauma due to the irritation or discomfort from parasiticinfestations
(fleas, Cheyletiella, lice, Demodex),bacterial infections, superficial or intermediate
fungal infections, and allrgic skin diseases.Because the lesion is unilateral and recurs
in the same location, self-trauma in response to pain (soft tissue or bone), a foreign
body, or neoplasia (e.g. mast cell tumor) must be considered along with psychogenic
self-trauma.
i.Diagnostic tests include skin scrapings,flea combings, trial of flea control,
impression smears,dermatophyte culture,radiographs,and a skinbiopsy.All of these
tests were normal or negative.The owner declined evaluation for allergies;however,
the lesion did not respond to glucocorticoids suggesting that pruritus,as would be
seen in an allergic disease,was not the underlying cause of the discomfort.This was
eventually diagnosed as a case of self-trauma or psychogenic dermatitis. The cat's
lesion resolved with clomipramine,but recurred when the medication was dis-
continued.The self-mutilation stopped when the owner's roommate moved out.
ii. Commonly used tricyclic antidepressants are amitriptyline, clomipramine, and
doxepin.Citalopram,fluvoxamine,fluoxetine,and paroxetine are specific serotonin
reuptake inhibitors. All of these drugs work by selectively inhibiting the uptake of sero-
tonin.Hydrocordone is a narcotic and optiate agonist (Juarbe-Diaz and Frank, 2002).
37i. Calcinosis cutis.This patient had hyperadrenocorticism.
i.Lesions of calcinosis cutis can be very inflammatory and may cause pain and
pruritus. It is usually assumed that dogs with calcinosis cutis secondary to
hyperadrenocorticism will not be pruritic; however, this is not always the case. Often
the sites resemble areas of deep pyoderma and are pruritic to the patient.There is no
specific treatment for calcinosis cutis. Lesions resolve when the underlying cause is
addressed and treated (iatrogenic or spontaneously occurring hyperadrenocorticism).
Resolving lesions of calcinosis cutis can become very pruritic and often require
secondary antimicrobial treatment.Intensely pruritic dogs may benefit from
cyclosporinA therapy or short-term application of a low-dose dexamethasone spray
to relieve the discomfort. Depending upon the cause of the calcinosis cutis, it may
take weeks to months to resolve.
ii. Calcinosis cutis can be either dystrophic calcification or metastatic calcification.
The most common cause of the latter is chronic renal disease. Dystrophic causes in-
clude calcinosis circumscripta,inflammation,or infection (e.g.calcification of the ear
canal of dogs),degenerative lesions,or neoplasia.Calcinosis cutis can be seen in dogs
with diabetesmellitus, and in puppies with acute severe infection orinflammation.
42
Copyrighted material
-043.jpg
38:Question
38a
38b
38A3-year-old,intact,female Shetland sheepdogispresentedfortheproblemof hair
loss on the face(38a)and tail tip(38b）.The facial lesions and alopecia of the tailare
not pruritic. These lesions first developed when she was 16 weeks of age and have
graduallyprogressed.Skin scrapings have been consistentlynegative for Demodex
mites,and repeated fungal cultures were negative.Several other littermates had
similar lesions anda contagionwas suspected butnone found.Finally,the lesions did
not respond to oral antibiotic therapy.The owners report that she isa‘sloppy eater
andhasneverhadregularheat cycles.
i.Based upon the information provided,what is the most likely diagnosis andwhat
other clinical signs are commonly associatedwith this disease?
i.How is this disease diagnosed?
ii.This is a heritable disease.What is the mode of transmission,and how is this
disease treated?
43
Copyrightedmaterial
-044.jpg
38:Answer
38 i.Familial canine dermatomyositis of
38c
Shetland sheepdogs and collie dogs.
Clinical signs can occur as early as
7 weeks of age in these dogs, and may
consist ofhair loss and erythema around
the eyes, on the ear tips, metatarsal and
metacarpal areas,digits,and on the tip of
the tail. Myositis is a feature of this
disease and varies from mild to severe.
Dogswithmore severe signsmaypresent
with a history of difficulty in chewing
and/or swallowing (sloppy eater),a high
stepping gait,megaesophagus,and/or aspiration pneumonia.The most common signs
of myositis are atrophy of the muscles of mastication and hind limbs.
i.A clinical diagnosis can be made based upon the history,breed,clinical signs, and
ruling out other common causes of follicular dermatitis in young dogs. In this disease,
typical lesions usually develop before 6 months of age. Differential diagnoses include:
dermatophytosis,bacterial pyoderma, and demodicosis.These are easilyruled out via
skin scrapings,dermatophyte culture,and response to treatment. Other differential
diagnoses include cutaneous lupus erythematosus and EBs.Lupus erythematosus
usually occurs in older dogs.EBS is a rare disease, and affected animals have bullous
lesions on the skin and in the oral mucosa. In canine dermatomyositis, supportive
findings for the diagnosis can be found on skin biopsy, muscle biopsy, and muscle
conduction studies,or EMG.Skin biopsy findings show hydropic degeneration of basal
cells, intrabasalar or subepidermal clefting,pigmentary incontinence, follicular atrophy,
and possibly vasculitis (38c). Muscle biopsy findings show inflammatory exudates,
muscle fiber necrosis, and muscle atrophy.Needle EMG abnormalities include positive
sharp waves and fibrillation potentials in muscles of the head and distal extremities.
Definitive skin and muscle biopsy specimens are often difficult to obtain.
ii. This is a hereditary disease, and affected animals should not be bred. Breeding
studies have shown an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance.The goal of
treatment is to minimize the worsening of clinical signs and maintain a good quality of
life for the dogs. Mild clinical signs can be managed with oral vitamin E
(200-8oo IU/day), which may help the skin lesions but not the muscle lesions.Animals
with moderate disease and/or relapsing episodes from sun exposure or trauma may
benefit from prednisone (1-2 mg/kg PO),and severely affected dogs may require
chronic prednisone therapy.Pentoxifylline(200-400 mg PO q24h-q48h) has been
helpful in some dogs to minimize or eliminate the need for glucocorticoid therapy.
44
Copyrighted material
-045.jpg
39,40:Questions
39A12-week-old puppy was
39
presented for examination be-
cause of‘pimples’under its
forelimbs(39).
i.What is this lesion,andwhat is
the common name for this skin
disease in puppies?
ii.What would a cytological
smear of an intact pustule be ex-
pected to show,andwhat is the
controversy regarding treatment
ii.“Impetigois most commonly
seen in puppies.Describe the
clinicalcharacteristics ofthis
disease's counterpart in kittens
and in adult dogs.
40An obese 6-year-oldmale
40
collie dog is presented for pain
and sloughing skin that developed
overthelast3weeks.Notethe
ulcerations and erosions(40).The
lesions began as flaccid bullae
thatruptured and coalesced to
formthelesionsseen.Theowner
reportsa similar,butmilder,
episodeoccurredlastsummer
that spontaneously resolved.
Close examination of the patient
reveals small ulcerative lesions are
present on the eyelids,inner
pinnae,anus,and footpads.The lesions are painful upon palpation.Skin biopsy
findings reveal hydropic degeneration of basal cells,vesicles at the dermoepidermal
junction,andlichenoid dermatitis.Hair follicles arenormal.DIFand ANA testing are
negative.
i.What skin diseases unique tocollie dogs and Shetland sheepdogs could present like
this?
i.Of these diseases,which ismost likely?
i.How is this disease managed?
45
Copyrighted material
-046.jpg
39,40:Answers
39 i. This is a pustule. This condition is also called *puppy pyoderma’ or puppy
impetigo. Impetigo is characterized by large, rapidly developing, subcorneal pustules
affecting sparsely haired areas of the skin, especially in the flexor areas.
i. Impetigo in puppies occurs in the axillary and inguinal regions. It is diagnosed via
clinical presentation and/or impression smears. Impression smears of intact pustules
reveal neutrophils and keratinocytes may be seen. Depending upon the sample site,
cocci may be visible intra- or extracellularly.The controversy regarding treatment of
this syndrome revolves around the administration of systemic antibiotics since clinical
signs may resolve without antibiotic treatment in some puppies. Impetigo in other
puppies may resolve with only topical therapy (e.g. daily antibacterial baths with
chlorhexidine)while others may require up to 21 days of oral antibiotics. Benzoyl
peroxide isbest avoided in pediatric patients as it can be very irritating.
ii. Impetigo is rare in kittens, but it can be seen on the neck of kittens that are
‘mouthed’ excessively by the queen.The pustular lesions are very transient in kittens,
and owners usually present youngkittens for the complaint of crusting andmatting of
the hair on the neck. It is uncommon to see clusters of intact pustules on adult dogs.
However, the discovery of large numbers of intact pustules should raise the suspicion
 of a possible autoimmune skin disease characterized by pustules (e.g. pemphigus).
Bullous impetigo in adult dogs has been seen in association with hyperadrenocorticism,
diabetes mellitus,hypothyroidism,and other systemic illnesses (Scott et al., 2001b).
40i.Thebreed-related skin diseases includeSLE,dermatomyositis,BP,and idiopathic
ulcerative dermatitis.
i. Idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis of Shetland sheepdogs and collie dogs. Clinically,
these lesions are compatible with BP or SLE. However, DIF and ANA testing were
negative, and the skin biopsy findings were incompatible. In addition, SLE and BP
diseases usually do not wax and wane or spontaneously resolve.The clinical lesions
are incompatible with dermatomyositis because this disease is not ulcerative.A
common biopsy finding in dermatomytosis is follicular atrophy,notlichenoid
dermatitis or clefting.Finally, dogs with this disease tend to show lesions at a young
age and/or have a history of previous skin disease.
i.Idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis of Shetland sheepdogs and collie dogs tends to
have a cyclic nature; the disease is often worse in summer suggesting that sun
exposure is a trigger. Trauma can worsen lesions, and every effort to minimize
trauma should be made.Antibiotic therapy is needed if a secondary bacterial infection
is present.Glucocorticoids,pentoxifylline,azathioprine,Vitamin E,and tetracycline
andniacinamide have been anecdotally reported tobe effective.This diseasemay be a
variant of lupus erythematosus and‘vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus’has
been proposed as a new name.
46
Copyrighted material
-047.jpg
41-43:Questions
41Aphotomicrographof
positive direct immuno-
fluorescence testing from
a skin biopsy in a dog is
shown(41).
i.What pattern of immu-
nofluorescence is shown?
i.What autoimmune skin
diseases show this pattern?
42Whatis the difference between eumycoticmycetoma,actinomycoticmycetoma,
and pseudomycetoma?
43Thedorsalbackofa5-year-oldmale
intact schnauzer dogis shown(43).Thedog
43
has just been diagnosed with atopy.The
owner reports that the dog has hadbumps
over its dorsum almost its entire life.Pal
pation of the dorsum reveals diffuse, sharp,
crustedpapulesfrom theneckto thelumbo-
sacral area.When the hair coat is clipped,
numerous comedones are seen.
i.What is the common name for the lesions
on the dog's back?
i.How does it relate to the dog's atopy?
i.How is it treated?
47
Copyrighted material
-048.jpg
41-43:Answers
41i.The pattern is intercellular immunofluorescence.
i.This pattern of immunofluorescence is most commonly associated with the pem-
phigus complex (PF, pemphigus erythematosus, pemphigus vulgaris).Pemphigus
erythematosus may show both intercelular and basement membrane deposition of
antibodies.
42 The terminology regarding *mycetomas’ is very confusing. A mycetoma is
subcutaneous infection that usually presents as a nodular lesion. Classic lesions are
raised,nodular,cool to the touch,and have open draining tracks exuding ‘tissue
granules or grains'. The latter are formed as a result of host antibody reaction.
Eumycotic mycetomas are caused by by either pigmented (dematiaceous) or
nonpigmented fungi.Actinomycoticmycetomas are caused by bacteria of the
Actinomycetales order such as Actinomyces or Nocardia.Pseudomycetomas, another
confusing term, are caused by dermatophytes or bacterial infections such as
Staphylococcus spp.
43i.The common name for this condition is‘schnauzer comedone syndrome'
ii. This condition is unrelated to the dog's atopy. The syndrome is a disorder of
keratinization characterized by dilated cystichair follicles that develop into
comedones. In the author's experience,many dogs have undiagnosed concurrent yeast
and bacterial pyodermas associatedwith this syndrome.
ii.This is a genetic skin disease that can be controlled,but not cured.Owners should
be educated not to manipulate the comedones or to scrub the area aggresively, as
these dilated hair follicles rupture easily and may become infected. These dogs may
have secondary bacterial and yeast infections that are often undiagnosed. Impression
smears of the contents of the comedones should be cytologically examined and
concurrent infections treated.The hair coat should be kept short to facilitate bathing
with a mild shampoo. These dogs require baths 1-3 times per week. Benzoyl peroxide
is an excellent follicular flushing shampoo and may be helpful in removing
comedones.Antiseborrheic shampoos may also be used. The most important aspect
of treatment is to clean the skin without being unduly harsh.
48
Copyrighted material
-049.jpg
44,45:Questions
44 One of six beagle puppies, all
44
with similar lesions,
was
presented for examination. The
owner's complaintwas that all
the dogs had itchy skin and
nonhealingsores’on the chest,
legs,and abdomen.The owner
had treated the lesions with
topical povidone-iodine scrubs
and topical antibioticointment
with no response.The puppies
were beingtrained tohunt and
were housed outside on straw
bedding and marsh hay thatwas removed and changed once or twice monthly.The
puppy presented had straw in its hair coat and smelled of feces and urine. Well-
demarcated,thickened,hairless lesions with central areas of exudation were present,
most notably on the ventral aspect of the dog's body (44).
i.What are the differential diagnoses,andwhat initial diagnostic tests areindicated?
i. Skin scrapings revealed nematode larvae about 600 μm in length.What is the
diagnosis and treatment?
ii.What other helminth parasites can cause skin disease in dogs and people?
45 A 2-year-old indoor,male,
45
neutered cat was presented for
thecomplaintofsymmetrical
alopecia due toovergrooming of
acute onset (45）.This behavior
began shortly after the owner
remarried;the new spouse had
three small children.At the time
of examination,it had been
occurring for 4 weeks.Skin
scrapings,flea combings,and a
fungal culture were normalor
negative.The owners practiced
flea control.A skin biopsy
revealednormal skinandhair follicleswithno evidence of an inflammatory infiltrate.
The catwasnormal on physicalexamination except for growlingwhen the
overgroomed sitewas touched,and palpation of the area revealed pain.
i.What diagnostic test is indicated andwhy?
iWhatsfelinehyeresthesia syndromeandhowisitdifferentiatedclinicallfom
obsessive compulsive grooming?
49
Copyrighted material
-050.jpg
44,45:Answers
44 i. The most common pediatric skin diseases are dermatophytosis, louse infestations,
fleas,demodicosis,Sarcoptes,hookworm dermatitis,and Pelodera dermatitis.In this
case, demodicosis and secondary deep bacterial infection would be highly suspicious
because of the clinical signs. Skin scrapings should be performed to rule out Demodex
mites and nematodes. Impression smears should be done to look for infectious agents
and to confirm the presence of bacterial pyoderma. A dermatophyte culture also
should be done;Microsporum canis and M.gypseum are common dermatophyte
infestations of young dogs.Flea combings should be performed to look for
macroscopic parasites such as lice and fleas.Sometimes Cheyletiella infestations
require microscopic confirmation; the mites are small and look like^moving dandruff.
ii.Pelodera dermatitis (also called rhabditic dermatitis) is caused by a free-living
nematode (Pelodera strongyloides)found in damp soil,hay,and marsh hay.It invades
the skin of dogs housed in filthy conditions and causes severe pruritus. Treatment
requires removal of the bedding, cleaning of the facility, bathing of the affected dogs,
and antimicrobial therapy for the secondary infections.Parasiticidal dips can be used,
but most cases spontaneously resolve once sanitation is improved. Depending upon the
severity of the pruritus,humane use of glucocorticoids may be needed to provide relief.
ii.Ancylostoma braziliense,A.caninum,Uncinaria stenocephala,Gnathostoma
spinigerum,and Strongyloides stercoralis have beenreportedto cause skin diseasein
people and dogs (Scott et al., 2001a; Smith et al.,1976).
45 i.Radiographs of the caudal abdomen and pelvis are indicated. This is a case of
symmetrical alopecia; however, the pattern of overgrooming is somewhat abnormal
being asymmetrical and‘curved’. In addition, the cat growling when petted over the
area should raise suspicion that the cat is licking the area in response to pain, as
 opposed to anxiety. Radiographs of the caudal abdomen and pelvis revealed bilateral
fractures of the pelvis. After an appropriate period of cage confinement and pain
management, the pelvic fractures healed,and the cat‘s overgrooming stopped.It was
eventually discovered that the cat had been run over with a tricycle, and this was
presumed to be the cause of thefracture.
i.Feline hyperesthesia syndromeis not believed to be a behavioral disorder,but rather
a disorder of neuropathic pain. Cats affected with this disorder violently groom and
self-mutilate themselves in random unpredictable explosive attacks.They often growl,
vocalize,run, and may attack others. Owners describe the cats acting as if they are in
pain. The skin over the dorsum of the back may twitch or ripple just prior to an
episode. In contrast, cats with compulsive grooming behavior show none of the pre-
viously described behaviours and methodically groom themselves in secret or in sight.
50
Copyrightedmaterial
-051.jpg
46,47:Questions
46
46A3-year-oldmaleLabradorretriever dogwaspresentedfor acuteintermittent
episodesof bilateral periocular edema andfacialpruritus,arecurrent problemfor the
last 4months.The ownersreported thedogwould benormalfor several days,and then
acutely develop periocular edema(46）.These episodes always happened while the dog
was inside the house,in the owner's opinion.What was most frustratingwas the
episodeswould last for several hours,and then the edema wouldresolve when the dog
was taken outside orwhile enroute to theveterinary clinic.After each episode,the dog
had some residual periocular or facial pruritus for1-2days.The ownerwaswondering
if thelesionswere behavioral in originbecause they always occurredwhile shewas at
home. The owner never arrived home to find the dog with lesions. Conjunctival swabs
and aspirates of the edematous arearevealedlargenumbers of eosinophils.
i.What is the clinical diagnosis?
i.Exposure to some type of allergen is suspected.What questions should the owner
be asked,and how might the allergic trigger beidentified?
ii.What are the afferent and efferent phases of allergic contact dermatitis?
47
47What procedureis demonstrated in the illustration(47)
51
Copyrighted material
-052.jpg
46,47:Answers
46i.Edema is a clinical sign of a type 1 hypersensitivity reaction.The intermittent
nature of the episodes suggests some type of allergic reaction, most likely infrequent
contact with a potent allrgen to which the dog has become sensitized. An underlying
allergic etiology is further supported by the presence of eosinophils.
i.It is difficult to solve cases such as these.The fact that the episodes always happen
in the home and not after being outside, suggests that the allergen is located indoors.
Also,theintermittent nature of the episodes suggests that the allergen isnot present at
all times. The final clue is the observation that the owner is always home when the
episodes occur.The owner should be asked about the dog's exposure to liquid or
aerosol chemicals and cleaning supplies. If there is no obvious cause,the owner
should be instructed to keep a log of household activities (cleaning,burning of
scented candles,indoor grilling)for several weeks tohelp to establish a pattern.After
careful questioning,reviewing the activity log, and provocative challenge,the dog was
found to be developing allergic blepharitis (i.e. allergic contact dermatitis) when the
owner used a wood resin for a hobby craft (basket weaving). Improving ventilation
and keeping the dog outside when the owner used the wood resin solved the problem.
If lesions did develop, the owner was instructed to apply a topical ophthalmic
glucocorticoid to the periocular area.
ii.The afferent phase of allergic contact dermatitis is used to describe the initial
presentation and processing of the allergen orhapten.The hapten is transferred from
the skin to the regional lymph nodes via Langerhans’ cells. The stimulated T-
lymphocytes produce skin homing ligands that will direct their movement to the skin.
The efferent phase describes the animal's response to exposure to the allergen or
hapten.After re-exposure to the hapten, activated T-lymphocytes are recruited to the
site by expresion of adhesion molecules and epidermal cytokines (Belisto,1999).
47This is an example of a skin impression smear.The target skin area is gently lifted
toward the glass slide to enhance sample collection.The glass microscope slide is then
pressed onto the site. In order to obtain a cellular sample, it is very important to apply
pressure directly over the target lesion.Using digital pressure from the index finger or
thumb easily accomplishes this,minimizing the chance of breaking the glass slide during
the impression smear.Enough pressure has been appliedif there is an impression of cell
debris on the unstained slide. If Malassezia is being tested for, the slide should be heat
fixed. Care should be taken when heat fixing slides. Matches and butane lighters can
leave carbon deposits on the glass slide while a low blue flame from a Bunsen burner
will not.If deposits are seen, the material should be gently wiped off the slide prior to
examination.Furthermore,heat fixing of glass slidesmay damage cellular architecture.
Thus, at least one slide should be examined without heat fixing.
52
Copyrightedmaterial
-053.jpg
48,49:Questions
48The ventral abdominal area of
48
a5-yearold bull terrier dog is
shown(48）.The dog lives outside
in the state of Colorado,USA,
and‘sunbathes’year round in the
owner's yard. The lesions
depicted include diffuse erythema,
several raised erythematous
masses,andnumerous cutaneous
horns. Two years ago,prior to
thedevelopmentoftheraised
masses,a skin biopsy specimen
was obtained.No evidence of
neoplasia was seen and the mor-
phological diagnosis waschronic dermatitis,solar elastosis,and actinic
dermatitis/keratoses'.No treatmentrecommendationsweremade.
i.What are solar elastosis and actinic dermatitis/keratoses?
i.What treatment recommendations should havebeenmade?
ii. If a skin biopsy specimen is examined,what is themost likely diagnosis and what
arethetreatmentrecommendations?
49Acat waspresented for the
49
complaint of*swollen toes'of
3months'duration (49）.Exam-
ination revealedgeneralized
paronychia, exudation,and self-
traumaon thedorsal skinofthe
digits.The owner reported that
previous skin scrapings were
negative for mites and a derma-
tophyte culture was negative.
i.What diagnostic test(s) should
be performed at this time?
ii.Large numbers of neutrophils
andrare acanthocytesarefound on thein-house diagnostic test.How should thiscase
be managed?
ii.Surgical removal of the third phalanx is often required to establish a definitive
diagnosis orto rule out suspected differential diagnoses in diseases of the claw.What
histological features of normal claws can be mistaken forpathological findings?
53
Copyrighted material
-054.jpg
48,49:Answers
48i.Solar elastosis(damaged elastin fibers in the dermis) and actinic dermatitis
(atypia and dysplasia of the epidermis)are terms used to describe skin that has been
damaged by excessive exposure to sunlight.Actinic keratoses are crusted
hyperkeratotic plaques on the skin; these are premalignant lesions.
i.The owners should have been advised to keep the dog out of the sunlight,provide
photo protection via sunscreens, and/or a canine sun suit.Topical sunscreens labeled
as safe for use in infants are recommended, and the highest SPF number available
should be used.The owner should have been told to apply sunscreen at least twice a
day,clearly before the dog went outside.Topical or oral glucocorticoids could have
been used to provide relief from pain or pruritus,if present,and lesions could have
been treatedwith systemic retinoids(isotretinoin,acitretin).
ii. The most likely diagnosis is squamous cell carcinoma. At this stage, surgical
excision is unlikely to be curative.These tumors are slow to metastasize, but they are
locally invasive. Alternative treatments might include a combination of surgery with
radiation therapy,chemotherapy,and photodynamic therapy.Piroxicam,a
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug has been used in some dogs in addition to
systemic retinoids.
49i.Impression smears of the nail bed exudates and interdigital exudates should be
examined for bacteria and yeast, and a skin biopsy of the nail bed is indicated.
Dermatophytosis and PF are the most common causes of paronychia in cats.
ii.Since previous diagnostics ruled out dermatophytosis and mite infestations, the
likely causes were a pustular disease such as PF or bacterial pyoderma. The
acanthocytes (rounded epithelial cells shed from the stratum spinosum) seen in the
cytological specimen were suggestive of pemphigus, as this is a classic finding.
However, care must be used when examining slides from deep pyoderma.With
severe infection,it is common to see occasional acanthocytes.In PF,rafts of cells are
usually found on impression smears of exudate from new lesions. In this case, a
practical approach would be to delay any therapy until the biopsy report was
received because the problem was of 3months’duration.However,it was clear from
the clinical picture and in-house diagnostics that the lesions were inflamed and
exudative. Pending the biopsy report, a course of oral antibiotics (e.g. cephalexin
liquid suspension) was prescribed. This was a case of bacterial paronychia, and the
cat was almost normal by the time the biopsy report was received.
ii.Intrakeratinocyte vacuoles,intraepidermal and dermoepidermal clefts,pseudo-
spongiosis, and apoptotic keratinocytes can be features of normal dog and cat claws,
andmight be misinterpreted as‘abnormal findings’bya nondermatopathologist
(Scott, 2002).
54
Copyrighted material
-055.jpg
50,5l:Questions
50a
50b
50An8-month-oldkitten ispresentedfor
raised,firm,pencil-like lesions on the
caudal aspects of both hind legs.The owner
reports the lesions developedrapidly but donot seem bothersome to thekitten.
Dermatological examination reveals hard,linear lesions in the superficial dermis
(50a）.Skin biopsies revealeosinophilic granulomatousinflammation and collagen
degeneration(50b).
i.What is the diagnosis and what are other clinical presentations of the same
'syndrome'?
ii.What are the treatment options?
ii.What components of eosinophil granules may be responsible for collagen
degradation?
51A 10-year-oldgreatDanedog
51
is presented for evaluation of a
mass on the sternum (51).The
owner reports that the mass has
developedslowlyover thelast
several years. On clinical exam-
ination,a raised,freely movable,
roughenedmass can be found on
the sternum.Closer examination
of the mass reveals it is a con-
fluent mass of enlarged and
dilated hair follicles packedwith
sebum.Thick black caseous
material can beexpressed from the pores.
i.What is this lesion called,and how should it be treated?
ii.What is a hygroma, and how is it managed?
ii.What is a ‘tug of war blister'?
55
Copyrighted material
-056.jpg
50,51:Answers
50 i. This is a classic presentation of feline eosinophilic granuloma. Other presenta-
tions include firm swellings on the chin (fat chin syndrome), swollen lower lips
(pouting cat syndrome), oral lesions in the mouth, firm nodules in the skin, and
nodules on the ear pinnae.
i. Treatment is not always needed as lesions in cats less than 1 year of age usually
spontaneously resolve. Methylprednisone acetate (20 mg/cat SC), every 2 weeks until
the lesions resolve (4-6 weeks), is effective.Recurrent lesions suggest an underlying
trigger such as FAD, food allergy, and/or atopy.
ii.The pathogenesis of these lesions is unknown.However, tissue damage may be
causedby eosinophil collagenase that degradestypeI andIIcollagen andgelatinases
that degrade type XVll collagen.
51 i.This is a sternal callus, and it is a type of pressure point injury caused by repeated
trauma to skin.The skin and specialized structures have proliferated resulting in the
development of cystic comedones and furunculosis.These lesions are difficult to treat
because they tend to recur. In this case, the area should be hot packed and gently washed
daily with benzoyl peroxide. If there is limited fibrosis, it may be possible to massage
gently the lesion with a circular motion and express the black debris from the
comedones.Extreme care must be taken not to be aggressive as thismay result in further
rupture of hair follicles.Concurrent systemic antibiotics for 4-6weeks are helpful. It is
unlikely that this lesion will completely resolve because of its severity and chronicity.
Surgical excision would be difficult due to concerns about wound closure. In addition to
condition elect to sleep on hard surfaces even when provided with soft bed options.
i. A hygroma is a false bursa that occurs over bony prominences and pressure points,
especially in large breed dogs.Repeated trauma from lying on hard surfaces produces
an inflammatory response,which results in a dense-walled, fluid-filled cavity.A soft,
fluctuant (fluid-filled),painless swelling develops over pressure points, especially the
olecranon. If long-standing, severe inflammation may develop, and ulceration,
infection,abscesses,granulomas,and fistulas may develop.The bursa contains a clear,
yellow to red fluid. If diagnosed early and if still small,hygromas can be managed
medically via aseptic needle aspiration, followed by corrective housing. Soft bedding or
padding over pressure points is imperative to prevent further trauma.If hygromas are
chronic, surgical drainage,flushing, and placement of Penrose drains are indicated.
Areas with severe ulceration may require extensive drainage,extirpation,or skin
grafting procedures. Use of intrahygromal corticosteroids is not recommended.
ii.A ‘tug of war blister’(Scott et al.,2001c) is a traumatic injury characterized by
vesicles and erosions on the front paws of dogs that vigorously play tug of war'. Lesions
have an acute onset in an otherwise healthy dog. These lesions may be more common in
puppies where pads are more fragile or in breeds of dogs with a high threshold of pain.
56
Copyrighted material
-057.jpg
52,53:Questions
52A1-year-oldfemaleindoorcat
52
fromFloridawaspresentedfor an
after-hours emergency examin-
ation.Approximately 72hours
after spending the night locked
out on the family's screened-in
porch,the cat developed acute
severe facial pruritus and was
presented for the lesions shown
(52）.Similar lesionswere seen on
the ear tips and paws;only thinly
haired areaswith darkhairwere
affected.The cat was otherwise
healthy. Skin scrapings were
negative.Impression smears of
the nose revealedinflammatory exudatescomprised ofapproximately75%
eosinophils and lesser numbers of neutrophils,lymphocytes,andmast cells.
i.This cat's lesions aremost compatiblewithwhat differential diagnoses?Based upon
the information provided,what is the most likely diagnosis?
i.The owners declined a skin biopsy.Howwould thelikely disease then be
confirmed?What arethetreatmentrecommendations?
ii. What would be expected on a skin biopsy specimen from this cat?
53 A Labrador retriever dog was
presented for examination because the
dog had a‘pink nose²(53）.The owner
reported that the dog's nose and skin
werenormal until severalmonths ago.At
that time,shenoticed a small amount of
crusting at the junction of the haired and
unhaired regions of the nose.When this
crusting sloughed,the lesion depicted
was present.The owner reported that
sometimes crusting is present in this area,
but sheremoves it as soon as it develops.
No other abnormalitieswere found on
examination.
i.What condition is seen here,what are the differential diagnoses,andwhat
diagnostic test(s)is/are most cost effective in making a definitive diagnosis?
i. What is the most common cause of hypopigmentation in dogs?
ii.List five hereditary causes of hypopigmentation that have been documented in
dogs or cats.
57
Copyrighted material
-058.jpg
52,53:Answers
 52 i. PF or pemphigus erythematosus, food allergy, atopy, dermatophytosis, and
insect bite hypersensitivity.The most likely diagnosis is insect bite hypersensitivity,
particularly mosquito-bite hypersensitivity. The clinical lesions and history are
characteristic of the disease. The rapid development of the lesions after spending the
night outside (most screened porches are not insect proof) and the marked
eosinophilia seen on cytological examination of impression smears are highly
supportive of the diagnosis. Mosquitoes are attracted to dark colors or dark hair
coats; lesions are often seen in the darkly haired areas of cats.
i.This disease is seasonal and coincides with the mosquito season, although other
small biting insects (gnats, Culicoides spp.) can cause similar lesions. Confining the cat
indoors for 5-7 days and watching for lesion resolution can confirm the diagnosis;the
other differential diagnoses will not respond to this therapy.Keeping the cat indoors
can prevent recurrences. Also, improving the quality of the screening and/or using a
flea control product with repellant activity is recommended.Permethrins can be toxic
to cats, and only products labeled as safe for use in cats should be used. Dimethyl
metatolulimide(DEET) should not be used in cats. Repositol methylprednisolone
5mg/kg subcutaneously may be needed to resolve lesions and/or treat cats that cannot
be confined. This therapy is safe if the problem is seasonal.This cat was treated with
one injection of methylprednisolone (20 mg/cat SC) and the lesions resolved within
14 days.The lesions recurred if the cat spent excessive time on the family’s screened
porch in the evening when mosquitoes were present.
ii.Histological findings most compatible with this syndromeinclude a superficial and
deep eosinophilic infiltrate. Unique findings in this disease include infiltrative
eosinophilic mural folliculitis and furunculosis, dermal mucinosis, and flame figures.
Such skin biopsyfindings are relatively common in arthropod or insect bites.
53 i. Nasal hypopigmentation or nasal depigmentation.Note the depigmentation on
the dorsum of the nose at the junction of the haired and unhaired skin of the nose.
Also,note the subtle depigmentation of the nares. Differential diagnoses include
discoid lupus erythematosus,trauma, contact allergy (rare),pemphigus complex,and
cutaneous lymphoma. A skin biopsy of the depigmented area and nares is the most
cost effective diagnostic test. In cases of nasal hypopigmentation, skin biopsy
specimens should be obtained from the oldest (i.e. most depigmented or gray area).
This was a case of lupus erythematosus.
i. The most common cause of hypopigmentation in dogs is graying of the hair as a
result of senescence of melanocytes.
ii.Chediak-Higashi syndrome in Persian cats,albinism,piebaldism,Warrdenburg-
Klein syndrome, and canine cyclic hematopoiesis of collie dogs.
58
Copyrighted material
-059.jpg
54,55:Questions
54A5-year-old male catwith classical signs of a heritable skin disease is shown(54).
i.What is the diagnosis?
iWhat other clinical signs are associated with this disorder,how is this disease treated
and,excluding euthanasia,what is themost common cause of death in thesecats?
ii.What is the biochemical cause of this disease?
55Thiscatwasdiagnosedwith
55
whatwaspreviously calledfeline
endocrine alopecia²(55).
i.What is the hormonal ab-
normality of feline endocrine
alopecia?
i.What is the current terminology
for this condition?
ii.What are the most common
differential diagnosesforthis
disorder?
59
Copyrightedmaterial
-060.jpg
54,55:Answers
54i.Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,cutaneous asthenia,or dermatosparaxis.This disease
can occur in both dogs and cats.
ii. The skin is soft, pliable, 'stretchy', and loosely attached to the underlying
epidermis. These cats will often present with nonhealing wounds, bleeding, and tears
from minimal trauma. Some animals have joint laxity and/or ocular changes, and
clinical signs often worsen with age. This is a hereditary disease, and affected animals
should not be bred from.There is no known treatment.Pets with mild symptoms
and/or joint laxity may be kept as pets; however, most are eventually euthanized
because of therecurrent skin tears,Affected catsmay die suddenly from rupture of an
aortic aneurysm or other large vessel.
ii.This is an inherited disease caused by a biochemical defect in collagen production.
Affected collagen forms twisted ribbons rather than cylindric fibrils and fibers.
Biochemical studies have demonstrated a procollagen production defect, resulting in
decreased activity of procollagen peptidase, and accumulation of partially processed
type I procollagen containing N-terminal propeptides. Collagenase activity is
increased several-fold above normal (Minor, 1987; Scott et al., 2001e).
55 i.Feline endocrine alopecia is a misnomer, and there is no hormonal abnormality
in these cats.
i.The current terminology for this condition is FSA.
ii.FSA is a dermatological reaction pattern caused by a wide range of feline skin
diseases.The hair loss is caused by overgrooming. Less commonly, it can be a clinical
manifestation of obsessive-compulsive behavior in cats. The standard evaluation of
these cats is to rule out parasitic,infectious,and allergic skin diseases prior to making
a diagnosis of psychogenic alopecia.Skin scrapings,flea combings,acetate tape
preparations, fecal examinations, and treatment trials with ivermectin and/or flea
control should be performed to rule out parasites.Dermatophyte cultures and
impression smears for bacteria and Malassezia dermatitis should be obtained to rule
out infectious agents.
If bacterial or yeast dermatitis is found, then a careful search for the underlying
trigger is necessary while the infections are treated. Food allergy, flea allergy, and
atopy should be ruled out via food trials, flea control trials, and skin testing, and/or
invitro allergy testing,respectively.Finally,a skinbiopsy should be erformed torule
out inflammatory infiltrates in the skin.A complete blood count to look for signs of
infection and/or eosinophilia may be helpful.An elevated eosinophil count is often
seen in cats with fleas and/or FAD. If the cat is older,a complete serum chemistry
panel,thyroid hormone evaluation,and urinalysis should be done to rule out systemic
illnesses as a cause of FSA.Diseases such as feline hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus,
chronic renal disease, and neoplasia should be considered as possible metabolic
diseases associated withFSA.
60
Copyrighted material
-061.jpg
56,57:Questions
56Themedial thighofa dog scheduled for
surgery forrepair ofaruptured anterior
cruciate ligament is shown (56).As part of
the pre-operative procedures,the dog was
bathed in an antibacterial shampoo(benzoyl
peroxide),and then given an intravenous
bolus of a second-generation cephalosporin.
A student bathed thedogin a stainless steel
tubinwarmwater and then towel dried the
dog.Approximately20minuteslater,the
dog hada generalized eruption of coalescing
erythematous wheals.The dog was pruritic,
but showedno gastrointestinal symptoms.
i.What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii.What caused the reaction seen,and how
should this patient be treated?
ii.What is/are the mechanisms involved in
the development of these lesions?
57A bacterial culture andsensitivity isperformed on a dogwith recurrent bacterial
pyoderma.The laboratory isolates Staphylococcus intermedius and reports that the
organismis sensitive to the following drugs:
Tetracycline.
。
Penicillin.
Amoxicillin.
Cephalosporin.
Chloramphenicol.
Erythromycin.
Sulfonamide.
Amoxicillin clavulanate.
·Enrofloxacin.
i.Which of these drugs are least likely to be efficacious in the treatment of canine
pyoderma even though the sensitivity showssusceptibility?
iWhich of these drugs,although effective againstS.ntermedius,sbest avoidedfor
the treatment of canine pyoderma?
61
Copyrighted material
-062.jpg
56,57:Answers
56 i. The erythematous wheals are classic for urticaria,which is a type 1 hyper-
sensitivity reaction.Folliculitis,vasculitis,erythema multiforme,and neoplasia can
 also mimic urticarial lesions, but the sudden occurrence of the lesions in this case
makes these differential diagnoses unlikely.
i.Type 1 hypersensitivityreactions, such as urticaria,usually occur within 1 hour of
exposure to the offending allergen. In this patient, the urticarial reactions could have
been caused by any one of the shampoo ingredients (coloring, scent, benzoyl
peroxide, detergent agents), the antibiotic (drug, carrier agent), the water
temperature,the pressure from towel drying the patient, or the disinfectant used to
clean the bathing tub or the dog's run.It is also possible that it was a combination of
factors that led to the eruption.
This patient was closely monitored for signs of systemic anaphylaxis (vomiting
and diarrhea), immediately bathed with water to remove any shampoo residue, and
given prednisone (2 mg/kg IM).Epinephrine was not administered because the dog
did not show signs of systemic anaphylaxis. If he had, epinephrine (1:1000 in
0.1-0.5 ml SC or IM) in addition to prednisone would have been administered.
Antihistamines were not used because they are ineffective in the treatment of acute
episodes of urticaria even though they are beneficial in preventing future reactions.
Finally, the surgeon elected not to use cephalosporin antibiotics in this patient.
Interestingly,follow-up of this patient revealed that he hada history of recurrent
episodes of urticaria associated with stressful events (car rides,visits to the
veterinarian’s office,boarding in a kennel).Pre-treatment with an antihistamine
(hydroxyzine 2 mg/kg PO q8h) before these events eliminated the problem.
ii. Urticaria and angioedema can result from immunological and nonimmunological
mast cell or basophil degranulation. Increased vascular permeability causes extra-
type 3 reactions. Nonimmunological mechanisms include physical forces (heat,
sunlight, cold, exercise, pressure), psychological stresses, genetic abnormalities, drugs,
and chemicals.
57 i. Tetracycline, penicillin, and amoxicillin are generally best avoided in the treat-
ment of canine pyoderma. Although the sensitivity in this case shows that the organism
is sensitive, the clinical response in patients treated with these drugs is often poor.
i.Enrofloxacin,a fluoroquinolone, is best avoided in the routine treatment of canine
pyoderma.There are other less expensive and equally efficacious drugs.Another
important reason to avoid the routine use of fluoroquinolone antibiotics in the
treatment of bacterialpyodermais the concern over the development ofresistant
bacterial strains.This is particularly true in the case of Pseudomonas.
62
Copyrighted material
-063.jpg
58,59:Questions
58
58A7-month-old dogwas presented for thefirst time for the complaint ofbumps，a
common clinicalpresentation of superficial bacterial pyoderma in dogs(58).Note the
goose bump’or“hive-like lesions on the skin.
i.Whatisthename of thiscondition,andwhatis seenupon closeexaminationof the
skin?
i.What diferential diagnoses anddiagnostic tests should be performed to confirm the
diagnosis?
ii.What is themechanism of action of fluoroquinolone antibiotics,andwhy would
this drug class not be an appropriate antibiotic choicein this dog?
59Animpression smearfrom the
59
nail bed debris froma dogwith
intense pedal pruritus is shown
(59).
i.What is this organism,and how
ii.What species have been
isolatedfrom dogs andcats?
ii. Is this a zoonosis?
63
Copyrighted material
-064.jpg
58,59:Answers
58i.This is an example of superficial bacterial infection of the skin involving the hair
follicles,hence the namesuperficial bacterialfolliculitis.Close examination of the skin
revealed small papules at the base of the hairs. These papules/pustules may rupture
causing the formation of tiny epidermal collarettes,which may be seen encircling the
base of the hairs.
i. The major differential diagnoses to consider are: dermatophytosis, demodicosis,
and Malassezia dermatitis.Less common differential diagnoses include pemphigus,
sterile eosinophilic pustulosis,and pustular demodicosis.Most commonly,however,
bacterial folliculitis is likely to be confused with dermatophytosis or urticaria.Skin
scrapings should be performed to rule out demodicosis, impression smears to rule out
concurrent Malassezia infections,and dermatophyte cultures where there is a
suspicion of infection.
The diagnosis of a bacterial pyoderma is often a clinical diagnosis supported by
ruling out demodicosis and dermatophytosis, the two most common follicular
diseases.Concurrent bacterial and Malassezia infections,especially in warm weather,
can occur in approximately 50% of patients.
i.Fluoroquinolone antibiotics act intracellularly by preventing bacterial DNA
synthesis by partly inhibiting bacterial DNA gyrase.This class of drugs is primarily
active against Gram-negative aerobic and facultative anaerobic bacteria.Although
they are effective against many Gram-positive organisms (e.g. staphylococci), the
minimum inhibitory concentrations are usually higher than for Gram-negative
bacteria.Fluoroquinolone antibiotics are contraindicated in this particular patient
because they are known to cause an erosive arthropathy in young dogs.
 59 i. Malassezia spp. Malassezia organisms are part of the normal fungal flora of the
skin of dogs, and they have been isolated from 3-day-old puppies.Their resident
niche is the oral cavity, ears, anal sacs, interdigital areas, and mucocutaneous
junctions. These organisms can also be found on the skin of normal dogs, but not
too many.In the author’s opinion, if the animal is symptomatic and organisms are
found, treatment is indicated.
ii.Malassezia pachydermatitis is the only species isolated from dogs. M.
pachydermatitis,M.sympodialis,andM.globosa have been isolated from cats.
ii. M. pachydermatitis can transiently colonize the skin of people. It was the
presumed causeof an outbreakofexfoliative dermatitis,septicemia,meningitis,and
urinary tract infections in a neonatal intensive care unit. The organism was then
transferred from human to human in the unit.
64
Copyrighted material
-065.jpg
60:Question
60a
60b
60This great Dane dogwas presented for examination.It was one of 12 dogs in a
kennel,all of which had had intense pruritus for 1 year (60a）.The owners reported
that the other dogs looked similar to this one.In addition to skin lesions,the dogs
were losingweight andwere irritable with the owners andeachother.Close exam-
ination of the skin revealed a generalizedpapular eruption without evidence of
pustules and/or epidermal collarettes.Any manipulation of the skin triggered an
intense episodeof self-mutilation.All of thedogswere currentlyvaccinated,received
monthly heartworm medication,and monthly spot-on flea control.The owners
reportedno lesions or discomfort after any handlingof the dogs.Fleacombingswere
negative.Skin scrapings revealed the organism shown (60b).
i.What isthediagnosis?
ii.The owners of thekennel have threeborder collie dogs and seven cats in addition
to these dogs.What are the treatment options for this kennel of dogs?What is the
causeandwhattreatmentcanbeusedforcatscabies?
65
Copyrighted material
-066.jpg
60:Answer
60 i. Scabies infestation.The organism is an egg of Sarcoptes spp. One mite or egg is
diagnostic for scabies. Definitive evidence of a scabies infestation (eggs or mites) is
not always found, even in ‘classic cases'. The vast majority of dogs with scabies are
diagnosed based upon response to treatment, hence the old saying with regard to
scabies in dogs: If you suspect it, treat for it'.
i. Scabies mites can live for a short period of time off the host. The kennel facilities
should be thoroughly cleaned with high-pressure hoses, scrubbedwith detergent,and
then sprayed with an environmental parasiticidal agent.Any and all dogs in contact
with these great Dane dogs should be treated for scabies.Lime sulfur dips once
weekly for 6weeks or amitraz dips every 2weeks for 6weeks are effective topical
therapies.Lime sulfur can be combined with ivermectin therapy.Ivermectin
(200 μg/kg PO or SC) every 2 weeks for 6 weeks is also a very effective treatment.
The author uses a test dose of 100 μg/kg PO in all dogs.If there are no adverse effects
 consistent with ivermectin sensitivity (e.g. tremors, salivation) within 24 hours, a full
treatment dose of 200 μg/kg PO is administered the next day.
Herding breeds of dogs, especially collies, are known to be sensitive to ivermectin
toxicity.Thus, the drug is best avoided in this breed.Dogs sensitive to ivermectin can
often tolerate milbemycin oxime at 3 mg/kg PO weekly for 3-6 weeks.Lime sulfur
dips are also an effective therapy. Doramectin at 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM has also been
reported to be effective.Finally,two applications of selamectin or fipronil at 30 day
intervals may be effective.Selamectin is licensed for the treatment of scabies,and the
manufacturer reported it to be effective in 70% of cases.Fipronil is not licensed for
use but has been found to be effective.Again the author has seen treatment failure
cases with this drug. It is important to remember that no one treatment is 100%
efficacious in all patients. If scabies is suspected and the patient does not respond,
retreatment with a different therapy should be performed before ruling it out.
Canine scabies is not considered a contagion to cats.However,Sarcoptes mites
have been reported in a small number of cats with severe debilitation and in pruritic
cats in England.There may be some geographic variation with respect to contagion to
cats.These cats do not need to be treated.Truefeline scabies'is caused by Notoedres
cati, a contagious mange mite. In contrast to canine scabies, N. catis easily found in
large numbers on skin scrapings. In cats, lesions are found on the head, feet, and
perineum. This infestation can cause large amounts of crust; cats should be sedated,
the hair coat clipped,and the cat bathed to remove the contaminated crusts prior to
treatment.Because cats are extremely sensitive to parasiticidalagents,lime sulfur and
ivermectin are the most commonly used treatments.Affected cats, and all animals in
contact with infection should be treated for at least 6weeks.
66
Copyrightedmaterial
-067.jpg
61,62:Questions
61A catwas found asa stray in
winter in Wisconsin, USA, during
61
a January blizzard.The cat was
suffering from hypothermia and
had frostbite on the ear margins,
tail tip,and on several digits.The
cat recovered from the hypo-
thermia and the only permanent
damage was sloughing of the tail
tip,several digits,and the tipsof
the ears, the latter healing with a
slightly irregular contour.Over
the last 5years,the cat has been
an indoor cat.Severalmonths ago,the owners noted that thecat's ear margins were
crusted and bleeding (61).
i.What is the most likely differential diagnosis?
i.Whatrole,if any,did the frostbitehave in thedevelopment of thelesions？At this
time,whatis themost cost effective treatment?
i.What is Bowen's disease?
62
62The inguinal fold area of a partially paralyzed dogis shown(62).The dogwas
expectedtoregainvoluntarymovementandwasreleasedto theownersforhome
care.The owners manually expressed the dog's bladder six times per day;however,
the dogwas oftenfoundwet from urine leakage.
i.What is themost likelycauseof thelesion shown?
ii.How should this lesion be treated toprevent it from happening again?
ii.What are the most common irritants encountered by small animals?
67
Copyrighted material
-068.jpg
61,62:Answers
61 i. This is a white cat with lesions on the ear margins.The most likely cause is
squamous cell carcinoma. Many cats with squamous cell carcinomas will have pre-
cancerous actinic changes of the skin prior to the development of the lesion. Actinic
skin changes are most commonly seen in the external ear pinnae and pre-auricular
areas. Owners may report a waxing and waning of erythema and scaling in these
areas.
i.Frostbite, though uncommon in animals,usually affects the tips of the ears.
Healing is slow, and as the necrotic tissue sloughs,the remaining ear margins will
curl.Ear margins are notorious for healing slowly due to poor vascularization.
Because squamous cell carcinomas have been observed to develop at the site of
frostbite scars in people,it is possible that frostbite predisposed this cat to
squamous cell carcinoma.The most cost effective therapy is bilateral pinnectomy.
This was a case of bilateral squamous cell carcinoma in a cat. These tumors have
low metastatic rates, and radical, local therapy can result in a long-term cure.
Although surgical excision of the ears seemed rather dramatic’to the owner, the
surgeon was able to obtain clean margins, and the lesions did not recur. In addition
to surgery, minimizing sun exposure was recommended, a nearly impossible task in
this species.
ii.Bowen’s disease is also known as multifocal squamous cell carcinoma in situ.This
disease can occur in cats or dogs,but is most common in middle-aged cats.In this
disorder, multiple squamous cell carcinomas are present in the haired or pigmented
skin in a cluster.The lesions are 0.5-4.0 cm in size and may have 1-3 mm of crusts
that reveal an ulcer underneath when removed. In cats, these lesions can occur as
gingivitis or plaques.The treatment of choice is surgical excision.
62 i. The most likely cause is urine scalding. This is an irritant reaction caused by the
skin being chronically wet from exposure to urine.
i. These lesions are very painful. The area should be washed with warm water and
thoroughly dried.Topical silver sulfadiazine ointment or triple antibiotic ointment
should be applied to this lesion until it heals.Urine scald lesions are a risk factor in
any animal that is recumbent and/or paralyzed. The owners need to express the dog's
bladder more efficiently and/or more frequently.If this dog is having urine scalding, it
is very likely that the dog may also develop pressure point necrosis.The dog should
be turned more frequently and consideration should be given to putting the dog in a
body sling until it recovers.
ii. Irritant reactions are most likely to occur on thinly haired areas. The most
commonly incriminated irritants include soaps,detergents, disinfectants,weed and
insecticidal sprays,flea collars,fertilizers,and carpet cleaners orfresheners.
68
Copyrighted material
-069.jpg
63,64:Questions
63A4-year-oldfemale spayedblack
63a
Labradorretriever dogwas presented for
recurrent otitis externa.Dermatological
examinationwasnormalexceptfor
bilaterally erythematous lacey hyper-
pigmentation of the external ear canal
and inner pinnae(63a）.Otoscopic exam-
inationrevealedthe erythemawaslimited
to the vertical ear canal, and cytological
examination using ear swabs revealed
numerous keratinocytes and rare
Malassezia organisms.The dog’s otitis
responded to topical glucocorticoids, and
aworkingdiagnosis ofallergicotitis
externa was made. Over the next year,
the dog developed pedal and facial
63b
pruritus.The pruritus continued year
roundbutwas worse in the summer and
fall.The dog's symptoms were not easily
controlled with antihistamines and
essential fatty acids.An intradermal skin
test was performed and numerous
positive reactions were found (63b).
i.What question does an intradermal
skin test answer?
ii.How will antigens to include in an
immunotherapymixturebeselected?
64Antibiotic therapyis commonly usedinveterinary dermatology.In many diseases
it is necessary to obtain a bacterial culture and sensitivity to determine appropriate
drug therapy.There are twomethods for determining bacterial sensitivity to an
organism: disc diffusion and tube dilution.
i.What is thedifferencebetween these twotests?
i.Laboratories using tube dilution tests report anMICnumerical valueand identify
the organism as S(susceptible),I(intermediately susceptible) and R（resistant).Why
does thelaboratoryreport anumericalMICandwhydoesthelaboratory also
interpret the susceptibility for the clinician?
69
Copyrighted material
-070.jpg
63,64:Answers
63 i. An intradermal skin test does not answer the question of whether or not the
patient is atopic.That question is answered by the patientshistory,clinical signs,and
by ruling out other causes of pruritus. Positive intradermal skin test reactions can
provide corroborating support for a diagnosis;however, the major question that
needs to be answered is‘what allergens are significant for this patient?’ In other
words,positive reactions show exposure.Intradermal skin testing and in vitro allergy
testing are primarily used to guide selection of allergens for immunotherapy. If a
client is unwilling to consider immunotherapy, then the cost effectiveness of doing an
intradermal skin test or in vitro allergy test must be considered.
i. There are two major criteria for selection of allrgens for an immunotherapy
mixture.The first is the match between the positive reactions and the patient's
symptoms.The second is the strength of the reaction.Allergens are selected for
immunotherapy based upon matching the patient's clinical signs to the results of the
intradermal skin test.For example,if the patient were not symptomatic in the spring
when trees were pollinating,then tree allergens would not be included in
immunotherapy mixture.The second criterion takes into consideration the strength or
weakness of the intradermal skin test reaction. By convention, intradermal skin test
reactions are scored subjectively on a 0-4 scale using wheal size, induration, and
erythema; positive and negative controls are used as reference points. Generally,
intradermal skin testreactions scoring2or greater are considered significant if they
correlatewith the patient's history.
64 i. The disc diffusion technique is semiquantitative and the drug concentrations in
the agar surrounding the disc are roughly proportional to the drug concentrations in
the patient's serum. The tube dilution technique is a quantitative method for
determining bacterial sensitivity.This technique provides quantitative data regarding
the amount of drug required to inhibit bacterial growth.This technique allows for a
MIC to be determined by growing bacteria in decreasing concentrations of drug.
ii. Laboratories using the tube dilution technique report a numerical MIC and the
more familiar‘S’(susceptible),I(intermediately susceptible) and R'(resistant)
designations.MIC values are specific to the bacteria cultured and specific drug tested.
The designation of S, I, or R relates to the breakpointMIC.The breakpoint MIC for
routes of administration.With MIC testing,bacteria are considered tobe sensitive to
the drug if the MIC is well below the breakpoint MIC.Bacteria are considered to be
intermediately susceptibleif theMIC approaches the breakpoint MIC and are
considered tobe resistant if theMIC surpasses the breakpoint.
70
Copyrightedmaterial
-071.jpg
65,66:Questions
5
65A photomicrograph of a cross section of a hair bulb is shown (65).
i.What are the stages of the hair cycle,and what are the most common patterns of
growth in dogs and cats?
i.What factors influence hair growth in animals?
ii.Describe thebasicanatomy of a hair follicle.
66A 9-month-old boxer cross
66
dog is presented for examin-
ation of its chin. The owners
report that the dog develops
pimples'in this area.Upon
physical examination,the dog
has hair loss,papules,and
furuncles on the lips,chin,and
muzzle (66).Many of the hair
follicles are plugged with
keratin,and purulent material
and hairs can be expressed
from within these follicles.
i.Whatis thecommon name
for this condition?
ii.How is this treated?
71
Copyrighted material
-072.jpg
65,66:Answers
65 i. There are three stages or cycles in hair growth. The first is anagen, or the
growing phase. During this time the hair follicle is actively producing hair. The
 anagen hair is characterized by a well-developed dermal papilla that is covered or
‘cappedby the hair matrix.The second stage is catagen, or a transition stage between
active growth and rest. This hair is characterized by retraction toward the surface.
The catagen hair follicle is shortened in length and smaller. The most characteristic
feature of a catagen hair is the replacement of inner root sheath by trichilemmal
keratinization. During telogen, or the resting stage, the hair stops growing and is
retained in the hair follicle as a dead hair.A telogen hair is characterized as a small
hair, approximately one-third the length of the anagen hair. Hairs continue to grow
until they reach a preset length and then enter the resting phase.The hair will remain
in this state until a new hair starts to grow,pushes the old hair out, and the old hair
is shed. Hairs in dogs and cats are replaced in a mosaic pattern with peaks of hair
los/replacement in the spring and fall. The other two most common replacement
patterns are seasonal and waves.
ii. The hair cycle of animals is controlled by a number of factors including:
photoperiod, ambient temperature, health, genetics (i.e. breed and species), nutrition,
hormones, and local factors that directly influence the growth of hair follicles.The
most important of these factors are photoperiod and ambient temperature.
ii.Hair follicles are divided into three major anatomical regions: the infundibulum,
isthmus, and the inferior segment. The infundibulum or pilosebaceous region consists
of the area from the opening of the sebaceous duct to the surface of the skin.The
isthmus consists of the area between the opening of the sebaceous duct and the
attachment of the arrector pili muscle.The inferior segment extends from the
attachment of the arrector pili muscle to the dermal hair papilla.
66i.‘Canine chin acne’ is the common name for this disorder although this is
incorrect.Acne’ is a disorder of keratinization, and the condition depicted is, in
reality,a deep furunculosis. Chin furunculosis is almost exclusively seen in short
coated dogs such as boxers, doberman pinschers, English bulldogs, great Dane dogs,
rottweilers, and German shorthaired pointers. The cause of this condition is
unknown,and it is speculated there may be a breed and/or inherited predisposition to
the development of muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis.
i. In young dogs, it is important to rule out demodicosis as an underlying cause or
complication of muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis.This condition is treated with
oral antibiotics for 4-6 weeks along with daily cleansing of the lesions.It is important
to treat the condition aggressively as these lesions can cause scarring.
72
Copyrightedmaterial
-073.jpg
67,68:Questions
67A 4-month-oldkittenispresentedforevaluationof a freelymovable,firm,well-
circumscribed,0.5cm dermalnodule between the scapulae on the dorsal back.The
kitten has a history of being vaccinated 14 days ago in this region. The kitten also has
a history of flea and tick infestation.
i.What are themost likely differential diagnoses?
ii.How should the clinicianproceed?
68
68The owner of a dogbrought in a small container filledwith scales.Theorganism
shown was found in the debris(68）.What is it,what clinical signs can it cause,and
how is it usually diagnosed?
73
Copyrighted material
-074.jpg
67,68:Answers
67i.Injection site reaction, tick bite reaction （tick bite hypersensitivity or tick bite
granuloma), focal eosinophilic granuloma. Injection site granuloma is most likely due
to recent history of vaccination; however, these clinical diseases cannot easily be
differentiated by clinical presentation and history alone. Cats frequently develop local
reactions at the site of vaccinations and/or injections.A post-vaccinal fibrosarcoma is
unlikely due to the rapid development of this nodule and its clinical presentation
(well-circumscribed,freely movable nodule).Post-vaccinal fibrosarcomas occur in
subcutaneous tissue at the site of previous injections. These neoplasms tend to be
irregular andnodularin shape,softtofirm,poorly circumscribed,andvariablysized
(1-15 cm).These lesions are often ulcerated and hairless. Feline fibrosarcomas
associatedwith feline sarcoma virus are seen in cats less than5years of age and tend
tobemulticentric.
ii.There are several options available. The first option is surgical excision of the
lesion and histological examination of the tissue.The second option would be FNA.
Cytological findings in a fibrosarcoma include pleomorphic,atypical fibroblasts.FNA
of firm dermal nodules due to granulomatous reactions are difficult to perform and
are often poorly ceular; eosinophils and macrophages may be seen. The third option
is tomeasure the lesion andwatch it for further development.Tick bite granulomas
and injection site reactions are usually maximally developed by the time the owner
finds them;these lesions will spontaneously resolve over several weeks.Eosinophilic
 granulomas may progress, or not. If the lesion progresses, it should be biopsied.
68 This is a Cheyletiella spp. mite also called the ‘walking dandruff mite'. This mite
lives in the superficial layers of the epidermis; it does not burrow.It lays its eggs on
hair shafts, and the eggs are smaller and more loosely attached than louse eggs.This
is a contagious mange mite that causes scaling and mild to moderate pruritus in
contrast to scabies,which causes intense pruritus. In some breeds of dogs (e.g. cocker
spaniels),the only clinical sign is excessive scaling that resembles idiopathic
seborrhea.This mite can cause skin disease in cats,dogs, and rabbits.It causes
scaling, pruritus, miliary dermatitis or, surprisingly, no symptoms in cats. Diagnosis
can be difficult because infestations can vary from mild to severe.Mites can be found
on skin scrapings, acetate tape preparations,flea combings,and in cats via fecal
examination (cats ingest the mites during grooming). In some situations,mites cannot
be demonstrated, but animals are pruritic and the owners have clinical lesions
consistent with cheyletiellosis. (See also 69.)
74
Copyrightedmaterial
-075.jpg
69,70:Questions
69Withregardtothedogin68infestedwithCheyletiellamites:
iHow is this condition treated,and what are the zoonotic implications?
ii.How would this mite be differentiated from others?
70A 4-year-old dachshund
70a
dog is presented for the com-
plaint of recurrent bacterial
pyoderma,pruritus, sebor-
rhea,and hair loss in the
lumbosacral area (70a).The
ownersarebreedersand
havebeenreferredforan
intradermal skin testfor the
dog.The episodes of recur-
rent bacterial pyoderma and
seborrhea respond to anti-
70b
biotic therapy and anti-
seborrheic shampoo therapy.
Physical examination reveals
a quiet, slightly overweight
dogwith bilaterally sym-
metrical hair loss in the
lumbosacral area.The skin
of the ventral neck, axilla,
inguinal regions,and legs is
thickened and folded (70b).
Lichenification,hyper-
pigmentation,waxy debris,odor,hair loss,and apapular eruption arepresent.Uon
further questioningof the owners,it is established that the dogisnot pruritic when
the bacterial pyoderma and seborrhea are resolved.Skin scrapings and fungal culture
are negative.Impression smears today reveal bacteria and Malassezia organisms.
During the entire examination,the dog has not moved on the examination table.
When this is mentioned to the owners,they respond by saying that they selectively
breed for a quiet temperament.
i.Is an intradermal skin test indicated in this patient?Why orwhy not?
i.What skin disease(s）may the breeders be inadvertently selecting for in this line of
ssop
ii.The diagnostic suspicions are confirmed.What advice should the clients be
offered?
75
Copyrighted material
-076.jpg
69,70:Answers
 69 i. All animals in contact with an infested host or suspected infested host should be
treated.This mite is particularly difficult to eliminate in hosts with long hair,and
clipping of the hair coat is strongly recommended. Prior to specific antiparasiticidal
treatment, the affected host shouldbe bathed in a flea shampoo to aid in the mechanical
removal of mites and eggs.It is very important to treat for at least 4weeks since the life
cycle of the host is 3 weeks.Topical pyrethrin sprays, fipronil spot-on repeated twice at
30 day intervals,fipronil spraylime sulfur dipsweekly for6weeks,amitraz sponge-on
dips, and milbemycin are effective. Because mites live on the surface of the skin and lay
eggs on the hairs, reinfestation or inadequate eradication is very possible if treatment is
too short. Furthermore, these mites can live off the host for at least 10 days. The
environment should be thoroughly cleaned,and an environmental flea controlproduct
should be used to kill mites in areas that the host frequents (dog beds). It is a zoonotic
disease, and in many cases owners will report pruritic red papules on their arms,
abdomen, and legs or any other area in contact with affected hosts.
i.Otodectes mites arelarge,white,andmove freely on the skin.They aremost likely to
be found in or near the ears. The anus is terminal, and they have four legs that extend
beyond the body wall, except for the 4th pair in females, with short, unjointed stalks with
suckers on all four legs in males and the first two pairs in females.Sarcoptes mites and
Notoedres are very difficult to differentiate. Both are very small (200-400 μm) and oval.
In Sarcoptes, the first two pairs of legs are short with long unjointed stalks containing
suckers. In Notoedres, the stalks are of medium length,and the caudal legs have long
bristles.The anus is terminal in Sarcoptes,while it is dorsal in Notoedres. Cheyletiella
mites are large and have four pairs of legs with combs instead of claws. The most
diagnostic feature of the mite is the accessory mouthpart or palpi that terminates in hooks.
70 i.This patient is not a candidate for an intradermal skin test. According to the
history, the patient is only pruritic when it has bacterial pyoderma and/or when its
seborrhea is untreated. A combination of bacteria, yeast, and inflammatory by-
products of oily seborrhea are causing the pruritus.An underlying nonpruritic disease
causing therecurrent bacterial pyoderma,seborrhea,and hair loss should be pursued
before an allergy evaluation.
i.This is a true case.These breeders were unintentionally selecting and breeding a line
of hypothyroid dachshunds. These dogs all developed recurrent bacterial and yeast
infections,secondary seborrhea,and inflammatory skin changes (7ob). Once this dog's
hypothyroidism was treated,along with the secondary skin infections and seborrhea,
the dog's skin was normal. He was also markedly more active and mischievous.
ii. One of the most common causes of canine hypothyroidism is lymphocytic thyroiditis,
which is hereditary.These dogs should not be used for breeding, and the breeding stock
in this kennel should be screened for hypothyroidism.Evaluation of antithyroglobulin
antibodies, fT4, and canine TSH willbe most helpful in the screening proces.
76
Copyrightedmaterial
-077.jpg
71,72:Questions
71 A cat is presented for the com-
71
plaint of a well-circumscribed,
noninflammatory area of alopecia
(71）.The owner reports the hair
loss waxes and wanes,and that
the cat is not pruritic. Previous
skin scrapings and fungal cultures
have been negative.Skin biopsy
findings report a predominance of
catagen and telogen hair follicles,
follicular atrophy,and rare peri-
bulbar accumulations of lympho-
cytes,histiocytes,and plasma
cells.
i.What are the differential diag-
nosesfor thislesion in the cat and,based upon the skinbiopsy findings,whatisthe
most likely diagnosis?
ii. How is this disease managed?
ii.What is pseudopelade?
72A 4-year-old cat ispresented for a
swollen chin.The owner reports that the
cat rubs its chin on furniture,walls,and
on her (72）.On physical examination
there is hair loss,erythema,broken
whiskers,andevidenceofself-traumaat
the commissures of the mouth.Derma-
tologicalexamination isotherwise
normal.Flea combing is negative.
i.This cat's dermatological problem is
‘facial pruritus.What are the most com-
mon differential diagnoses?What diag-
nostic tests are indicated at this first visit?
i.How should this cat be managed?
77
Copyrighted material
-078.jpg
71,72:Answers
71 i.Differential diagnoses include alopecia areata,follicular dysplasia,and pseudo-
pelade.If therehadbeena history of topicalglucocorticoid use,then alocalized steroid
endocrinopathy could be included in the differential diagnosis. If the lesion shown was
 in an area where the cat could groom, psychogenic alopecia/overgrooming would also
be a reasonable differential diagnosis.The histological findings are most compatible
with alopecia areata.Skin biopsy findings usually include a description of a
predominance of catagen and telogen hair follicles,follicular atrophy,and rare
peribulbar accumulations of lymphocytes, histiocytes, and plasma cells.
i.Alopecia areata is believed to be an immune-mediated disease that targetsfollicular
antigens,causing destruction of thehairfollicles.Theselesions tend towax andwane
andmay regrowhair spontaneously.There is no effective therapy.
ii.Pseudopelade is an immune-mediated disease of dogs and cats that is characterized
by well-circumscribed noninflammatory alopecia (dogs)and symmetrical alopecia
(cats). Immunological studies show there are high numbers of αβ, CD8+ lymphocytes
within the epithelium of the hair follicle as well as CD1+ dendritic cells. In addition,
circulating IgG antibodies against keratin and trichohylanin have been reported
(Power et al., 1998; Gross et al., 2000).
72i.The differential diagnoses include: food allergy,atopy, demodicosis,bacterial
pyoderma,Malassezia dermatitis,dermatophytosis,dental or gingival disease,and
mastocytoma or fat chin disease'.FAD is not a likely cause. In cats, FAD can be
localized to the head and neck,but the author is unaware of any cases that involve
localization to only the chin.Notoedres mites can cause facial pruritus,but usually
there is more extensive involvement of the head and crusting of the skin often occurs.
Skin scraping for Demodex mites,impression smears for bacteria and/or yeast, a
dermatophyte culture,and a thorough oral examination for dental or gingival disease
should all be done in cats with facial pruritus.
ii.The first thing to determine is whether or not the excessive chin rubbing is caused
bya nondermatological problem such as gingivitis or dental disease.If dental disease is
ruled out,treatment of any secondary bacterial oryeast infection found on cytological
smears is the next course of action.There are large concentrations of sebaceous glands
in the face and chin and colonization with bacteria and yeast is common.These
infections can be very pruritic, and it is important to eliminate secondary causes of
pruritus before pursuing more advanced diagnostic testing.A skin biopsy may rule out
less likely causes of pruritus,such asmastocytosis.Assuming there sno infection,orf
the cat is still pruritic after treatment of the infections, the cat should be evaluated for
atopy and/or a food allergy.This was a case of feline atopy. This cat was found to be
allergic to house dust.It responded to immunotherapy for house dust/house dust mites.
78
Copyrightedmaterial
-079.jpg
73,74:Questions
73a
73b
73The foreleg of a 16-week-old puppy presented becauseof nonpruritichair lossis
shown(73a）.A mite was found on skin scraping（73b,arrow).Skin scrapings of
other areas of thebody were negative for mites.
i.What is the diagnosis?
i.What are the treatment options?
ii.Themechanism of action of amitraz makes contact with this drug dangerous for
people taking certain medications.What is the mechanism of action of this drug,
what are thecommon adverseeffects,andwhat is the antidote for overdose?
74There aretwomajor categories of adverse drugreactions.What are they?Give an
example of each type.
79
Copyrighted material
-080.jpg
73,74:Answers
73 i. Localized demodicosis.This diagnosis was based upon the fact that lesions are
few in number, and mites are localized to only the affected area.An adult Demodex
mite can be seen along with a lemon-shaped egg (73b, arrowhead).
i. The best course of treatment is difficult to determine in cases of localized
demodicosis. Conservative treatment would involve a “watch and wait’ approach.
This appears to be a case of localized demodicosis because there is only one lesion
present and mites were not found in normal adjacent skin.Approximately 90% of
cases will self-cure without treatment. If this puppy were otherwise healthy, this
would be an appropriate treatment approach.If more lesions develop,a more
aggressive treatment approach can be used.
Aggressive therapy would involve treating the puppy with weekly amitraz dips
until there are at least three negative skin scrapings at weekly intervals.Although
there are numerous treatments for demodicosis,weekly amitraz dips are still the best
initial approach.Alternative therapies(ivermectin,milbemycin) should be reserved for
patients that do not respond to amitraz therapy. The author does not consider
alternative therapies until patients have received at least 5 months of therapy
(20 dips) and live mites and/or multiple life stages are present. Other considerations
for using alternative therapy would include whether or not the dog is tractable to be
treated topically orif the owner can afford topical therapy.Amitraz shouldbe applied
byaveterinarian or a technician directly under the supervision of a veterinarian.
Although this appears to be a localized lesion, it is rather large and immature mites
(e.g.eggs) were found on the skin scraping.It could be argued that starting therapy at
this time would be prudent to prevent or minimize the chance that this animal goes
 on to develop generalized demodicosis.
ii.Amitraz is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor.It inhibits prostaglandin synthesis,and
it is an alpha-adrenergic agonist.This drug also inhibits insulin release, explaining
why dogs experience transient polyuria and polydipsia. Other adverse effects include
sedation, pruritus, urticaria, weakness, ataxia, and bradycardia. People taking
monoamine oxidase inhibitors or whohave glucose regulation disorders should not
come into contact with this drug.Yohimbine and atipamezole,along with supportive
care, are used in cases of overdose or to treat dogs with severe adverse effects.
74 Adverse drug reactions can be divided into predictable and unpredict-
able/idiosyncratic reactions.Predictable adverse drug reactions are usually dose related
and areoftenrelated to thepharmacology of the drug.An example would be the
vomiting associated with xylazine hydrochloride. Unpredictable or idiosyncratic drug
reactions are dose independent and are related to the host's immune response and/or
the breed of the dog.An example would be ivermectin sensitivity in collie dogs.
80
Copyrightedmaterial
-081.jpg
75,76:Questions
75A 10-year-old female spayed
poodle dog is brought in for a
'wart vaccine' appointment after
‘catching warts after grooming'.
Further questioning of the client
reveals the dog has no history of
having viral papillomatosis as a
puppy.The current lesions have
been slowly developing as the dog
has aged.The lesions are most
obvious to theownerafter the
dog'shair coat has been trimmed,
and also because they are traum-
atized duringgrooming.The dog's
hair coat is slightly oily.The owner is repeatedly requesting thewart vaccine'.Close
examination of the skinreveals multiple,well-circumscribed,raised,cauliflower-like
lesions (75).The lesions are freely movable in the dermis,and the dog has
approximately15 such lesions.
i.What is this lesion,what should be the response to the owner's request for a wart
vaccine',and what is the prognosis?
i.What arethefour syndromesin dogs that are associatedwithviral papillomatosis?
ii.Autogenous papilloma vaccines have been used to treat true cases of oral
papillomatosis. What is the risk associated with the use of these vaccines?
76a
76b
76Microscopicviews of two fungal organisms are shown(76a,b).
i.Based on the colony morphology presented,which one of these organisms is a
contaminant and which one is a pathogen.Why?
ii.How was this preparation made?
81
Copyrighted material
-082.jpg
75,76:Answers
75 i. This is an example of nodular sebaceous gland hyperplasia. This is the second
most common skin tumor in dogs. It is common in breeds such as beagles, cocker
spaniels, poodles, dachshunds, and miniature schnauzers. The cause is unknown, but
lesions are common in older dogs and dogs with seborrheic skin disease. Diagnosis
can be confirmed by finding clusters of lipidized sebocytes on FNA or by excisional
biopsy. These are not warts, and there is no *vaccine’ for these lesions. Such lesions
are best left untreated or, if traumatized,removed surgically.The prognosis is good
since sebaceous gland hyperplasia is a benign skin lesion. Lesions can be observed and
not treated,or removed surgically (using blade,laser,electrosurgery）.Although new
lesions may develop, tumors do not recur at the site of removal.
i. Warts' in dogs are caused by a papillomavirus. There are four syndromes
recognized in dogs: oral lesions in puppies that self-cure,horn-like lesions on the
footpads of dogs 1-2 years of age, pigmented papules, plaques or nodules on the
body of dogs 35years of age, and an ocular form that occurs in dogs of any age,but
usually in younger to middle-aged dogs. Immunotherapy (papillomavirus vaccine) has
not been effective for treatment or prevention of these viral lesions.
ii. The efficacy of autogenous vaccines has always been in question because the
lesions, at least in puppies, spontaneously regress. The risk associated with the use of
these vaccines stems from the finding of neoplasms (squamous papilloma, basal cell
epithelioma,and squamous cell carcinoma)at the site of injection of the livevaccine
(Bregman et al., 1987).
76 i. The heavily pigmented organism is not a dermatophyte, it is a fungal contami-
nant (76a).Fungal contaminants can be darkly pigmented, pale, or vary in color from
green to blue to yellow depending upon the species. Dermatophytes are never grossly
or microscopically darkly pigmented.The pale blue organism is a macro conidia of
Microsporum canis (76b).Note the boat’ shaped appearance of the macro conidia.
M. canis typically has six or more cells, tapered ends, and thick walls. In contrast, M.
gypseum has less than six cells and is thin walled. These differentiating characteristics
may be hard to seein young colony growth.Because some fungal contaminants, such
as Aspergillus spp. mimic fungal pathogens, microscopic identification of suspect
pathogens using lactophenol cotton blue should always be done.
i. Microscopic identification of fungal organisms is easily performed in practice.
Clear acetate tape is gently pressed against the colony growth and then placed on a
glass microscope slide over a drop of lactophenol cotton blue stain.This stain is
called a vital stain because it is used on living organisms; the phenol kills the fungal
spores on contact. Care must be taken when using this stain, as it will damage a
microscope lens.
82
Copyrighted material
-083.jpg
77,78:Questions
77A close-upviewof the skin
of a dog presented for a second
opinion is shown (77).The dog
has a 1 year history of gener-
alized pruritus and seborrhea.
Previous skin scrapings have
been negative.The pruritus
and seborrhea were treated
with glucocorticoids and anti-
seborrhea shampoos,butthe
lesions persisted and/or
returned shortly after discon-
tinuation of therapy.Exam-
ination of the medicalrecords
reveals that the dogwas repeatedly treatedwith cephalexin (5mg/kgPOq12h）for
7-10 days. Close examination of the skin reveals easily epilated hairs, scattered
papules,hairs piercing the scales,and a mild odor.
i.Given the information provided,what is themost likely cause of this patient's
recurrent seborrhea and pruritus,and what diagnostics should be performed to
confirm the diagnosis?
ii.What information in the history may explain why the infection isrecurrent?How
should this skindiseasebetreated?
ii.Why is topical therapybeneficialin the treatment of bacterial pyoderma,andwhat
treatmentoptionsareavailableforthispatient?
78The forepawsof an adult
78
cat are shown(78).
i.What is this condition called?
i.What treatment, if any,is
required?
83
Copyrighted material
-084.jpg
77,78:Answers
77i. Superficial bacterial pyoderma.Hair piercing scales are a common finding in
animals with pustular skin diseases,the most common ofwhich is a bacterial
infection. Skin scrapings should be repeated in this patient to rule out demodicosis as
an underlying cause, or as the result of the chronic steroid therapy. Flea combings
should be performed tolookforCheyletiellamites,fleas,andlice as eitherunderlying
causes of the pyoderma or complicating secondary skin disease. Impression smears
should be done to rule out a concurrent yeast infection.
i. The most commonly encountered errors in the treatment of bacterial pyoderma
include: concurrent use of glucocorticoids with antibiotic therapy,using too low a
dose of antibiotics, too short a course of antibiotic therapy, and an ineffective drug.
All but the latter occurred in this case. Other important causes of treatment failure
include lack ofpursuit of an underlyingdisease,concurrent Malassezia dermatitis that
was not diagnosed and/or treated, and misdiagnosis of pyoderma.
This patient's pruritus and seborrhea were‘cured’with a 6week treatment course
of oral antibiotics,topical antibacterial shampoo therapy (alternate chlorhexidine and
benzoyl peroxide shampoo), and immediate discontinuation of the glucocorticoids.
Yeast organisms were not found on impression smears.
ii. Topical shampoo therapy removes debris and crusts from the epidermis. These can
be heavily laden with bacteria.It removes bacteria from the surface of the skin,
follicular infundibula,and helps remove debris from deep draining tracts.Shampoo
therapy has a soothing effect on pruritic skin, especially when applied with tepid
water.The author instructs clients to pre-dilute the shampoo before applying to the
patient. This minimizes the potential for shampoo residue on the hair coat and the
development of irritant reactions from the application of concentrated shampoo to
inflamed skin.Benzoylperoxide,ethyl lactate,chlorhexidine,sufur,and salicylic acid
are the main ingredients in antibacterial shampoos.
78 i. Polydactyly. This is a hereditary disorder seen in cats in which there is an extra
digit.Affected cats appear to have ‘thumbs'.A common lay term for this condition is
'mittened'.
i.This condition is cosmetic and causes the cat no discomfort provided that the claws
of the extra toes do not grow into the associated pad. Owners should be educated
that they need to look at the cat's claws and cut the nails, as needed. If the nail does
grow into the pad, the cat will become lame.This is easily solved by a nail trim, but
in severe cases,the cat may be in pain and require sedation or a short-acting
anesthetic. Owners are very fond of the appearance of these cats, and although
surgicalremoval of the extra digit will prevent in-grown claws, owners often prefer
not to have this done.
84
Copyrighted material
-085.jpg
79,80:Questions
79a
79 The inner pinna of a 10-year-old
79b
cocker spaniel dogis shown;both ears are
similar in appearance(79a).The owners
report the doghasa history ofear infec-
tions,and they noticed the proliferation
starting on theinner pinnaeabout3years
ago.The ears are exudative,malodorous,
and the ear canal feels calcified upon
palpation.The dog is experiencing a great
dealofpain.Calcification ofthe soft
tissue of the ear is confirmed on skull
radiographs(79b,arrows).
iWhat type of ear disease isrepresented
here?
i.What are the treatment options?
80Insect growthregulators andinsect development inhibitors are used inflea control.
i.What is the difference between an insect growth regulator and insect development
inhibitor?
ii.Give examples of each class of drugs.
ii.What are the advantages and disadvantages of each class of drugs?
85
Copyrighted material
-086.jpg
79,80:Answers
79 i.This is a case of severe proliferative otitis.The severity of the proliferation and
calcification of the ear canal is compatible with what is called ‘end stage ear disease'.
It is highly probable there is a mixed bacterial infection complicating the situation.
Otitis media is highly likely in this patient.
ii.The treatment options in this patient are very limited. In patients with end stage ear
disease, TECA and BO are recommended. In this patient, there is marked
proliferation and calcification of the lining of the ear canal and the lining of the inner
pinnae.TECA and BO along with surgical amputation of the ear pinnae were
recommended to the client as the only viable treatment option.In this case,the clients
elected euthanasia.
80i.Insect growth regulators are analogues of the insect juvenile hormone.In the
 normal development of a flea, a fall in juvenile hormone concentrations triggers the
development of the pupal stage. These drugs prevent pupation and they are also
ovicidal. Insect development inhibitors affect nonadult stages of the life cycle by
means other than affcting pupation.
i. The most commonly used insect growth regulators are fenoxycarb, methoprene, and
pyriproxifen.Methoprene and pyriproxifen can be used on animals and are available in
collars or topical products.Fenoxycarb is used in the environment.Themost commonly
known insect development inhibitors are lufenuron and cyromazine.Lufenuron is a
benzylphenol that inhibits chitin, an important component of the flea exoskeleton.
Cyromazine is an aminotriazine.It does not inhibit chitin but rather causes the
exoskeleton to become stiff and results in lethal body wall defects. It is not widely used.
ii.Methoprene is directly and indirectly ovididal, embryocidal, and larvicidal. It does
not readily wash off the animal or surfaces to which it has been applied.The product
is safe for use on cats and can be used in combination with other products.The major
disadvantages of the drug include sensitivity to ultraviolet radiation and that it can
volatilize and move to other locations.Pyriproxyfen is ovicidal and larvicidal and is
not sensitive to ultravioletradiation.It is very stable even outdoors and is also safe
for use on cats.It is not easily removed by bathing and will translocate to bedding.
The major concern about this drug is its potential to harm nontarget species insects.
Insect growth regulators are systemic drugs that have high margins of safety.They
are an alternative to environmental insecticides although it can take greater than 3
months for fleas to be eliminated from a closed home environment.There is no
residue problem on animals or people and they are safe for use in cats.The major
disadvantage of this drug is that it must be given with food to be absorbed, takes
months to eliminate fleas from the environment,it hasno adulticidal activity,and
animals can bring new fleas into the home(Kunkle and Halliwell, 2002).
86
Copyrighted material
-087.jpg
8l:Question
81 Theowners ofa3-year-old
8la
spayed female dachshund dog
presented her for the problem of
symmetrical nonpruritic hair loss
(81a）.Upon examination,the skin
was thin,the dogwas slightlypot
bellied’, and the superficial vas-
culature on the ventral abdomen
was more prominent than ex-
pected(81b,c).The dog sun-
bathes,and theownerreportedno
changes in the dog’s water con-
sumption,urination,defecation,or
behavior.A complete blood count,
81b
urinalysis,and serum chemistry
panel were ordered,andall values
were within normal limits.The
skin biopsy finding was *compati-
ble with an endocrine alopecia'.
The epidermis and dermis were
thin,and the hair follicles were
atrophied.
i.What are the differential diag-
nosesfornonpruritic symmetrical
alopecia in this breed?
ii.Why were the screening diag-
nostic tests ordered for this
81c
patient?Additional diagnostic
testing is indicated in this patient.
What tests should be ordered?
ii.What is a UCCR,and how
might the information be useful
in treating this patient?
87
Copyrighted material
-088.jpg
81:Answer
 81 i. The differential diagnoses include hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism,
pattern alopecia,and estrogen-responsive alopecia.Hyperadrenocorticism and
hypothyroidism are the two most common endocrine disorders in this breed, and in
the early stages they can look very similar. Patern alopecia is a hereditary disorder
common in this breed. It usually presents with bilaterally symmetrical hair loss over
the head, ears, ventrum, and caudal thigh.Estrogen-responsive dermatosis is very
rare, but it has been reported in this breed also.It would be a diagnosis of elimination.
i. The most likely cause of this patient's hair loss is an endocrine disorder; however,
the history and clinical signs do not allow differentiation between canine
hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism.The dog's clinical signs are very
suggestive of hyperadrenocorticism,but the dog israther young for this problem and
isnot showing any other symptoms except for hairloss,thin skin,and a slight pot-
bellied appearance.The history of sunbathing suggests hypothyroidism.However,the
heat seeking behavior could be due to the fact the dog is simply cold because it has
lost its hair due to a nonendocrine follicular disorder.
A complete blood count, urinalysis, serum chemistry panel, and skin biopsy are
indicated to help differentiate causes of endocrine hair loss from follicular diseases.A
thyroid screeningpanel,low-dose dexamethasone test,and an ACTH stimulation test
would be the next series of tests.A thyroid screening panel was ordered first in this
patient andwas found to be normal.AnACTH stimulation testwas performed next
and was normal. The results of the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
(0.01 mg/kg IV) revealed an elevated basal cortisol at 0 hours,marked suppression of
cortisol at 4 hours post-dexamethasone, and an elevated cortisol concentration at
8 hours post-dexamethasone.These findings not only answer the question of whether
or not the dog has hyperadrenocorticism but also were compatible with PDH.In a
normal dog,the 8hour cortisol concentration would be suppressed,but in this case,
it was not. A high-dose dexamethasone suppression test (0.1 mg/kg IV) confirmed this
was a case of PDH. (The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test in this patient
was optional as the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test was compatible with
PDH.)
ii.A UCCR is a screening test that rules out hyperadrenocorticism. Dogs with
spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism have an elevated UCCR,but most dogs with an
elevated UCCR do not have hyperadrenocorticism.If the test is normal, it is most
likely the dog does not have hyperadrenocorticism.If the test is elevated,adrenal
function tests are indicated to answer the question of whether or not the dog has
hyperadrenocorticism.An abnormal UCCR test would have signaled that adrenal
function testing is needed, saving the owner the cost of the skin biopsy and thyroid
function testing.
88
Copyrighted material
-089.jpg
82,83:Questions
82A 2-year-old cocker spaniel
82
dog was presented for the com-
plaint of bilateral epiphora and
periocular pruritus(82）.On
physical examination,mild signs
ofprimaryseborrheawerenoted
(nasaldigitalhyperkeratosis and
scaling).The discharge in the
periocular area was thick and
malodorous,and impression
smears of this area revealed bac-
terial and yeast organisms.The
initialworkingdiagnosiswas
primary seborrheawith mild facial foldpyoderma.The epiphora andperiocular
pruritus didnotresolve after a 21 day course oforalantibiotics andketoconazole;
however,impression smears of the skin revealed that the microbial infection had
resolved.Closer examination of the patientrevealed there wasno evidence of face
rubbing,chewing, or whole body pruritus.The dogs conjunctivae were reddened,
and the sclera injected.Excessive tearingwas noted.What are two common causes of
epiphora in this breed of dog?
83A4-year-old male mixed
83
breed dog is presented as an
emergency with a skin lesion on
its lateral left thigh.The owners
left for dinner 4 hours ago,and
whentheyreturned,thedogwas
biting and chewing at this lesion.
The dog is extremely agitated
witha10x7cmlesionon its
lateral left thigh.The lesion is
extremely painful,pruritic,and
exudative (83).
i.What is the clinical diagnosis?
i.How should this lesion be
treated?
89
Copyrighted material
-090.jpg
82,83:Answers
82 The two most common causes of epiphora in this breed are blockage of the nasal
lacrimal duct and distichiasis. This dog's nasal lacrimal duct was patent. Careful examin-
ation of the patient under mild sedation revealed severe distichia on both the lower and
upper eyelid. This case of distichiasis was treated by electroepilation of the cilia.
83 i. The lesion is most compatible with an area of pyotruamatic dermatitis (hot
spot).There are two‘classifications’of pyotraumatic dermatitis in veterinary
dermatology: pyotraumatic dermatitis and pyotraumatic folliculitis.Pyotraumatic
dermatitis is described clinically as an acute, flat,ulcerative lesion with surface
colonization of bacteria but not follicular invasion.In the case of pyotraumatic
folliculitis,the lesions canlook similar,but satellite lesions of folliculitis are present,
and bacteria have invaded the hair follicles.It is the author's opinion that the
classification is academic as an untreated or inappropriately treated lesion of
pyotraumatic dermatitis will develop into an area of pyotraumatic foliculitis and
furunculosis, i.e. one lesion is simply the early form of the other.
i. Pyotraumatic lesions develop acutely and are very pruritic and painful. The dog
should be sedated and the hair from the area clipped.The lesion should be washed
with a mild antibacterial scrub and topical antibiotic ointment applied.Topical
drying agents (astringents) delay epithelial migration and slow healing of the wound,
so their use should be avoided. Cleaning of the wound is a key step in breaking the
infamousitch-scratch' cycle. Many dogs will no longer traumatize these areas after
they have been cleaned.The wound should be coveredwith a protective ointment or
dressing. The application of a topical antibiotic ointment (e.g. mupiricin) is preferred
because it does not inhibit epithelial migration.Also, these ointments act as wound
barriers and cover the free nerve endings in the epidermis; much of the pain and
pruritus in these lesions is due to the exposure of free nerve endings. Some clinicians
prefer to use a glucocorticoid containing product.Finally, the decision about use of
systemic antibiotic therapy needs to be made.Not all clinicians feel that systemic
antibiotic therapy is needed in the treatment of acute focal pyotraumatic dermatitis.It
is the author's preference always to treat these lesions as areas of pyoderma, as a
careful and thorough dermatological examination almost always reveals evidence of
concurrent bacterial pyoderma,underlying pruritic disease,or evidence of satellite
lesions of foliculitis as a result of the traumatic lesions. In long and/or heavy coated
dogs, pyotraumatic lesions are areas of deep pyoderma, and systemic antibiotic
therapy for 4weeks or more is the treatment of choice.The use of concurrent
glucocorticoids in the treatment of bacterial pyoderma is contraindicated; however, in
this condition it may be necessary to administer oralglucocorticoids for 24-48 hours
 in some patients to provide humane relief of pain and pruritus. This is especially true
in situations where lesions develop in a matter of hours. (See also 84.)
90
Copyrightedmaterial
-091.jpg
84,85:Questions
84Withregardto thecase ofpyotraumaticdermatitis in83:
i. Recurrent lesions of this type are commonly seen in what disease(s)?
i. What two diseases can present as areas of chronic recurrent pyotraumatic derma-
titis and are diagnosedvia skin biopsy?
85A 9-month-old cat is presented
85
for the lesion seen on its face
(85）.The owner reports that the
lesion developed over thelast
24hours.The owner also reports
the cat has had similar facial
lesions previously,but never one
this severe or acute.This is an
indoor cat,and the only other pet
in the house is a canary. The
owner practices flea controleven
though the cat does not go
outside.The only change in the
cat'senvironment and husbandry
was a diet change from a nonpre-
scription over the counter canned
cat food to a prescription lamb-
and chicken-based dry cat food.The lesion is pruritic,and blood and hair are trapped
in the cat's hind claws.Physical examination is otherwise normal. Skin scrapings and
flea combings arenegative.Impression smearsrevealed septic inflammation with
intracellular cocci.A dermatophyte culture is pending.The initial working diagnosis
is bacterialpyoderma,and the cat is treatedwith liquid cephalexin(30 mg/kgPO
q12h)for21 days.The lesion resolves,but thecat is still pruritic andwithin 10days
of completing the antibiotic therapy,another lesion develops.Bacterial cultures of the
lesion are negative. Impression smears reveal neutrophilic and eosinophilic inflam-
mation but no visible organisms.Fungal culture results are negative.
i.What is/are this cat's dermatological problem(s)?
ii.What differential diagnoses can be eliminated at this point?
ii.What else should be examined prior to pursuing additional dermatological testing?
Assumingno other physical abnormalities are found,what diagnostic tests should be
performed?
91
Copyrighted material
-092.jpg
84,85:Answers
84i.The most common causes ofrecurrent areas of pyotraumatic dermatitis are
 inappropriate therapy for the original lesions, unresolved bacterial pyoderma and/or
an unrecognized pruritic disease such as atopy, food allergy, and/or fleas.Recurrent
retrievers, Labrador retrievers,and Newfoundland dogs.
i.Areas of resolving calcinosis cutis and apocrine gland carcinomas can present as
nonhealing areas ofpyotraumatic dermatitis/folliculitis.
85 i. Facial pruritus.
i.Skin scrapings,flea combings,andmonthly flea control eliminate demodicosis,flea
infestation, Cheyletiella,stick tight fleas,and lice as underlying causes.Otodectes
infestation of the ears is still possible,although unlikely in an indoor cat receiving
monthly flea control and without exposure to other cats. The negative fungal culture
rules out dermatophytosis; Microsporum canis can cause eosinophilic plaque-like
lesions.The fact that the cat was still pruritic after antibiotic therapy resolved the
acute septic lesion indicates there is an underlying pruritic trigger for these lesions.
The use of flea control makesFAD unlikely.
ii. Under anesthesia, the cat's external and middle ear canal should be examined.
Some cats with intense facial pruritus have eosinophilic plaques in the ear canal.Ears
shouldbe examinedforforeignbodies ortumors thatwill cause thecatto traumatize
itself. In addition, cats with undiagnosed Malassezia otitis or ear mites can develop
lesions on the face.The cat's eyes should be carefully examined for any abnormalities,
particularly distichiasis.
Several options exist for further diagnostic testing.If the clinician and/or owner
are still unsure about the origin of thelesion,unstained impression smears and a skin
biopsy could be submitted to a diagnostic laboratory for confirmation. (In this case,
the owner requested that the lesion be confirmed; it was an eosinophilic plaque). In
this patient,both food allergy and/or atopy could be the cause of the recurrent facial
lesions. Because of the young age of the cat, and because at least one of the episodes
was triggered by a diet change, a restricted diet trial was recommended. This cat's
eosinophilic plaque was treated with an injection of methylprednisone acetate
(20mg/cat SC) followed by a 10 week diet trial using a canned rabbit diet.At the end
of the trial, the cat was normal and no further lesions developed. The cat was
challengedwithits previous diet,andwithin72hoursit began furiously scratching at
its face creating another eosinophilic plaque.This cat was diagnosed with a food
allergy.The owner was not interested in identifying the specific offending food and
elected to continue feeding the cannedrabbit diet.
92
Copyrighted material
-093.jpg
86,87:Questions
86a
86b
86A 10-week-old chow chow puppy is presented for hair loss,erythema,itching
behind the right ear(86a),and on the right rear foot(86b）.An area of ulceration on
the digit is also present,and theownerreported the woundwas self-inflicted.Upon
questioning,the ownerreports that thelesions slowly developed over2weeks,and
that hair loss preceded pruritus.
i.What are the differential diagnoses,andwhat diagnostic tests are indicated?
i. Closer examination of the skin revealed that follicular plugging caused
hyperpigmentation in this patient.What skin diseases are associated with follicular
plugging?
87A German shepherd dogwas
87
presentedforexaminationbecause
ofmouth odor and drooling.
Upon dermatologicalexamination,
the skin was odorous,exudative,
anderosionson themucocu-
taneous margins (mouth,eyelids,
and anus)were present(87).The
dogwas otherwise healthy.
iWhat is the diagnosis and how
should thisproblem be treated?
ii.What dog breeds may be at
greater riskfor developingmuco-
cutaneous pyoderma?
ii.How is this bacterial disease different from lip foldpyoderma?How would a
biopsy specimen differentiatelipfold pyoderma frommucocutaneous pyoderma?
93
Copyrighted material
-094.jpg
86,87:Answers
86 i.This puppy has two major dermatological problems: pruritus and hair loss.The
most common causes of hair loss in puppies are demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and
bacterial pyoderma. The most common causes of pruritus include flea infestation,
 demodicosis, scabies, cheyletiellosis, dermatophytosis, and bacterial pyoderma.
The diagnostics tests indicated are deep skin scrapings for demodicosis,
impressions smears to look for yeast and/or cocci, and a dermatophyte culture. This is
a case of dermatophytosis due to Microsporum gypseum.The puppy contracted this
dermatophyte while at the breeder's home since several other littermates and the bitch
also developed lesions.The puppies were also housed outside in a pen with a dirt
floor. M. gypseum is a geophilic organism, and animals contract it from exposure to
contaminated soil, often through digging.This puppy was treated successfully with
topical lime sulfur dips twice a week, for 8 weeks. The puppy was treated until two
negative fungal cultures were obtained at 2 week intervals. Systemic antifungal
therapy was not used in this puppy because it was <12 weeks of age. It is also
important to inform the owner that this is a zoonotic disease.
i.Follicular plugging with black debris is common in demodicosis, Malassezia
dermatitis,bacterial pyoderma,and seborrheic skin diseases.
87i.Mucocutaneous pyoderma.This presentation tends to start on the lips,but may
also occur on any mucocutaneous area (vulva,eyelids,nares,prepuce,or anus).The
tissue is swollen, exudative, and painful. Concurrent infections with Stapbylococcus
intermedius and Malassezia are common.It is important to consider other differential
diagnoses such as lupus erythematosus, lip fold pyoderma, zinc responsive
dermatoses, early PF, drug reactions, candidiasis, and erythema multiforme.
Diagnosis is confirmed by response to antimicrobial therapy and, if necesary, skin
biopsy. Severe cases can be very painful and may mimic more life-threatening
diseases.Differentiation from lip fold pyoderma may be difficult,but the lack of
chronicity and anatomical folds may be helpful. Systemic antibiotics for at least 4
weeks are indicated. Concurrent topical therapy with mupirocin ointment and
antibacterial soaks may be helpful.
i. This can occur in any breed of dog, but German shepherd dogs and German
shepherd dog crosses appear to be predisposed.
ii. Lip fold pyoderma is caused by anatomical apposition of tissues, and lesions are
localized to areas where the redundant skin causes friction.There is usually a history
of chronicity.In lip fold pyoderma,lesions are,by definition,localized to the lipfold
area. Concurrent involvement of other mucocutaneous junctions eliminates this as a
differential diagnosis. In mucocutaneous pyoderma,there is dense plasmactyic,lichen-
oid dermatitis in the dermis that is not present in the dermis of a lipfold pyoderma.
94
Copyrighted material
-095.jpg
88,89:Questions
88
88What is the metal instrument shown in the picture(88)
89Mucocutaneous ulcerations,
89a
either focal or multifocal,are a
major dermatologicalproblem
(89a,b).
i.What are the major differential
diagnosesformucocutaneous
ulceration in either the dog or
cat?
i.What other dermatological
diagnostic tests,other than skin
biopsy,should bedone when
evaluatinga patientwith mucocu-
taneousulcerations?
ii.What is epidermolysis bullosa
89b
acquista?
95
Copyrighted material
-096.jpg
88,89:Answers
88 The flat metal instrument is a skin-scraping spatula.This can be purchased from
medical or chemical suppliers, and it is also used as a weighing spatula. This tool is
used for obtaining superficial and deep skin scrapings. There are a number of
advantages of the metal spatula over a traditional scalpel blade.First, the spatula is
reusable and less expensive than using a new scalpel blade for every patient.Second,
and more importantly,it is safer method for collecting specimens forboth the patient
and clinician.The edge of the blade is sharp enough for scraping the skin,but not
sharp enough to cut either the patient or clinician. This tool is especially useful in
small or struggling patients that may be easily injured.Another use of the tool is for
the collection of cytological specimens from beneathnail beds,crevices in the skin,or
for collection of surface material. It also is extremely difficult to obtain safely a
sample of nail bed debris or exudate from interdigital areas or fold and crevices in the
skin with a scalpel blade.
89 i. In cases of oral mucocutaneous ulceration, the most important differential
diagnosis to rule out first is oral ulceration due to renal failure. The immunological
 diseases associated with mucocutaneous ulceration include pemphigus vulgaris,
bullous pemphigoid, systemic lupus erythematosus, and erythema multiforme. Drug
eruptions,heptocutaneous syndrome,thallium toxicity,and cutaneous lymphoma can
also cause local or generalizedmucocutaneous ulcerations.Several diseases caused by
infectious agents must also be considered,including leishmaniasis,protothecosis,
phaeohyphomycosis, staphylococcal infection, and candidiasis.
ii.As mentioned above, serum chemistries to rule out renal failure should be done in
any case involving oral ulceration.Second,cytological preparations of exudates from
the margins of lesions should be examined for the presence of cocci, Malassezia,
and/or Candida.These preparations are made by gently scraping the edge of a lesion,
smearing the exudate on a glass microscope slide and staining after air-drying.
Candidiasis may need to be confirmed via fungal culture.Mucocutaneous candidiasis
is often associated with an underlying systemic disease, e.g.neoplasia,immune-
mediated disease, or immunosuppression.
immune-mediated disease of dogs and cats. It causes mucous membrane ulceration
comprised of vesicles, erosions, and ulcers that are present around the oral cavity,
eyes,ears, anus, and genitalia. Most animals are affected by 1 year of age and
German shepherd dogs are predisposed.Histologically,the disease is characterized by
subepidermal vesiculation.Immunological tests to confirm the disease include finding
basement membrane bound IgG via direct or immunoperoxidase testing methods.
96
Copyrighted material
-097.jpg
90,91:Questions
90It is late spring,and the local
90
television stations have been
televising public service announce-
ments about the dangers of
sunbathing.The television com-
mercials included a list ofvarious
types of skin tumors that can
develop in people asaresult of
excessive sun exposure (e.g.basal
cell tumors,squamous cell car-
cinomas,melanoma).People with
any suspiciouslesions are urged to
seek a consultation with their
physician. One day,a very distres-
sed owner calls and requests a ‘skin cancer check’for her dog.During the exam-
ination,shpoints outa raised,solitary,pigmented lesion thathasrapidly developed
on thedorsum of herWestHighlandwhite terrier dog(90).
i.What is the most likely diagnosis and how should this lesion bemanaged?
i. What role does breed play in predicting prognostic significance?
ii.What roles doeslesion location havein predictingbenign ormalignant behavior?
91An indoor-outdoor cat is presented
for a facial lesion (91）.The lesion is
16
hard and adherent to the skin.How-
ever,it can be gently lifted at the
margins,and a healthy granulation
bedof tissueispresentbeneathit.
There isnoexudate beneath the lesion
or odor present.This is the only cat in
the household, there are no children in
the house,and no known exposure to
trauma.The only heat source in the
home is a wood stove.The cat fre-
quently sleeps as close as it can get to
thewoodstove.
i.What is the differential diagnosis?
i.How should the case be managed?
i.What breed of dog has been
reportedrecently tobe atriskfor ultraviolet light thermal injuries?
97
Copyrighted material
-098.jpg
90,91:Answers
90 i. The most likely cause is a melanocytic neoplasm or cutaneous melanoma.
Cutaneous melanomas can be benign or malignant. Benign lesions (also called
melanocytoma) are usually well-defined, deeply pigmented, <2.0 cm in diameter, and
mobile. Areas of pigmentation that are congenital and are most likely part of a dog's
normal skin coloration are called melanocytic nevi.The treatment of choice is radical
excision, and submission of the lesion and margins for histological examination. In
this patient,there are multiple areas of pigmented macules thatmost likely are part of
the dog's normal skin coloration. Because the lesion developed in this area, it may
have been present for much longer than the owner reported. One of the key findings
during the examination was the clearly indurated feel of the tumor.Sites of normal
pigmentation or pigmentation due to inflammatory skin disease do not feel thickened
orinfiltrated.
i.Breed may have an important prognostic significance as 75% of melanomas in
doberman pinscher and miniature schnauzer dogs are benign while75% of
melanomas in miniature poodle dogs are malignant (Bolon et al., 1990).
ii. Over 85% of melanomas in dogs arise from the haired skin and are benign.The
majority of melanomas of oral or mucocutaneous origin and about 50%of melanomas
from the nail bed are malignant. Melanomas with a more malignant behavior (i.e.
more likely to spread to other sites and organs) usually grow rapidly, are >2.0 cm in
diameter and,histologically,have a mitotic index of >3per10x high power field.
91 i.The differential diagnosis in this situation is difficult. The lesion is clearly‘old
because the triggering episode occurred long enough ago for the skin to die and become
hard and dry. The lesion looks like a burn eschar, but the whiskers on the cat's face are
not curled, as would be expected if it were exposed to a strong heat source. It is possible
that this is a thermal burn caused by the cat sleeping next to the wood stove.
i.There is no sign of infection, and a healthy bed of granulation tissue is present.
Daily hydrotherapy is recommended to keep the wound clean and allow the
granulation bed to continue to develop.The eschar could be allowed to slough on its
own or be debrided under general anesthesia.This wound will most likely heal
without complication. New hair growth may or may not occur, depending upon the
depth of the injury.
ii. Dalmatian dogs are at risk for ultraviolet light thermal injuries. Recently, full
thickness burns were reported in the black haired marking areas of a dalmatian
puppy and adult dog as a result of exposure to direct sunlight.It has been
hypothesized that dalmatians may be at risk for this type of injury because, as a
breed, they are generally white and thus, may not sense the degree of developing
injury and not seek shade as often as a black haired dog (Hargis and Lewis, 1999).
98
Copyrighted material
6dl660-
92,93:Questions
92a
92b
92Two DTM plates are shown(92a,b）.Both have been inoculated with a fungal
culture from a dog.
i.What is DTM,and what is the principle of its use?
ii.How can the gross characteristics of fungal colony growth be used to aid in the
differentiation of possible pathogens and contaminants?Which culture plate has
colonygrowthcompatiblewith a suspectpathogen andwhy?
ii.What factor may be most important in the development of false negative fungal
cultures when incubated in private practice?
93What are the clinical signs of dermatophilosis in small animals?
99
Copyrighted material
-100.jpg
92,93:Answers
92 i. DTM consists of plain Sabouraud’s dextrose agar, phenol red as a pH indicator,
and antimicrobials to inhibit thegrowth of bacterial andfungal contaminants.Although
there is a variety of commercially available plates, the author prefers the use of agar
plates that are easy to inoculate or Sab-Duets (Bacti-Labs,Mountainview CA).The
illustration shows a dual compartment plate with plain Sabouraud's dextrose agar on
one side (yellow) and DTM on the other. DTM is popular because it contains a color
indicator that signals the growth of a possible pathogen.Pathogens use the protein in the
media first, producing the color change.In general, contaminants use the carbohydrate
source first and do not produce a color change until the entire carbohydrate source has
been used. The color indicator (phenol red) may alter the gross and microscopic
appearance of fungal colonies and/or depress macro conidia growth. In addition, some
common contaminants will grossly mimic pathogens and turn the media red.
The author avoids the use of screw top fungal culture media because they are hard
to inoculate, obtain samples from, and there is an increased risk of bacterial
contamination if the top is screwed on too tightly.
i. The plate with the pale white colony is the one most compatible with a posible
 dermatophyte pathogen (92b). Dermatophyte pathogens are pale in color and are
never heavily pigmented (92a). The red color change in the medium indicates the
organism is consuming the protein in the media;both pathogens and some
contaminants can turn DTM red. Contaminants tend to use the carbohydrates in the
medium first before using proteins. Old fungal culture plates growing contaminants
may eventually turn red as the organisms utilize the protein in the DTM.
ii.Recently a published study showed that increased incubation temperature
(24-27°C [75.5-80.6°F]) resulted in a more rapid colour change on a commercial
DTM developed for animals (Rapid Vet D, DMS Laboratories, Inc. Flemington,
New Jersey, USA) and improved sporulation of fungi in that study (Guillot et al.,
2001). This study also suggested incubation at room temperature might account for
false negative culture results.
93Dermatophilosis is causedbyDermatophilus congolensis andismore common in
horses and cattle than in dogs and cats.This disease, although rare,has been seen in warm
moist climates. It is most likely to be seen in a dog or cat whose skin has been macerated
and compromised by chronic wetness. Lesions are most common on the dorsum. The
disease starts as erythematous papules and pustules that crust and become exudative,
causingmatting of the hair coat.The skin beneath these crusts is ulcerated and exudative.
Diagnosis is made by finding the organism on cytological examination of skin impression
smears or by culture.Treatment requires moving the host to a clean dry environment,
removal of the crusts,topical antibacterial soaks,and systemic antibiotic therapy.
100
Copyrightedmaterial
-101.jpg
94,95:Questions
94An adult Chinese shar-pei dog ispresented for the complaint of blisters.The axillary
region of the dog is shown andnumerous vesicles ranging in size from 0.5->1 cm are
present(94).The vesicles arefirm to the touch and donot rupture easily.
iThis is a common skin condition in this breedWhat is it, and how is it caused?
ii.How can it be diagnosed and managed?
i.What causes this condition in Chinese shar-pei dogs?
95A 2-year-old goldenretriever
95
dog is presented for the problem
ofacute onset of hair loss in the
last 48 hours (95）.The dog is
nonpruritic,and theskin shows
no signs of inflammation.Large
amounts of hair can be pulled
from the coat with normal
petting. Trichogram of the shed
hairs reveals they were all in the
telogen phase of the hair cycle.
Skin biopsy revealslarge numbers
ofhairs in anagen.Twomonths
prior topresentation the dog had an intestinal foreignbody thatwas removed
surgically.
i.What is the diagnosis?
i.How should thisdisorderbe treated?
ii.What are the five classifications of anagen and telogen defluxion in humans?
101
Copyrighted material
-102.jpg
94,95:Answers
94 i. Although this resembles an autoimmune vesicular disease, it is actually
cutaneous mucinosis. Chinese shar-pei dogs have an excessive amount of dermal
mucin, which gives them their characteristic ‘wrinkled’ appearance. The vesicles
contain dermal mucin that has percolated from the dermis through the basement
membrane and into the epidermis, creating a subcorneal ‘vesicle'.They commonly
occur in frictional areas.
ii.The easiest way to diagnose cutaneous mucinosis is to puncture gently one of the
vesicles with a sterile needle and express the contents.The mucin is thick, clear, and
stringy.This is a cosmetic problem and requires no treatment. In some cases, the
lesions can become large and pendulous, especially when they occur on the hocks.
The more wrinkled the dog, the more likely for these cosmetic lesions to be large.
Oralprednisone (2 mg/kg)for 7-10 days followed by a slowreduction over
30-45 days will decrease mucin production. However, this will occur over the dog's
entire body,not just in focal areas,and owners should be warned that their dogs will
lose some of their wrinkled appearance. Owners often refer to this as‘deflating’ their
Chinese shar-pei dog.
ii.The mucinosis of Chinese shar-pei dogs is the result of massive accumulations of
hyaluronic acid along with chondroitins-4 and -6 sulfate, and dermatan sulfate (Scott 
et al.,2001f).
95 i. This is a case of telogen defluxion.This is a unique syndrome in which a severe
illness,ug,highfever,shock,urgery,anesthsia,rothr stessfulvent cause
disruption of the hair growth cycle and a sudden loss of hair several months later.
The hairs abruptly stop growing, and large numbers are synchronized in catagen and
then in telogen. Approximately 1-3 months later large numbers of hairs are shed as
new hairs emerge.Anagen defluxion is a similar condition except that the large shed
of hairs occurs shortly after (within days to a week) the event. Hairs from anagen
defluxion often show a narrowing in the hair shaft or a sudden break. The sudden
stressor causes a temporary cessation of hair growth manifested by a narrowing or
weak spot in the growing hair.
ii.Treatment is not needed. The hair coat should regrow within 3-6 months.
ii. The five classifications are: immediate anagen release (anagen hairs prematurely
enter telogen and hair loss starts in 3-5 weeks); delayed anagen release (hairs remain
in anagen for longer than normal, and their release starts when hairs grow in
2-3 months); short anagen (idiopathic shortening of anagen results in increased
shedding and decreased hair length); immediate telogen release (normal telogen is
shortened and hair loss begins in days to weeks); and delayed telogen release (telogen
is prolonged)(Headington,1993;Scott et al.,2001g).
102
Copyrighted material
-103.jpg
96,97:Questions
96
96An adult (18-month-old)dogwas presented for lameness andbleeding of the paws
of 4months’duration.The owner reported that the lesions developed slowly，and
onlyrecently did all four paws look similar to the one shown(96).The paws were
painfulwolenandxudaivndigitltissuewasfriablandblodandu
exudedfrom theareawhenit wastouched.
i.This is a case of pododermatitis.This is a clinical example of what type of
pyoderma?
ii.What is the most common underlying cause of generalized pododermatitisin a dog
of thisage,andhowisit treated?What isthemost common cause ofpododermatitis
in dogs?
ii.What are sterile granuloma syndrome andnodular dermatofibrosis syndrome?
97A cytological smear of ear exudate ismade and cocci,rods,and peanut-shaped
organisms are found.A culture and sensitivity of the exudate isrequested.
i. What cocci are most commonly isolated from the ears of dogs?
i.What rods are most commonly isolated from the ears of dogs with otitis?
ii.What is the most likely identity of the peanut-shaped organism?
103
Copyrighted material
-104.jpg
96,97:Answers
96 i. Deep pyoderma. Blood, pus, and pain are the hallmarks of deep pyoderma.
Patients are oftenfebrile and have regional lymphadenopathy.
i. Demodicosis. Because these patients are in much pain it can be difficult to do
proper deep skin scrapings.Thus,Demodex mites can be missed in these patients. In
other cases,mites can be hard to find due to chronic granulation tissue.If mites are
suspected but not found, a skin biopsy should be done to eliminate demodicosis as a
cause of deeppyoderma/pododermatitis.
The deep bacterial infection needs to be treated with an appropriate antibiotic; it
cannot be stressed enough that treatment will require 4-12weeks of oral antibiotics.
Because therapy will be prolonged and expensive,a bacterial culture and sensitivity is
recommended since often more than one pathogen is present.The dog needs to be
treated for demodicosis.Amitraz therapy weekly is the initial treatment of choice.
Whole body dips with concurrent foot soaks in amitraz are the author's first choice of
treatment. It could be argued that ivermectin or milbemycin may be more appropriate
in such cases because therapy could be started immediately and, as systemic agents,
they may penetrate more readily into tissues. Often, the feet are the last region to clear
of mites because of scar tissue, and the inability of amitraz to penetrate into tissues.
Unfortunately,many dogs with pododemodicosis cannot be cured.Dogs that fail
amitraz therapymay respondto other therapies or may require maintenancemiticidal
therapy (e.g.amitraz)for life;treatment may vary from weekly tomonthly depending
upon the situation. In situations where chronic therapy is appropriate, the goal of
therapy is tokeep the patient lesion free even though the dog still shows positive skin
scraping for mites. Dogs with generalized demodicosis should not be bred, as the
tendency to develop this skin disease appears to be heritable.
ii. Sterile granuloma syndrome is an idiopathic disease that is common in many
breeds,especiallyEnglish bulldogs,great Dane dogs,boxers,and dachshunds.In this
disorder,dogs develop nodular lesions particularly on their feet.The lesions are
histologically pyogranulomatous but are negative for bacterial and fungal culture;
hence the name.The pathogenesis is unknown. The disease is important to recognize
because it can mimic bacterial pododermatitis,but it responds to glucocorticoid
therapy. Nodular dermatofibrosis is primarily a disease of German shepherd dogs
that presents clinically with nodular lesions on the feet and legs. The nodules are
associated with renal cystadenomas or cystadenocarcinomas in both kidneys.
97i. Gram-positive cocci,most likely to be Staphylococcus intermedius or
Streptococcus spp.
ii.The most commonly isolated rods from the ear canal are E.coli,Proteus,
Klebsiella,orPseudomonas spp.
ii. Large peanut-shaped organisms are Malassezia spp.
104
Copyrighted material
-105.jpg
98,99:Questions
98A 9-month-old intact female
98a
Labrador retriever dog wasrefer-
red for the complaint of persistent
pruritus (98a,b).The owners
practice flea control,and the other
two dogs in the house are normal.
The dog sleeps with the family’s
children,and none of them have
skin lesions.The dog was treated
for Sarcoptes scabiei miteswith
both lime sulfur(once weekly
sponge-on dips for6weeks) and
ivermectin(200 μg/kgPO every
2weeksfor6weeks).The pruritus
didnot respond to a 4week course of oral anti-
98b
biotics(cephalexin)andketoconazole atthe
appropriate dose and dosage for this patient.
Skin scrapings, flea combings, and a
dermatophyte culture were negative.The only
otherpieceofhistorical informationobtained
wastheownersreportedthedogdefecates
3-4 times a day,even thoughitisfedonlyonce
daily.The feces varyin consistency from firm to
soft.Dermatologicalexaminationrevealshair
lodged between the dog's teeth and gums,
generalized thinning of thehair coat,anda mild
oiliness to the coat.
i.What differential diagnoses have been ruled
out by the previous diagnostics?
i.What are the most likely differential diag
noses at this time, and what diagnostic tests
should be performed at this time?
ii.What is therelationship between intestinal
parasitism and cutaneous pruritus?
99Whatispiedra,whatclinical signsdoesitcause,whatother differential diagnoses
mustbeconsidered,andwhat isthe treatment of choice?
105
Copyrighted material
-106.jpg
98,99:Answers
98 i. The negative skin scrapings rule out demodicosis. The lime sulfur and ivermectin
therapy rule out lice and Sarcoptes and Cheyletiella mites.In addition,these are
highly contagious mites, and the other dogs in the house are normal, and the children
have no symptoms. The negative fungal culture and 4 week treatment trial with
antimicrobials rule out infections as a cause. The use of flea control makes a flea
infestation or lice infestation unlikely, as well as FAD. Also, the distribution of
clinical signs is inconsistent with classical FAD.
i.The most likely differential diagnoses are food allergy and/or atopy.The frequent
bowelmovements could be related to the skin disease,since some dogs with food
allergies have concurrent colitis. Owners may report that the dog strains and/or
defecates several times a day.This dog could also have intestinal parasites and be
suffering from a poorly understood disease called intestinal parasite hypersensitivity.
Finally, this dog is an intact female, and another poorly understood disease called
hormonal hypersensitivity could be the cause of the pruritus.A direct fecal smear and a
fecal flotation should be done to rule out intestinal parasites.If necessary,the dog
should be treated with an appropriate anthelmintic. If this dog has intestinal parasite
hypersensitivity, the pruritus will resolve with treatment. Surgical neutering should be
discussed with the owners,not only because estrus cycles are a possible (but rare) cause
of pruritus,but also for the obvious health benefits for the dog.In addition, the most
obvious dermatological test to pursue is a restricted food trial for up to12weeks.The
food trial should be delayed until after the dog has recovered from surgery. Although
most commercial or home cooked diets are formulated to be complete and balanced,
they may not contain enough calories and protein for a patient recovering from surgery.
If the food trial is negative,or if there is only a partial response, the dog should be
evaluated for atopy. This dog was diagnosed with a food allergy to beef and remained
symptom free as long as she was fed a beef- and beef by-product-free dog food.
ii.The intestinal mucosa is a protective barrier that does not permit antigens to cross
into the body. It has been proposed that one of the mechanisms by which dogs become
sensitized to various food antigens is via a damaged mucosal barrier.Intestinal parasites
(round worms, hookworms,and tape worms) damage the mucosal barrier and allow
antigens into the submucosa,leading to sensitization.In addition,viral diseases of the
gut are believed to play a similar role in predisposing animals to food allergies.
99 Piedra is an uncommon fungal infection of the hair shaft. It is caused by one of
two organisms,Piedraia hortae or Trichosporon biegeli.These infections are usually
asymptomatic and present as nodular lesions on the hair shaft.Differential diagnoses
include trihorrhexis nodosa,trihomycosis axillaries,hair casts,and abnormal hair
shaft development. These infections are usually self-limiting and shaving of the hair
coat and topical antimycotic shampoo therapy is usually curative.
106
Copyrightedmaterial
-107.jpg
100,10l:Questions
100
100What is this parasite (100)?
Allen
Mags
16Se
101The illustration shows three vials of a new immunotherapy prescription for a
patient(101).
i.Twoof thevials are dilutions of the concentrated ormaintenance vial(Vial 3）.Why
are dilutionsmade and administered topatients?
i.What is thecorrect’injection schedule for administration of the allergen,and how
should the allergen be stored?
ii.How long will it take before the patient shows maximal benefitfrom allergen
immunotherapy?Assuming the patient shows benefit from the therapy,how long will
thepatientneed toreceivetheimmunotherapy?
107
Copyrighted material
-108.jpg
100,101:Answers
100Ctenocephalidesfelis,adult catflea.
101 i. The individual stock allergens purchased from an allergy company range in
concentration from 20,000-40,00 PNU/ml. The maintenance vial consists of an
individualized mixture of allergens for each patient and is made from the commercial
stock solutions and varies in concentration from 20,000-40,000 PNU/ml. It is too
concentrated and patients are at risk of localized or generalized anaphylaxis if it is
administered without an induction period. Two 1:10 serial dilutions are made from
the patient’s maintenance vial (Vial 2, 2000-4000 PNU/ml; and Vial 1,
200-400 PNU/ml).Immunotherapy injections are administered subcutaneously.
Patients receive increasing volumes of Vial 1 every 2-3 days until a total volume of 1
ml is administered.At that time,Vial1 is discarded and small increasing volumes of
Vial 2 are administered until the patient has received a total of 1 ml. This process is
repeated until the patient is receiving 1 ml of Vial 3.
i.There is no one correct injection schedule. All schedules are tailored to the patient‘s
response to therapy. The initial phase of therapy takes about 30 days to complete.
After this, the patient receives a maintenance injection at regular intervals; the time
interval between injections is tailored to the patient andmay vary from 7-10 days to
every 21 days.The optimum interval between injections is determined by recording
the severity of pruritus between injections.For example,if a patient is receiving a
maintenance injection every10 days but becomes pruritic after day 8,the appropriate
interval between injections is about 8 days. The target volume of 1 ml is also not
absolute.Patients that develop pruritus shortly after the administration of 1 ml of
allergen, may not be able to tolerate this much allergen.In these cases, a decrease in
the volume (e.g. 0.75 ml instead of 1 ml) may be beneficial. On occasion, Vial 3 is too
concentrated and a patient's maintenance vial is Vial 2 (2000-4000 PNU/ml).
Allergens should be refrigerated to prevent premature degradation of allergen
proteins and to prevent bacterial contamination.The allergen liquid is a clear amber
color. Cloudy vials or vials with flocculent material indicate bacterial contamination.
The most common cause of bacterial contamination is a client that reuses needles
and/or does not refrigerate the allergen.
ii.Immunotherapy is beneficial in the treatment of atopy in both dogs and cats in
approximately 70% of cases. In general, patients can start to show signs of benefit
anywhere between 3 and 12 months of therapy. Immunotherapy is generally
considered to be life-long therapy. Therefore, it is important to select patients
carefully for this type of therapy. Seasonally atopic patients are usually managed
medically.As a rule of thumb, the best candidates for immunotherapy are patients
with severe seasonal allergies, year round allergies, patients that do not respond to
medical therapy,or patients with concurrent medical conditions that preclude the use
of glucocorticoids (e.g. diabetes mellitus).
108
Copyrighted material
-109.jpg
102,103:Questions
102 One of five cats in amulti-
102
cat household is presented as
an emergency. One week prior
topresentation the owner
foundasmallamountofblood
on the cat's face.Today the cat
is febrile（40°C[105°F]）,
depressed,has hair loss, and
an openwound on the side of
its face(102).
i.What is the most likely
diagnosis,how should it be
confirmed,and how should it
be treated?
ii.Three weeks later the owner
presents the same cat for examination.The owner reports that the cat's skin lesion
showed onlya partial response to treatment.What diseases should be considered at
this time?
iii.What is CSD?
103A 12-year-old cat is presented for
103
the sudden development of greasy
seborrhea (103).The cat is nonpruritic,
there arenoother inflammatory skin
lesions found on physical examination,
and the cathasno previous historyof
skin disease.The owner reports the cat
has stoppedgroomingitselfandhaslost
weight. Oily seborrhea is uncommon in
cats, especially in older cats. What non-
dermatological diseases should be
investigated for in this cat?
109
Copyrighted material
-110.jpg
102,103:Answers
102 i. Cat bite abscess.The blood was the result of a bite or claw wound from a
housemate. Cat bite abscesses are common in cats that go outdoors and/or that live in
multi-cat households. Lesions are found on the face, shoulders, tail base, paws, and
inguinal areas. This is usually a clinical diagnosis. The most commonly isolated
pathogen is Pasteurella multocida.Other organisms commonly found in the oral
cavity may be cultured. Although more difficult to culture, anaerobes are more
commonlyisolated than aerobicbacteria.Cytologicalfindingswould compatiblewith
septic inflammation: inter- and intracellular bacteria would most likely be found.
The cat should be sedated,the hair coat from the wound should be clipped, the
wound surgically drained, explored for a possible foreign body, and the wound
flushedwith saline or chlorhexidine solution.Antibiotic therapy alone is likely to fail
in cases where the lesion is not drained.Systemic antibiotic therapy for 1-2weeks is
most commonly prescribed, especially in cats that are depressed and febrile.
Pasteurella multocida is susceptible to penicillin antibiotics.
i.Themedical problem at this point is a non-healing wound.It is still possible that this
is due to the original cat bite abscess; there could be a walled-off area of sequestered
infection.Differential diagnoses include: sporotrichosis,foreign body,Cuterebra larva,
andNocardia or mycobacterial infection.Gloves should always be worn and lesions
should beconsideredofzoonoticlinfectious originuntilproven otherwise.
i.CSDis a zoonotic bacterialinfection caused byBartonella henselae(Breitschwerdt
and Greene, 1998). These bacteria are fastidious, arthropod-transmitted organisms
and cats appear to be the reservoir of infection.The disease can be transmitted to
people via cat bites, cat saliva, or bites from fleas or ticks feeding on infected cats.In
cats, this disease is considered to be a self-limiting febrile illness of 48-72 hours.Some
animals will develop neurological symptoms,anorexia,and peripheral lymph-
adenopathy.Most infections incats,however,are subclinical.The disease in peoples
associatedwith a variety of syndromes but is highly dependent upon the immune
status of the individual.This is one of the reasons why routine and consistent flea and
tick control are recommended for cats.
103 Greasy seborrhea is very rare in the cat, and when it happens it should be
considered a dermatological sign of a systemic disease: liver, pancreatic, or intestinal
disease, drug eruptions, systemic lupus erythematosus, hyperthyroidism, diabetes
mellitus,FeLV or FIV, and neoplasia.This was a case of greasy seborrhea secondary
to feline hyperthyroidism.The greasy seborrhea seen in feline patients with these
diseases is most likely due to poor grooming on the part of the cat and not a direct
relationshipbetween the disease and the skin.
110
Copyrightedmaterial
-111.jpg
104,105:Questions
104a
104b
104A second opinion isrequested ona catwith nonhealingwounds on the face and
21 days of oral antibiotics at the correct dose and dosage.The cat didnot respond,
and the owner reports the infection seems to be spreading. On physical examination,
a severe ulcerative lesion on the face isnoted and numerous smaller lesions on the
inner forelegs(104a).Exudate forbacterial and fungal culture is collected and an
impression smear of the exudate performed.The impression smear shows severe
neutrophilic inflammation andnumerous intracytoplasmic organisms(104b,arrow).
i.What is the diagnosis,andwhat is the treatment of choice?
i.Where can dogs and cats acquire this disease?
ii.What are the public health considerations?
105 This dog was presented for pruritus (105).
105
Notethehairlossoverthedorsumandalongthe
caudal thighs. Skin scrapings and a fungal cul-
turewerenegative.Fleacombingswerenegative
forfleas,fea excreta,lice,or Cheyletiellamites.
The dog’s pruritus had not responded to anti-
microbial therapy.
i.What is the most likely diagnosis given the
informationprovided?
i.What is the treatment for this condition?
ii.Howdoesthecondition developandwhat
immunological reactions are involved?
111
Copyrightedmaterial
-112.jpg
104,105:Answers
104 i.Sporothrix schenckii.Note the cigar-shaped organism surrounded by a clear
intermediate fungal disease. Organisms are plentiful on cytological preparations in
cats, but not in dogs. Itraconazole (5-10 mg/kg PO q24h) is the treatment of choice,
and treatment should be continued for at least 30 days past clinical cure. Cats often
require 4-8weeks of treatment.
ii. Sporotrichosis is a subcutaneous fungal disease caused by a dimorphic fungus,
Sporothrix schenckii.The organism is found worldwide and grows as a saprophyte in
the soil and in dead organic debris.It is also found in barberry and rose bush thorns,
sphagnum moss, tree bark,and timber. Outbreaks of the disease have been associated
with sphagnum moss used in horticulture to pack seedlings,young trees,and hanging
decorative flower baskets.The organism does not grow on living moss but rather on
dead decaying moss (Zhang and Andrews, 1993). The handling of stored bales of hay
has also been associated with disease (Rosser and Dunstan, 1998).
ii. This is a zoonotic disease; however, people can and often do contract it
spontaneously from the environment. Cases of cat-to-people transmission have been
primarily limited to veterinary health care workers coming into contact with infected
exudate. In some instances, infection has occurred after nontraumatic exposure,
suggesting that the cat form is particularlyvirulent and can gain entry into the skin
through microscopic breaks.People handling cats with abscesses should wear
disposable gloves and thoroughly wash their hand and arms with chlorhexidine or
povidone-iodine scrubs.
105i. Fleas and/or FAD.This is a classic distribution for flea infestations or flea
allergy in dogs.FAD is a hypersensitivity to the bite of the flea, and it is common to
find a low number of fleas in these animals.
i.The management of FAD in dogs requires the identification and treatment of
secondary bacterial and/or yeast infections, consistent and thorough flea control on
the pet and in the home,and the alleviation of pruritus.The latter may be
complicated by the presence of secondary infections. Glucocorticoids are con-
traindicated if secondary infections are present.
ii.FAD can be experimentally induced in dogs by intermittent flea exposure. In one
study, dogs were exposed once weekly for 15 minutes to fleas and within 40 weeks
developed clinical signs of FAD when challenged with flea infestations (Halliwell,
1990).Dogs that were continuously exposed to fleas developed tolerance to fleas and
a delayed onset of hypersensitivity. This work suggests that intermittent exposure to
fleas is an important trigger in the development of FAD. The immune reactions to
fleas are complex. Intradermal skin testing with flea antigen demonstrated that there
is an immediate,late phase (basophil influx),and delayed or cell-mediated response to
this arthropod.
112
Copyrighted material
-113.jpg
106,107:Questions
106A raised solitary lesion is
106
shown on the lower eyelidof a 3-
year-old cat (106). The owner
reported that the lesion had been
present for several months.
Previously,another veterinarian
told her that it was an‘eyelid
cyst'.Except for this lesion, the
cat is otherwise healthy. Cats do
not often develop infections of the
sebaceous glands of the eyelids
(meibomian styes or hordeolums),
and the lesion is suspicious and
may be a mast cell tumor.A FNA of thelesion confirms this.Thelesionis excised,and
the diagnosis is confirmed.A buffy coat smear isnegative for mast cells.
i.What is the prognosis for this cat?
i.What is thebehavior of ocular or eyelid melanomas in the cat?
ii.What is DNA ploidy?
107a
107b
107A catwas presented for lameness.Note the swollen skin around the base of the
nails(107a).
i.What is this condition called,and what are the most common causes of this
condition in the cat?
i.What diagnostictests areindicated?
ii.A smear of the exudate from the nail bed is shown (107b）.How could these
findings bedescribed,andwhat is the most likely diagnosis?
113
Copyrighted material
-114.jpg
106,107:Answers
106i.The prognosis for a cat with a solitary lesion is good. In cats,the vast majority
of cutaneous MCT are benign.The cat should be monitored for recurrence and/or
development of new lesions.Most feline MCT occur on the head and neck, and even
with a histologically incomplete excision most do not recur.Multiple tumors with a
generalized distribution over the body are morelikely to be associated withmalignant
biological behavior (i.e. spread to other sites and/or organs) than solitary tumors.
Cutaneous MCT can also representmetastaticlesions from visceral forms of the
disease, which carry a worse prognosis.
i.Most melanomas in the cat involve the eye or the eyelid.Unlike the situation in the
dog, histological assessment of malignancy does not predict the clinical behavior.
Ocular melanomas are behaviorally more malignant than oral melanomas, and
dermal melanomas aremost likely to have a benign course in the cat.
ii.DNA ploidy refers to the cellularDNA content,where diploid means normal DNA
content, and aneuploid means abnormal (either increased or decreased) DNA content. It
is measured by flow cytometry,which is a rapid and precise measurement of DNA ploidy
and the distribution of the cell cycle phases (G, G, G, and M) of a tissue sample.This
is a very important tool because it can rapidly measure hundreds of thousands of cells,
help to determine prognosis, and clarify the distinction between high-and low-risk
tumors. In the case of melanomas,DNA ploidy was found to be no more predictive than
simple light microscopy and is not considered cost effective (Bolon et al.,1990).
107 i. Paronychia.The most common causes of paronychia in the cat are trauma,
dermatophytosis, Malassezia dermatitis, demodicosis,Notoedres mites, and PF.
i.A Wood’s lamp examination is optional, but a dermatophyte culture should be
prepared. Exudate from the nail base should be collcted, smeared on a glass micro-
scope slide,heat fixed,and stained.Malassezia dermatitis is an under-recognized skin
disease in cats,and the most common presentation is an accumulation of black debris
under the nail.Bacterial culture and sensitivity should also be done,along with a skin
scraping using mineral oil to look for mites.A skin biopsy may be needed for a
definitive diagnosis.
ii.There is neutrophilic inflammatory exudate with large basophilic epithelial cells.
These cells are compatible with what would be described asacantholytic cells
(107b).These are epidermal cells from the stratum spinosum that have been shed into
the pustular exudate.These cells are often seen in patients with PF and in patients
with severe deep pyoderma. In PF,the cells are usually very numerous and often
present in rafts of 6-8 cells. In patients with deep pyoderma, the number of cells
adhered together are fewer,often just two or three.This was a case of paronychia due
to a Microsporum canis infection.
114
Copyrighted material
-115.jpg
108,109:Questions
108
108A 3-year-oldmale doberman pinscher dogwas presented for examination
because the lesions depicted did not respond to oral antibiotics(cephalexin 30mg/kg
POq12h for 21 days);the owner self-medicated the dog.Upon further questioning,
the owner stated that the lesion started out as a small raisednodule and,over the
course of 5-6weeks,developedinto a severely proliferative and exudative lesion
(108）.The dog was mildly febrile,had weight loss,and bilateral corneal ulcerations.
Impression smearsof the exudateswere consistentwith septicinflammation.
Anaerobic and aerobic bacterial cultures and fungal culture were performed.
i.What other diagnostic test is indicated?
i.Whatdifferential diagnoses should thepathologist be told arebeingconsidered?
ii.Cats rarely develop this type of lesion.However,something similar has been
described inlonghairedcats.Elaborate.
109Whatare thetreatmentoptionsforcanine hyperadrenocorticism?
115
Copyrightedmaterial
-116.jpg
108,109:Answers
108i.Skin biopsy.Numerous skin biopsy specimens should be taken from various sites
on the lesion.It is important NOT to scrub or wipe the target sample sites prior to the
biopsy. In some sites, a skin biopsy punch instrument would be suitable. However, if
the tissue is very thickened, a deep wedge biopsy using a scalpel blade is recommended.
i.The pathologist should be provided with a complete history. It is important to
include information about previous diagnostic tests (lack of response to antibiotic
therapy,negative bacterial and fungal cultures)because this will help the pathologist
decide which, if any, special stains may be needed. The considered differential
diagnoses in this case include neoplasia,deep fungal infections,dermatophyte kerion
reaction,mycetoma, and phaeohyphomycosis.All of these differentials can look
similar and are differentiated based upon histological examination of tissues.
A kerion reaction is an exudative inflammatory reaction to dermatophytes.It ismost
commonly seen with Microsporum gypseum or Trichophyton mentagrophytes. A
mycetoma is a subcutaneous skin infection in which tissue grains are present. These
grains’are believed to be composed of the infectious agent and/or antigen-antibody
response. Mycetomas are caused by fungi (eumycotic mycetomas) or bacteria such as
Actinomyces orNocardia.Phaeohyphomycosis is another subcutaneous fungal infection
caused by pigmented or dematiaceous fungi. It differs from a mycetoma in that tissue
grains are not present. This dog had a diffuse fungal kerion reaction due to T.
mentagropbytes.The bacterial culture was negative,and the initial fungal culture was
also negative. After receiving the biopsy report and noting the presence of dermatophytes
and a kerion reaction, a fungal culture from the peripheral region of the lesion was
obtained, and T. mentagrophytes was isolated. This dog lived on a small farm, and the
owner had several hobby catte and horses. Thus, the source of exposure was presumed
to be the large animals. The patient responded to 5 weeks of oral griseofulvin therapy.
ili. The acute onset and rapid spread of the lesion in this dog, along with the history
suggests that this may be kerion reaction to a dermatophyte. In cats, kerion reactions
are uncommon. Granulomatous dermatitis has been described in longhaired cats.
Affected cats developed subcutaneous nodules, and in one case, disseminated disease
from M. canis. This has been called M. canis pseudomycetoma or more appropriately,
fungal granuloma. Other names have included mycetoma or Majocchi's granuloma.
These lesions occur on cats with generalized dermatophytosis,and in one case, the
strain of M.canis isolated from the skin was different than the one isolated from the
tumor.Treatment is difficult and surgical excision and long-term itraconazole have
beeneffective.
109Adrenalectomyis thetreatment of choicefor adrenal tumors.Pituitary-dependent
adrenal hyperplasia ismost commonly treated with mitotane.Alternative therapies
include ketoconazole, selegiline, and trilostane.
116
Copyrightedmaterial
-117.jpg
110,I1l:Questions
110a
110b
110 A cat was presented forbumpy skin’and pruritus of the head and neck(110a).
Physicalexaminationwasnormal except for the skin.Diffuse,small papular-crusted
eruptions were present,primarily on the neck.The cat was an indoor-outdoor cat,
and the owners did not practice flea control. Skin scrapings were negative.Flea
combings of the trunk were negative for fleas and flea feces;however,fleas were
noted on the cat's face.Impression smears of the skin were consistent with
eosiniophilicinflammation(110b).
i.What is the clinical term for this cat‘sbumpy skin’?What differential diagnoses
should be considered?
i.What is theinitial treatment plan?
ii.The owner is a concerned the cat may have hypereosinophilic syndrome.What are
the clinical signs of this disease?
111A6-montholdSiamese
cat with multiple cutaneous
nodules on its head,face,and
ears is presented for exam-
ination (111）.Skin biopsy
findings reveal a histiocytic
MCT.
i.What is the cat's prognosis?
ii.What are the three major
clinical presentations ofMCT
in cats?
ili. What are the two histo-
logical subtypes of cutaneous
MCTin cats?
117
Copyrighted material
-118.jpg
110,Ill:Answers
110 i.Miliary dermatitis.This is one of many eosinophilicreaction patterns in cats,but
note this is not a diagnosis but rather a clinical sign.Theselesions are often found more
 easily upon palpation of the skin rather than on visual examination. This reaction
 pattern is most commonly seen in parasitic infestations, bacterial and fungal infections,
food allergy,atopy, and FAD.In this case, the most likely cause is flea infestation/FAD.
i. Initial treatment should be directed at treating the cat for FAD.Flea control for this
cat and all other animals in thehousehold should be prescribed.The monthly spot-on
flea control products would be ideal for this indoor-outdoor cat. A subcutaneous
injection of methlyprednisone (20 mg/cat) could be administered to alleviate the
pruritus and resolve the skin lesions.Treatment may need to be repeated. It is
important to follow-up on thispatient to determineif flea control alone eventually
controls the symptoms.If not,then food allergy and/or atopy should be investigated.
ii.Hypereosinophilic syndrome is a rare disease characterized by idiopathic
eosinophilia that infiltrates various tissues. Although a macular-papular eruption on
the skin can occur, it is rare. The most common clinical signs are diarrhea, weight
loss, vomiting, and anorexia. Thickened bowel loops, lymphadenopathy,
hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly are also common.
111 i. The prognosis is good. These tumors in young Siamese cats (<4 years of age)
usually undergo spontaneous remission.These lesions also can be seen in non-Siamese
kittens and will also resolve spontaneously.Adult cats of other breeds with widespread
lesions should be evaluated carefully as these cats tend tohave visceral involvement.
i.The three forms of clinical presentation are cutaneous,lymphoreticular or visceral,
and gastrointestinal. The visceral form involves a combination of the liver, spleen
and/or abdominal lymph nodes.The cutaneous form is limited to the skin.The
gastrointestinal form is usually a primary tumor and is the third most common
intestinal tumor in cats after lymphoma and adenocarcinoma (Thamm and Vail,
2001). These tumors usually arise from the small intestine.Eosinophilia may be
present. Clinical signs of lymphoreticular and gastrointestinal MCTs are indis-
tinguishable:vomiting,diarrhea,depression,weight loss,and anorexia.
ii.The two histological subtypes of feline mast cells are the histiocytic andmast cell
type. The histiocytic type occurs in young cats (<4 years of age) and is most common
in Siamese cats.It frequently presents as subcutaneous nodules.Histologically, the
mast cells are poorly granulated and lymphoid aggregates are common. Many of
these tumors will spontaneously regress. The‘mast cell form’of cutaneous MCT
tends to occur in mixed breed shorthaired cats. Lesions tend to be solitary and are
discrete,nodular,papular,or plaque-like lesions in the dermis or subcutaneous tissue.
It can also present as*miliary dermatitis'.
118
Copyrightedmaterial
-119.jpg
112,113:Questions
112An intensely pruriticdogwas
112a
presented for examination.The
dog's pruritus developed acutely
approximately 3weeks ago.The
doghadno history of skin disease
prior to this episode.The dog was
normal on physical examination
except for being intensely pruritic
and having‘scaly’elbows（112a).
The organism shown was found
ona skin scraping from the elbow
of the patient(112b).
i.What is the organism?
i.What clinical signs are asso-
112b
ciated with this parasite infesta-
tion?
i.What new diagnostic test is
available,and what are the limi-
tations of the test?
113A neutered female catwas
113
presented for the problem of‘tail
fungus'.The cat’s dorsal tail
region wasmildly pruritic,waxy,
and matted (113).The catwas
otherwise normal.When the
owner was asked why she
thought the cat had a fungal
infection, she said the area
‘glowed’when examined with a
Wood's lamp.
i.This is a very common skin
disorder found on the tail of cats.
What is it,and how is it treated?
ii.Why did the area glow when
exposed toa Wood’s lamp?
ii.What husbandry practices contribute to this problem?
119
Copyrighted material
-120.jpg
112,113:Answers
112 i. Sarcoptes scabiei mite.
i.This is a highly contagiousmite that causes intense pruritus.The history of an acute
onset of intense pruritus is common. The mites burrow in thinly haired areas, and
intense ventral pruritus may be the first clinical sign noted. In many cases, there is a
history of exposure to affected dogs or high-risk exposure situations (e.g. stray dogs,
boarding kennel, visit to a grooming facility, visit to a park). In many patients, lesions
may be absent but thinly haired areas,the ventrum,elbows,and ear margins,are
often good sites to find mites.Both deep and superficial skin scrapings should be
done to increase the chances of finding the mites.
ii. Recently, an in vitro serum antibody test was marketed in Sweden for the
diagnosis of this parasite.The test is reported to have a sensitivity of 83% and a
specificity of 92%(Curtis,2001).
113 i. Dorsal tail seborrhea or hyperplasia.The common lay term for this condition is
‘stud tail.This is a disorder of keratinization caused by excessive oil and sebum
production. The dorsal surface of the tail of cats contains large numbers of sebaceous
glands, and in some cats they become overactive and exudate accumulates on the
dorsal surface. This condition can occur in both female and male cats, regardless of
whether or not they have been neutered. Castration will not resolve the problem.
Impression smears of the oilymaterial should be obtained to look for secondary
yeast or bacterial skin infections,especially if the cat is pruritic.Secondary Malassezia
infections are common.If secondary infections are found, they should be treated for
21-30 days with appropriate antimicrobial drugs (e.g. cephalexin or itraconazole).
Topical, daily washings with an antifungal shampoo (ketoconazole, miconazole) is
another treatment optionforyeast infections.The treatment ofchoicefor the waxy
debris is frequent bathing of the tail area with a cleansing shampoo (e.g. a flea
shampoo) or a mild antiseborrheic shampoo.Treatment is usually life-long unless the
catresumesnormalgrooming.
i.The fluorescence is caused by the accumulation of sebum (skin oils) on the skin and
hair. Sebum commonly glows when exposed to an ultraviolet light orWood’s lamp
(e.g. chin and tail areas). The color of the fluorescence varies and is a known cause of
false positive Wood's lamp examinations. True fluorescence is apple green in color.
Diagnosis should be limited to the hairs since sebum on the skin surface will glow,
giving a false positive.
ii.Tail gland hyperplasia and excessive oily seborrhea are more common in cats that
are confined to small spaces and/or facilities with multiple cats. Cats confined to
small spaces and/or stressed by overcrowding may not groom properly. In addition,
this condition may develop in cats that are unable to groom properly,including
obese, elderly, arthritic, and/or injured cats.
120
Copyrighted material
-121.jpg
114,115:Questions
114
114InJanuary,a1-year-old dog is presented for treatment of ringworm.The owner
reports the dog has developed aringwormlesion on its dorsal back.There are two
other dogs in thehouse alongwith three indoorcats,andnone of these animals show
signs of skin disease.The doginquestion sleepswith the owner and she doesn’t have
skin lesions.Dermatological examination reveals a focal area of noninflammatory
hair loss(114) in the right lateral lumbosacral area.AWood’s lamp examination is
negative.The medical record indicates the dog received a subcutaneous injection of
glucocorticoids 3.5 months ago at the end of September for seasonal atopy.The
location of theinjection was recorded assubcutaneous over on the dorsum.The dog
isfrequentlygroomed,and theownerhas a penchant for havingribbons braidedinto
the dog's hair coat.
i.What are themost common differential diagnoses for acquired noninflammatory
focal alopecia,andwhat diagnostic tests shouldbeperformed?
i.The skin biopsy findings revealed a focal area of thinning of the dermis and
epidermis and atrophy of thehair follicles.What is the most likely diagnosis,and
what management recommendations should be made?
ii.List themajoretiologies that cause focaldamage to hairfollicles andgive at least
one disease examplein eachcategory.
115A dogwith severePseudomonas otitismedia is tobe treatedwithticarcillin
（Timentin?）otitic solution,compoundedfrom theinjectable formulation.20mlofa
20mg/ml concentration is required.Timentin? is supplied in a 3.1gvial.The
package says toreconstitute the drugby adding13mlof sterilewater toyield a
concentrationof200mg/ml.Howshouldthisprescriptionbecompounded?
121
Copyrighted material
-122.jpg
114,115:Answers
114 i.Differential diagnoses include alopecia areata,traction alopecia,post-rabies
vaccination alopecia,and post-glucocorticoid injection site alopecia.The anti-
inflammatory effects of glucocorticoids could be masking the inflammation usually
associated with an infectious disease such as pyoderma,demodicosis,or dermato-
phytosis,and these should be included in the differential diagnoses.Traction alopecia
is a clinical syndrome seen in small breed dogs that have ribbons, barrettes, or bows
tied too tightly into their hair coat.The tension on the hair follicles results in damage
to the vasculature and permanent loss of hair follicles. Subcutaneous rabies vaccina-
tions can cause vasculitis and a focal area of alopecia at the site of injection.Topical
andsubcutaneous glucocorticoids are also associatedwithfocal areas ofalopecia.The
most useful diagnostic tests include skin scrapings,impression smears,dermatophyte
cultures, and a skin biopsy.These tests were normal or negative.
i. The skin biopsy findings were interpreted as compatible with an endocrine alopecia.
This was a case of post-steroid injection alopecia. The dog's hair regrew over the next
6 months, and the lesion recurred in the fall when the dog again received a gluco-
corticoid injection. Post-injection hair loss is a possible side-effect of repositol
glucocorticoids, and owners should be warned that hair loss could occur at the site.
ii. Follicular infections (bacteria, yeast, and dermatophytes), follicular parasites
(demodicosis),nutritional diseases(zinc deficiency),neoplasia (epitheliotrophic
lymphoma),immune-mediated diseases (pemphigus, sebaceous adenitis,alopcecia
areata),and trauma (burns,vascular damage,i.e.traction alopecia,dermatomyositis)
(Paterson, 2002).
115Reconstituting the drug by adding 13 ml of sterile water yields a concentration of
200 mg/ml (3.1 g ÷ [13 ml water + 2.5 ml powder volume]).
First,calculate the number of mg of Timentin?needed in 20ml:
20mg/ml×20ml=400mg
Next, calculate how many ml of Timentin@200 mg/ml is needed to get that amount:
400 mg ÷ 200 mg/ml = 2 ml of Timentin@ 200 mg/ml
Then, calculate the quantity of NaCl 0.9% to add to obtain a 20 ml solution of
Timentin? 20 mg/ml:
20 ml -2 ml = 18 ml of NaCl0.9%
Note:This solution is commonly used by the author for the treatment ofresistant
Pseudomonas strains.The remaining stock solution (200 mg/ml) can be frozen in
aliquots of 2ml forfuture use.
122
Copyrighted material
-123.jpg
116,117:Questions
116a
116b
116Skinbiopsiesareveryimportant
116c
diagnostic tests in veterinary derma-
tology. The illustrations show key steps
in thecollectionof sampleswhere sample
handling can cause distortion and
artifacts.
i.How can creating artifacts be avoided
when selecting and preparing a site for
sampling?
ii.How can creating artifacts be avoided
when usinga skin biopsy punch (116a)?
ii.How can creating artifacts be avoided
when handling the specimen collected with a skinbiopsy punch (116b,c)?
117A 5-year-old female poodle dogwas presented for the complaint of anal licking
and scooting.Theowner reported that the problem startedabout 4weeks ago after
theyreturned from their winter vacation toFlorida.Physical examination revealed
salivary staining of the skin around the anus and amildly erythematous perineal area.
Rectal examinationrevealedmildlyfilled anal sacs thatweredifficult to express;the
secretion was thick and tan in color.
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
i. What is the immediate diagnostic and/or treatment plan?
123
Copyrightedmaterial
-124.jpg
116,117:Answers
116 i.The most common causes of artifacts during sample site selection and
preparation are damage of surface or target lesions with electric clipper blades,
surgical preparation of the site, and inadvertent intradermal injection of lidocaine.
The hair coat should be clipped very carefully or with scissors to prevent damage of
the site.The biopsy site SHOULD NOT be scrubbed or wiped prior to collection of
the specimens.Finally, care needs to be taken to ensure that lidocaine is administered
subcutaneously and not intradermally.
i.The skin biopsy punch should be placed directly over the lesion.The skin on either
side of the sample should be tensed to prevent shearing of the sample (116a).Once
the punch has been placed,it should be pressed onto the skin gently but firmly, and
rotated in one direction to prevent shearing and artifacts, until the sample is “free'.
Except where the skinis very thin,the biopsy specimen will be free from surrounding
attachments when the skin biopsy reaches the hub of the punch.
ii.It is very important not to crush the sample when freeing it from the skin.In order
to prevent this artifactmall forceps should beusedto grasp gentlythe ubcutaneous
stack of the specimen and gently lift it up (116b). In many cases, this alone will free
the specimen from the body. If not, a scalpel blade should be used to cut the
subcutaneous tissue and free the specimen from the skin (116c).
117i.Impacted anal sacs with or without secondary infection or pruritus ani
resulting in secondary anal sac disease. Anal sac problems are more common in
smaller breed dogs,especially obese dogs.Licking and scooting are suggestive of anal
sac impactions or anal pruritus. It is possible that the dog became infested with fleas
and subsequently tapeworms, as a result of the trip to Florida. Tapeworm segments
 can sometimes be found in anal sac expressions, fecal examinations, and/or on rectal
examination. Many dogs with allergic skin disease (atopy, food allergy, contact
allergy),vulvar fold dermatitis,vaginitis,tail fold dermatitis and prostate disease will
develop pruritus ani. The resulting inflammation of the anal area causes the anal sac
ducts tobecome narrowed leading to anal sacimpactions, and possibly infection.
i.Manual expression of the anal sacs is recommended. The secretion should be
examined cytologically for evidence of infection and infectious agents (bacteria,
and/orMalassezia).If there is evidence of infection,the anal sacs shouldbe filledwith
an antimicrobial solution that contains a glucocorticoid. This should be repeated
every 5-7 days.Alternatively, systemic antimicrobials (author’s preference) can be
administered for 14-21 days.A topical glucocorticoid can still be instilled into the
sacs or the owner can apply a topical steroid to the perineal area. In this case,flea
control should be discussed with the owners and prophylactic deworming for
tapeworms should be considered. Surgical removal of the anal sacs will not resolve
the anal pruritus if there is an underlying pruritic cause.
124
Copyrightedmaterial
-125.jpg
118,119:Questions
118A10-year-oldDSHtabbycatis
118a
presented for the complaintofa
“bump²on the nose (118a).The owner
reports that the lesionbegan as a scab,
and it has been gradually enlarging.
The cat also has had a chronic nasal
discharge of several months duration.
The cat is anindoor-outdoor and lives
in the southwestern region of the
USA.There is a mild purulent nasal
discharge, and the nose is distorted.
Thebump’is rather firm on pal-
pation.The cat is otherwise healthy
onexamination.
i.Given the history and clinical signs,
what isthemostprobable cause of the
lesion andnasal discharge?
i.What diagnostics are indicated to confirm the diagnosis?
ii.What drugs have been used successfully to treat this disease in catshow can
therapybe monitored,and can the owner begiven a prognosis?
119 A 3-year-old dog is shown (119).
i.This is a classic presentation of what allergic
611
skin disease?
i.How is this disease treated?
ii.What immunologicalmechanisms are
believe to beinvolvedin the development of
this disease?
125
Copyrighted material
-126.jpg
118,119:Answers
118 i.Feline cryptococcosis.This is a
118b
deepfungal disease caused by Crypto-
coccus neoformans,a ubiquitousyeast-
like fungus commonly associated with
pigeon feces. This organism has a
worldwide distribution and is the most
common deep mycosis of cats.Upper
respiratory signs,especially chronic
nasal discharge and masses over the
bridgeofthenosearethemost
common clinical signs,but skin lesions
are present in about 50%of cases.Cats
can also develop central nervous system and ocular signs.
ii.Definitive diagnosis can be made by findingthe organism on cytological
examinationofnasalswabs,nasal flushes,and/orimpression smearsofexudates.The
organism can also be found on biopsy;however,in this case, skin biopsy didnot
reveal the organism,and a nasal flush was needed to isolate the organism.The latex
agglutination test can give false negative results in cats with only skin lesions.The
organism(118b) is a round to elliptical 2-20 μm yeast-like organism,and has a
mucinous capsule that produces ahalo'around the organism.
ii.In some cases surgical debulking may be helpful when masses are large and/or are
obstructing nasal passages.Cats have been successfully treatedwith amphotericin B,
ketoconazole,itraconazole,and fluconazole;however,amphotericin B and keto-
conazole are not welltolerated by cats.Itraconazole treatment is long(>8.5months),
the dose is high (20mg/kg PO daily),and long-term therapy is associated with
hepatotoxicity.Fluconazoleis similartoitraconazole,anditiswidely distributed and
penetrates the blood-brain barrier.
Serial serum titers can be used tomonitorresponse to therapy.Progressive decreases
in serum antigen titers of at least10-fold over 2months suggest a favorable prognosis.
119i.This is a classic case of FAD.
i.FAD is treated with flea control.This patient has clinical signs of a secondary
bacterial pyoderma (note the erythema on the hind legs).The dog should be treated
with an appropriate course of antimicrobial therapy for a minimum of 4 weeks.
Glucocorticoids should not beusedin this patientto alleviate the pruritus until the
microbialinfectionsresolve,and the owner has initiated flea control.Immunotherapy
forflea bite hypersensitivity hasnotbeen successful.
ii.The pruritus of FAD is believed to be caused bya combination of type 1,type 4,
late phase reactions,and basophil hypersensitivity reactions.
126
Copyrighted material
-127.jpg
120,12l:Questions
120a
120b
120A9-year-oldblackpoodledogwithprimaryidiopathicseborrhea ispresentedfor
a second opinion(120a).The owner reports that the dog has developed primary
seborrhea in thelast6months andprior to that hadnohistory of skin disease.She is
seeking a second opinion because the dog's scaling is nonresponsive to topical
antiseborrheic shampoo therapy.Thesudden’development of primary seborrhea in a
middle-aged dogwithnopriorhistory of skin disease seems suspect.Theowner does
not practice flea control.The dog isprofessionally groomed every 4 weeks.Flea
combings reveal large amounts of dander,but microscopic examination of the debris
doesnotreveal any organisms.Skin scrapings of a scaly area reveal numerous thick-
walled organisms (120b).These are parasite eggs.
i.What is the parasite?
i. What species of this parasite is most likely found on dogs?
ii.This condition is considered a zoonosis.Can the parasite reproduce on humans?
121A5-year-old dogwasnormal
121
until6months agowhen theowner
started noticing that the dogs hair
coat was changing color (121).The
dogis nonpruritic and has no history
of trauma to the area.Lesions are
limited to the dog's head.No other
skin lesions are found on the dog.
i.What is the general term for the
clinical condition shown,what are the
possible causes,and,what are the
treatment options?
ii.What is vitiligo?
iii.What is tyrosinase, and what
clinical disorderhasbeen associated
with its deficiency?
127
Copyrighted material
-128.jpg
120,121:Answers
120 i. Cheyletiella. Cheyletiella mite is a highly contagious parasite that affects dogs,
cats, rabbits, and ferrets. The primary distributionof lesions is dorsal, and the classic
history is a dog with little or no pruritus to moderate pruritus and scaling. It is a
common parasite in dogs that require frequent grooming. This dog's primary
idiopathic seborrhca resolved after the dog was treated for cheyletiellosis.
Interestingly, the owners did not consider the dog pruritic.
ii. C. yasguri is most commonly isolated from dogs while C. blakei and
C. parasitovorax are isolated more commonly frorn both cats and dogs.
ii. This mite has not bcen shown to inultiply on people, which is in contrast to what
has bccn found with respect to Sarcopies scabiei mites.
121 i. Depigmentation or hypopigmentation. This can be caused by genetic disorders,
brccd associated diseases, or it can be acquired. Leukotrichia is the term used to
describe depigmentation of the hairs, and leukoderna is the term used to describe
depigmentation of the skin. This is a case of acquired hypopigmentation; the dog was
born with normal coat color. The possible causes of hypopigmentation of the skin
and/or hair include inflammation, drugs, metabolic diseases, neoplasia, immune-
mediated diseases, and idiopathic. In most cases the cause is unknown. Post-
inflammatory hypopigmenation is seen commonly in the inguinal region at healing
sites of baeterial pyoderma.
Subcutaneous and topical glucocorticoids are notorious for causing depigmenta-
tion. Metabolic causes are rarely documented but include zinc, copper, and lysinc
deficiencies. Depigmentation of the nose, gums, and oral mucosa can occur in dogs
with cutaneous lymphoma (pategoid reticulosis). Cutaneous lupus erythematosus and
uveodermatologic syndrome are two well-recognized autoimmunc skin diseases that
can cause depigmentation of the mucous membrancs. If there is an identifiable
underlying cause that can be treated, the skin and/or hair may repigment; otherwise;
there are no specific treatments.
i. Vitiligo is another term used to describe depgmentation. The cause of vitiligo is
unknown; however, there appears to be a genetic prcdisposition for depiginentation.
and the cause may be immune-mediated, Leukotrichia and leukoderma are often used
interchangeably with the term ‘vitiligo', but this is best avoided unless there is a clear
diagnosis of a genetic and/or immune-mediated ctiology.
ii. Tyrosinase is an enzyme that is necded to produce melanin. Documented deficiency
of this enzyme was found in chow chow puppies (Scott, 2001j). Their normally blue-
black tongue turned pink, the hair coat shafts turned white, and there was rapid
depigmentation of the oral mucosa. There is no treatnent, and the disease is diagnosed
by skin biopsy. Suspcct specimens are incubated with tyrosinase, and melanin is found
using special stains. Spontancous resolution of the condlition may occur.
128
-129.jpg
122,123:Questions
122a
122b
122The neck,caudal thigh,andperineal region of a 1-year-old female Portuguese
water dog is shown(122a,b).The hair loss began at approximately 6months of age
and has progressed.The dog is nonpruritic.Skin biopsy reveals a decrease in number
and size of the hair follicles and hair bulbs.
i.What is the cause of this dog's hair loss,and howis this condition treated?
ii.What is a tardive alopecia?
123The abdomen of an 8-year-old female cat
123
is shown （123）.The cat was originally
presented for a catbite abscess in this area.
The abscess was surgically drained, flushed,
and the catwas treatedwith 10 days of oral
amoxicillin.Over the last 4 months,the
surgical drainage site has failed to heal.The
site opens and drains a blood-tinged fluid.
Repeated surgery toremovegranulation tissue
andclose thewound has failed toresolve the
problem.
.What is this cat‘sdermatological problem
and what differential diagnoses should be
considered?
ii. What diagnostic tests are indicated? What
is a Ziehl-Neelsen stain?
ii.What are Runyon groupIV bacteria?
129
Copyrightedmaterial
-130.jpg
122, 123: Answers
122 i. This is a case of pattern baldness of Portuguese water dogs. Affected dogs are
born with a normal hair coat, and as they age, they develop a well-demarcated
This is a hereditary disorder and affected individuals should not be bred from. Dog
breeders arc wellaware of this skin discasc and are not breeding from affected dogs,
greatly decreasing the frequency of this condition. There is no known treatment, but
some dogs respond to oral melatonin (3-6 mg q8h) or subcutaneous melatonin
implants (1-3 x 12 mg implants). If trcatmcnt is cfficacious, hair growth should be
seen within 45-60 days.
ii. In tardivc alopccia, thc animal is born with a normal hair coat, and as the animal
matures, focal, regional, or generalized hair loss oecurs.
123 i. Nonhcaling wound. The diffcrcntial diagnoses include foreign body,
inmunosuppression, subcutaneous mycoses, sterile panniculiis, and infectious agents
(atypical mycobacterial infections, Nocardia, Yersinia pestis, L-form bacteria).
i. The cat should be tested for FeLV and FIV. The arca should bc radiographed for
 evidence of a foreign hody and surgically explored. Finally, tissue biopsies should be
collected for histopathology and bacterial and fungal culture. It is important to obtain
large deep wedige sections for biopsy and culture. Many of the organisms in thc
differential diagnosis list, particularly arypical mycobacteria, are present in small
numbers and/or are found in or ncar the subcutaneous fat. Furthermore, it is
important to tell the laboratory procesing the cullures and skin biopsy specimens
which organisms are suspected as this will influence the choice of culture media and
lissue stains, respectively. Because of the difficulty in isolating many of these
infectious agents, inpression smears of cut sections of tissue should be made and
submitted unstaincd with the biopsy specimen. Cut sections of the tissue are blotted
 on a paper towel until dry? (i.e. all blood is removed) and then 10-12 imprints on
clean glass slides are made. This cat had an atypical mycobacterial infection.
A rapid Ziehl-Neelsen stain is an acid-fast stain used to identify organisms such
as atypical mycobacteria (e.g. Mycobacteriun foriuilum, M. chelonei ). Aleohol
ii. Runyon group IV mycobacteria include organisms such as M. fortuitum, M.
chelonei, M. phei, M. segrnatis. These are considered atypical myeobacteria' because
they are rapidly growing unlike other mycobacterial organisms. These organisms are
Gram-positive, acid-fast, aerobie, nonspore-forming bacilli. They are ubiquitous in
nature. The slow growing mycobacteria are rarely associated with primary skin
lesions; skin lesions are usually secondary to systemic involvement.
1.30
-131.jpg
124,125:Questions
124 A 4-year-old femalc spayed 
124
St. Bernard dog is presented for
the problem of facial odor and
recurrent facial “hot spots'. The
dog has no other dermatological
problems. According to the
owncr, the dog developed a facial
hot spot 1 ycal ago, and the
lesion never resolved. It responds
to glucocorticoid therapy, but
always rcturns. The lesion is very
painful and malodorous. Upon
physical examination it is noted
that almost the entire lateral aspect of the right side of the dog's face is involved
(124). The skin is hot, moist, cxudative, and edematous. There is a serous crust
attached ro the hairs and, at the margin of the lesion, a papular cruption is visiblc. An
examination of the dog's oral cavity and ears is performed to look for a cause of the
unilateral lesion and none is found. A review of the patient's medical record reveals
the lesion has been consistently skin scraping negative. Imprcssion smcars of the
lesion roday, and in the past, have shown neutrophilie inflamunation with intercellular
and cxtraccllular cocci. The lesion was treated with topical chlorhexidine scrubs and
prednisone (0.5 mg/lkg for S-10 days). Thc dog had rcccived onc course of oral
 antilbiotic therapy (amoxieillin 500 mg q12h for 10 days).
i. What are the possible reasons for failure of this lesion to resolve?
i. What treatment recommendations should bc made?
125 The medial pinna of a
severely atopic West Ilighland
white terricr dog is shown (125).
Both of the dog's ears appear
similar. Note the severe erythema,
lichcnification, and scaling. The
owners arrived home to find the
dog with its head tilted to the left
side and a soft fluctuant bulging
on the medial aspect of the left
ear pinna.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. T'he owners don't' believe the
diagnosis. How can it be confirmcd?
.What is the most likely cause of this condition, and what are the treatment options?
131
-132.jpg
124,125:Answers
124 i.First, this is primarily a bacterial skin disease and glucocorticoid therapy is
inappropriate. Second, the antimicrobials therapy prescribed was ineffective for a
number of reasons. The dosage for this patient was too low and the length of therapy
too short.Third, amoxicilln is a poor empirical choice of antibiotics for treatment of
Staphylococcus intermedius.Finally,it isvery possible that thereis an underlying skin
disease perpetuating the lesions. Recurrent areas of pyotraumatic dermatitis on the
face are common in atopic dogs.
i.The first treatment step has already been done, clipping of the hair coat from the
lesions.Next, the area should be washed gently with an antibacterial shampoo or
scrub. The owner can continue to do this at home on a daily basis provided the dog
does not object.Finally, the lesion should be treated with systemic antibiotics (e.g.
cephalexin 30 mg/kg POq12h)for at least 4-6 weeks.This is a very large dog and the
owner must understand the dog must be dosed based upon the dog's weight. If the
lesion recurs after appropriate therapy, a more aggressive search for an underlying
cause or trigger should be pursuedAt this time,it is uncertain if therelapses aredu
to the presence of an underlying trigger or solely due to treatment errors.
125 i. Aural hematoma.
i. The diagnosis can be confirmed by aspirating fluid (i.e. blood) from the swelling.
This should be done with a small gauge needle because it is painful,and the pressure
within the hematoma will cause it to ooze blood.
i.Aural hematomas are caused by violent head shaking that fractures the cartilage,
leading to hemorrhage within the delicate ear cartilage. Clinically, this appears as a
soft fluctuant swelling on the concave surface of the pinnae. Unilateral or bilateral
aural hematomas are common in atopic dogs; many atopic dogs have curled or
deformed ear pinnae suggesting they have had previous aural hematomas that were
untreated and allowed to self-heal.The most common cause of aural hematomas in
cats is an ear mite infestation.
Aural hematomas,although uncomfortable for the patient,are not life threatening
and will resolve without treatment in most cases but with scarring. Optimum repair
of an aural hematoma requires surgical drainage of the lesion and closure of the dead
space with sutures. The two most common mistakes made when repairing aural
hematomas are use of too few sutures (i.e. leaving too much dead space) and
removing the sutures before the ear has completely healed (i.e. >3 weeks). Mastitis
teat cannulas can be used for temporary relief of the swelling,or in patients that
cannot tolerate general anesthesia.This is an excellent temporary measure for dogs
presented for an emergency examination.Laser therapy is an option to cold surgery
and sutures;however, the cosmetic success of either procedure depends more upon
the skill of the surgeon than on the tool.
132
Copyrighted material
-133.jpg
126,127:Questions
126
126 In a stray animal shelter, one of the volunteers identifies a dog with ‘nasal
fungus'. Examination of the dog (126) reveals a raised, destructive, proliferative
lesion involving the left naris and soft tissue of the nose. The area is ncrotic and
malodorous, and the dog's regional lymph nodes are enlarged. The major qucstion
rhe voluntecr needs answered is whether or not the dog can be treated and madc
availahle for adoption.
i. What are the differential diagnoses, and what diagnostic tests arc indicated at this
time?
i. What prognostie factors need to be assessed in dogs with canine MC'T?
ii. What is the significance of each of these prognostic factors?
127 What is feline paraneoplastic alopecia?
1.3.
-134.jpg
126,127:Answers
126 i. The most likely causc is a tumor: MCT, fibrosarcoma, melanoma, and
carcinoma. Other causes include bactcrial or fungal granuloma, kerion reaction,
subcutaneous mycoses, and trauma. The lack of history in this case complicates the
situation because there is no knowledge of how slowly or quickly the lesion developed.
Rapid development of the lesion docs not preclude a tunor but is more commonly
associated with infectious agents. In this paticnt, as in other cases, the nost irnportant
question to answer is what is it?From that perspective, FNA and skin biopsies are the
most cost effcctive diagnostic tools. Once a diagnosis has been made, the owners can
determine whether to pursue trcatment or not. If treatinent is pursued, additional
diagnostics (c.g. skullradiographs) are indicated to deterinine invasiveness of the mass
and treatment options. Diagnostics in this case revealed that this was an invasive MCT.
i.The prognostic factors that need tu be assessed inelude: histological grade, clinieal
stage, location, AgNOR count, growth rate, PCNA assessinent, DNA ploidy,
recurrence, systemic signs, age, breed, and sex (Thamm and Vail, 2001).
ii. Histological grade: this is strongly predietive of the ouicome. Dogs wich undif-
ferentiated tumors usually dic of the disease after local therapies, as compared with dogs
with well-differentiated tunors that are usually cured with appropriate therapy. Clinical
stage: states that are confined to the skin without local lymph node or distant metastasis
havc a bettcr prognosis than higher slage diseases. Location: visceral or bone marrow
MCTs have a grave prognosis. Tumors of the oral, mucocutaneous, perianal, preputial.
and nail bed sites tend to be tundifferentiated and are associated with a poor prognosis.
AgNOR count: the AgNOR count is predictive of surgical outcame. The higher the
AgNOR count, the poorer the prognosis. Growth rate: MCTs that renain localized for
long periods of time are usually benign. PCNA assessment: immunohistochemical
assessment of PCNA is a measure of tumor proliferation; the higher the score the more
guarded the prognosis. DNA ploidy: aneuploid tumors are associated with higher clinical
surgical excision carry a more guarded prognosis. Systemic signs: animals that present
with systemic signs of illness (anorexia, voniting, gastrointestinal ulceration, melena)
usually have nore aggressive forms of MCT. Age: older dogs have shorter median
disease-free interval than younger dogs. Breed: MCTs in hoxer dogs tend to be more
differentiated and carry a better prognosis. Sex: male dogs tend to have a shorter survival
time than fenale dogs post-chemotherapy (Thamm and Vail, 2001).
disease, in particular neoplasia of the gastrointestinal tract. The most common
presentation is an older cat presented with hair loss on the ventral abdomen and/or on
the extremities. The footpads may appear thin and scaly. Sometimes there is a shiny
appearance to the alopecic skin. Ahdominal neoplasia should be suspected in any older
cat presenting with a recent (weeks to months) history of overgrooming or hair loss.
134
-135.jpg
128,129:Questions
128A 9-month-old indoor
128a
cat was presented for a
woundon thelateral thorax
and matting of the hair
coat.The owner reported
that the wound started as a
small swelling that gradu-
ally enlarged over the last
week(128a).The kitten was
not febrile,and the wound
was cool and nonpainful
upon palpation.The wound
was explored,and a moving object was seen in
128b
the hole. A foreign object was removed from the
wound(128b).
i.What is the object?
i.How is this infestation treated?
iiHow did this kitten contract this parasite,
and what is the primaryhost?
129 Coalescingerythema on the
129
testicular skin ofadogis shown
(129).The lesionsblanche when a
glass slide is pressed over them.
Similar lesions are present
throughout the coat of this dog. In
addition,the dog was depressed
and‘walking stiffly’，according to
the owner.These lesions were not
present 3 days ago when the dog
received his yearly physical exam-
ination,heartworm test,and
appropriate vaccinations.At the
time ofvaccination abacterialpyoderma was found,and a 3week course oforal
antibiotics was prescribed.
i.What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. How should this case be managed?
135
Copyrighted material
-136.jpg
128,129:Answers
128i.Cuterebraflylarvae.
i.Treatment is unnecessary since cats are not natural hosts for this parasite.
However, the larva should be carefully removed. The wound should be enlarged
enough to allow for the entire grub to be removed without breaking it: retained parts
can cause infection, foreign body reactions, irritant reactions and, in rare cases,
 allergic reactions. The wound should be flushed after removal of the parasite, and a
7-10 day course of antibiotic therapy may be needed depending upon the extent of
the secondary infection.
ii. Cuterebra are large bee-like flies that do not bite or feed. They lay their eggs on
stones,vegetation, or near the openings of animal burrows.The natural hosts of this
organism are rabbits and rodents. Cats and dogs become infested when they come
into contact with the larvae onrocks,vegetation,or near the openings of rabbit and
rodent dens. The larvae enter the body when ingested or via natural openings. The
larvae undergo aberrant migration and localize to the skin of the neck, head,and
trunk. Cuterebra infestations are seen most commonly in the late summer and fall.
Lesions can be slow or rapid in development. Although Cuterebra infestations are
most common in outdoor cats, they can be seen in housecats with no known outdoor
exposure.This exposure occurred somewhere and sometime without the owner's
knowledge.
129 i. The lesion depicted is a diffuse reddening on the skin of the scrotum.Potential
differential diagnoses include:allergic or irritant contact dermatitis,worsening of the
bacterial pyoderma, hemorrhage, and drug reaction.
i.Because lesions are present throughout the hair coat,it is unlikely this is a contact
dermatitis.However, the owners should be asked if they have washed the dog in the
last 72 hours, applied any type of conditioner,and/or if the dog has been exposed to
any unusual chemicals (e.g. lawn fertilizer). Impression smears should be taken to
determine if the bacterial pyoderma has worsened,or if a concurrent yeast infection
has developed. The blanching upon pressure is most compatible with erythema due to
inflammation.If the lesion did not blanche,cutaneous hemorrhage would be included
in the problem list. The most likely cause of the lesions is a drug reaction to the oral
antibiotic prescribed for bacterial pyoderma.If this is a drug reaction, the lesions
should resolve within a few days after halting administration of the drug.The lesions
in this dog resolved within 72 hours after discontinuation of cephalexin.
136
Copyrighted material
-137.jpg
130,131:Questions
130
130The abdomen of a 10-year-oldIrish setter dogis shown.The owners presented
the dogfora very large,subcutaneous,ulcerativemass in the caudal abdominal area
(130). The mass was diagnosed via skin biopsy as a hemangiosarcoma.
i.What is the treatment of choice?
i.What is the prognosisfor thispatient?
131ThePCRmethod is sensitiveenough to detect aslittle asoneDNAmolecule in
almost anytype of sample,allowingscientiststoinvestigatechanges at thelevelof the
single cell.BecausePCRissuch an accurate and sensitive diagnostic tool,itmay soon
beclinicallyuseful for early detection orresidual detection of disease.Asanexample,
PCRwas recently used for early detection of opportunistic and pathogenic fungi in
dermal specimens from dermatomycoses-affectedpatients(Turinet al.,20oo),where
early detectionof fungal infectionis essential for effective therapy.PCRmay also be
clinically useful for detection of conditions such as CsD,a disease difficult to
diagnose in animals due to the quiescent phases of the infecting microbe Tapp et al.,
2001).Thus,PCR may soon be an alternative tool replacing conventional detection
techniques.
i.HowdoesthePCRmethodwork?
ii.Howwouldyou examine the products of a PCRreaction?
137
Copyrighted material
-138.jpg
130,131:Answers
130i.Wide surgical excision.
ii.The prognosis depends upon the location of the lesion.Dermal tumors have a good
prognosis if excised completely, since they have a low recurrence rate. Tumors in the
subcutaneous tissue have a poor prognosis because they recur at the original site and
have a high rate of metastasis.
131i.For PCR to work,one must know at least part of the DNA sequence of the
segment to be amplified. Two oligonucleotides (or primers) are synthesized, and each
primer is complementary to a short sequence in one strand of the desired DNA
sequence. The primer sequences should flank the sequence to be amplified. DNA is
isolated from a sample, and the DNA is heated briefly (denaturing step) to denature
it.The DNA is then cooled (annealing step) in the presence of an excess of the
synthetic oligonucleotide primers. The cooling allows the primers to anneal to the
complementary sites within the desired segment.A heat-stable DNA polymerase
(Taql) and four deoxynucleotide triphosphates are added,causing the primed
segment to be amplified (amplification step). The denaturing, annealing, and 
amplification steps are then repeated through 25-35 cycles. This process takes only a
few hours on an automated thermocycler, and the amplified DNA is abundant
enough within the sample that it can be easily isolated and cloned.
i.As the sequence of the primers used in the reaction is known and their locations on
the gene sequence of interest, it is easy to determine the size of a PCR product.For
example, primer 1 recognizes bases 10-22, while primer 2 recognizes bases 500-518.
Thus the size of the PCR product of interest is 508 base pairs (bp).
In order to visualize the PCR product,the sample is mixed with a loading buffer
(usually TAE or TBE) containing a dye. The sample is then loaded into a *well in
an agarose gel. Depending on the size of the PCR products, the concentration of
agarose varies from 0.8-1.5%.The gel is then placed in a gel box along with a
buffer and a current applied. As DNA carries an overall negative charge, it will
migrate towards the positive electrode;the agarose gel actslike a net or screen
allowing small products to move quickly through the“holes’ in thegel,while larger
products move more slowly. Thus smaller products will migrate faster towards the
positive electrode and will move to the bottom of the gel, and larger products will
move more slowly and will be found at the top of the gel. Once the gel run is
completed, the PCR products can be viewed using an ultraviolet light box. EB, a
fluorescent dye, is usually added to the gel or the gel buffer before the run, allowing
the EB to bind to the DNA.When EB is exposed to ultraviolet light it fluoresces
and the DNA appears as an orange band on the gel. The gel can then be
photographedand thePCRproducts analyzed.
138
Copyrighted material
-139.jpg
132,133:Questions
132a
132b
132c
132A 12-year-oldmixedbreeddogwas
presented for the complaint of lethargy,weight
loss,polyuria,polydipsia,and skin lesions
(132a). Dermatological examination revealed
crusting,hair loss,and scaling on the distal
extremities, especially on the elbows and hocks.
Pedal hyperkeratosis,crusting and hair loss on
the muzzle,and mucocutaneous ulcerations
132d
(132b,c)were also noted.Palpation of the abdomen
revealed a small liver. Laboratory evaluation of the
dogrevealeda normochromic,normocytic,non-
regenerative anemia,hyperglycemia,elevated serum
alkaline phosphatase and alanine aminotransferase,
andelevatedpost-prandialbile acidconcentrations.
Antinuclear antibody testingwas negative.
i.What differential diagnoses are ruled out based
upon the diagnostic testing done so far?
i.What differential diagnoses should be considered?
ii Skin biopsy findings reveal the following: diffuse
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis,upper level epidermal
edema,vacuolation ofkeratinocytes,and epidermal
hyperplasia.There isa mild superficial perivascular
infiltrate in the superficial dermis.The pathologist
comments that it shows the classicred,white,and blue²（132d）ofX’ disease.An
ultrasoundof the liver shows ahoneycomb’pattern.What is themost likely diagnosis
for the skin disease?
133Endectocides are a new class of parasiticidal agents.
i.What are they derived from andwhat is their mechanism of action?
i.What diseases are they used to treat?
139
Copyrightedmaterial
-140.jpg
132,133:Answers
132i. The differential diagnoses that may be ruled out are PF,zinc-responsive skin
disease, and generic dog food dermatitis.Dogs with these disorders rarely have
laboratory abnormalities and/or the clinical signs described for this patient.
i. Diagnoses that should be considered include systemic lupus erythematosus and
hepatocutaneous syndrome (superficial necrolytic dermatitis, metabolic epidermal
necrosis).
i. The most likely diagnosis is hepatocutaneous syndrome.This is a cutaneous
marker of systemic disease.Dogs with liver disease,chronic gastrointestinal disorders,
glucagonoma, diabetes mellitus,and pancreatic tumors may develop this unique
pattern of skin disease.The pathogenesis is unknown but is related to degeneration of
the keratinocytes in the upper levels of the epidermis. The most likely cause is some
type of nutritional imbalance caused by an underlying metabolic disorder.
There is no specific treatment for the skin lesions; however, supplementation
with high quality protein (1 egg yolk/4.5 kg), zinc sulfate (10 mg/kg q24h), and fatty
acids (e.g. omega-3 and omega-6 capsules) may be beneficial. Alternatively,
infusions of amino acids (500 ml of a 10% solution) IV via a central catheter over
 8-10 hours every 7-10 days may be helpful in some patients. If there is no response
after 4-5 treatments,then it is unlikely the patient will improve with amino acid
therapy.If there is resolution of clinical lesions, then the amino acid therapy is
administered as needed.The author has observed some mild resolution of skin
lesions in dogs where the underlying metabolic disorder was treated (e.g. diabetes
mellitus).In most cases,however, the appearance of this skin disorder is associated
with a severe disease, and most dogs die or are euthanized within 1 year of
diagnosis.
133 i. These are parasiticidal agents that have activity against both external and
internal parasites.They are derived from macrocyclic lactones produced by the
fermentation of various actinomycetes.This drug class includes avermectins
(ivermectin,doramectin,abamecin,selamectin) and milbemycins(milbemycin and
moxidectin).These drugs work by partly potentiating the release and effects of
GABA. GABA is a peripheral neurotransmitter in nematodes, arachnids, and insects.
Avermectins and milbemycin are also agonists of glutamate-gated chloride channels.
These drugs are relatively safe in mammals because GABA is limited to the
mammalian central nervous system.
i.These drug aremostcommonlyused in veterinary dermatology for the treatment of
Sarcoptes,Otodectes,Demodex,Cheyletiella,fur mites,lice,microfilaria,and
nematodes.Drug doses and drug intervalsvaryfor these diseases and not all of these
uses are licensed and approved.
140
Copyrighted material
-141.jpg
134,135:Questions
134a
134b
134 The owners of a 9-month-old
134c
Siamese-Burmese cross catwith
nonhealing pruritic lesions pre-
sented the cat for a second
opinion.The lesions were first
noticed when the cat was
4months of age.Physical exam-
ination wasnormal,exceptfor the
skin.Bilateral pinnal alopecia was
present （134a)along with
serpiginous lesions on the head.
Erythematous linear lesions were present on the cat's lateral abdomen and in the
inguinalregion(134b,c).These areas were intensely pruritic and moist.The lesions
were thickenedupon palpation,but they didnotfeel like areas of linear eosinophilic
granuloma.Previous diagnosticsincluded skin scrapings,fungal cultures,flea combing,
anda complete bloodcount.All testresultswerenegative,and therewasnoresponse
to flea control, a trial of ivermectin, a 12 week food trial, or antibiotic therapy. Skin
scraping,feacombingand fecal examinationwerenegative at today'svist.
i.Impression smears of the lesions revealed eosinophilsmast cellsneutrophils,and
cellular debris.What is the interpretation of this impression smear?
iBased upon testing to date,what differential diagnoses should beconsidered?
ii.What diagnostic tests are indicated at this point?
iv.The owners decline further diagnostic testing,butwould like to treat thelesions
symptomatically,if possible.What can berecommended?
135Ivermectiniscommonly used inveterinary dermatology for the treatment of
various parasitic diseases.The oraland injectable formulations are available as 1%
solutions.Howwould10ml of a10mg/ml concentrationbe compounded?
141
Copyrighted material
-142.jpg
134,135:Answers
134i.Eosinophilic exudation orinflammation.
i.Previous diagnostic testing has ruled out parasitic causes of the pruritus and all
commonly pruritic infectious skin diseases (bacteria, dermatophytosis). Today’s
impression smears did not reveal yeast organisms. The lack of response to flea control
and a food trial makes FAD or food allergy respectively,unlikely. The likely
differential diagnoses include atopic dermatitis, idiopathic eosinophilic dermatitis,
and a histiocytic MCT.
ili. The two diagnostic tests that need to be done are skin biopsy to rule out feline
MCT and intradermal skin testing and/or in vitro allergy test.Feline histiocytic MCTs
tend to be characterized by multiple cutaneous nodules and serpiginous lesions.
iv.Ideally,a skin biopsy should be performed before prescribing symptomatic
therapy.In this case,the most likely etiological cause is an allergic disease.This cat's
lesions could be treated with oral or injectable glucocorticoid therapy. This patient's
lesions resolved completely within 14 days of receiving a subcutaneous injection of
methlyprednisolone acetate (20 mg/cat).Eventually the cat was diagnosed as being
atopic. This cat's primary allergens were to house dust mites. The young onset of
clinical signs (approximately 4 months of age) is unusual.
135This product is available as 10 mg/ml both orally and as an injectable form
(Note: 1% injectable =1 g/100 ml = 1000 mg/100 ml =10 mg/ml).
In order to formulate10ml with a concentration of 1 mg/ml:
First,calculate the number of mg of ivermectin needed in the 10 ml solution:
1mg/ml×10ml=10 mg
Next, calculate how many ml of ivermectin 10 mg/ml (stock 1% solution) is needed
to get that amount:
10 mg÷10 mg/ml=1 ml
Then,calculate the quantity of propylene glycol to add to get a 10 ml solution of
ivermectin 10 mg/ml:
10ml-1 ml=9ml of propylene glycol
Therefore,1 ml of the stock solution should be diluted in 9ml of propylene glycol to
obtain 10 ml of a 1 mg/ml solution.
142
Copyrighted material
-143.jpg
136,137:Questions
136
136A5-year-old Siamese catwaspresentedfortheproblem of psychogenic alopecia.
According to the owner,the cat licksits abdomen furiously，bites,andgrowlswhenit
grooms iself.he cat is an indoor cat.Previous skin scrapings,dermatophyte culture,
skin biopsy,food trial,and blood allergy tests were negative or normal.The only
abnormality notedwas a mild eosinophilia on a complete blood count.The cat‘s
pruritus did notrespond to glucocorticoids.The ventralabdomen of the catwas
painted’with mineral oil and wide skin scrapings over the area were done with a
skin-scraping spatula.Mites were found on skin scrapingafter examination at 40x
magnification(136).
i.What are they,and how are they treated?
i.How do they relate to the psychogenic alopecia?
ii. Is this mite contagious?
137What diagnostic test is shown (137)?
137
143
Copyrighted material
-144.jpg
136,137:Answers
136i.Feline Demodex mites.There is no licensed product for the treatment of
demodicosis in cats.Otic demodicosiswill often spontaneouslyresolve without
treatment. However, preparations labeled as effective against ear mites will resolve
infestations. Generalized demodicosis may occur in young cats and, in the author's
experience,is very responsive to lime sulfur sponge-on dips once weekly until cured;
cats often respond to therapy in 6-8 weeks.Alternatively, milbemycin oxime
(2-3 mg/kg PO q24h) until cured is equally effective.The development of generalized
demodicosis,especially in older cats,is often associated with an underlying systemic
illness such as diabetes mellitus,hyperadrenocorticism (naturally occurring or
iatrogenic),chronic renal failure,FIV,FeLV,or neoplasia.
i. Feline demodicosis is an under-recognized cause of pruritus in cats. It should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of any and all feline skin diseases associated
with excessive grooming, e.g. psychogenic alopecia, atopy, food allergy, feline
scabies',FAD,and contact dermatitis.These mites are easily overlooked and,if
suspected but not found, cats should be treated with weekly lime sulfur dips for
4-6 weeks before more expensive diagnostics are undertaken and/or glucocorticoids
are administered. In this case, the mites were found because wide areas were sampled
via skin scraping, and the samples were examined under high magnification.These
mites can be seen under lower magnification but are easily missed.
ii.Cats have three species of Demodex mites,but only one of them is contagious.
The first is Demodex cati,and it is characterized by a long and slender appearance.It
ismost commonly associatedwith a pruritic dermatitis of the face,eyelids,periocular
area, and neck. This mite can also cause generalized skin disease characterized by
pruritus and hair loss. Generalized D. cati infestations are most often seen in older
cats with underlying illnesses, e.g. diabetes mellitus. The second mite, D. gatoi is short
with a blunted abdomen,and it is found in the superficial layers of the skin.Thismite
is believed to be contagious to other cats,unlike D. cati. It causes marked pruritus
suggestive of feline scabies', atopy, or symmetrical alopecia and is easily missed on
skin scrapings.The third species of Demodex mite, while unnamed,resembles D.
gatoi but is slightly larger.
137 This illustration demonstrates how to prepare an ear swab cytology specimen. An
ear swab from a patient is being rolled onto a clean glass microscope slide. It is
important to remember that Malassezia organisms will stain poorly,if at all, if the
slide is not heat fixed first.Heat fixing helps the organism to adhere to the slide and
enhances staining.This is easily done by gently passing a lighter flame beneath the
slide for 2-3 seconds.Excessive heating will damage the cytological specimen.
Matches can be used but carbon may be deposited upon the slide during the process.
Malassezia organisms are best identified under oil immersion.
144
Copyrightedmaterial
-145.jpg
138,139:Questions
138 The dorsal back of a 9-
138
month-old Rhodesian ridgehack
dog is shown (138). The dog was
presented for thc conplaint of a
nonhealing wound on the neck.
The lesion has been prcsent since
thc dog was a puppy. Impression
smcars showed neutrophilic
exudate with bacteria, but the
lesion did not respond to oral
antibiotic therapy. On occasion,
the owner reports the lesion drains
a clear fluid.Exploration ol the
lesion reveals cascous debris and
bits of what appear to be hair.
i. What is this lesion called?
ii. What clinical signs are associated with this condition, and how is this condition
managcd?
ii. How docs the lesion form?
139 A 2-year-old springer spaniel
139
dog was presented for the problen
of odor and recurrent lip fold
pyoderma (139). Systemic anti-
biotic therapy, daily facial
washings, surgical lip fold resec-
tion, and a change of food bowls
did not resolvc the problem. The
owner reported the dog rubbed his
face after eating (normal behavior)
and several times per hour on the
floor and couch. The dog was
currently eating a lamh-based
restrictcd dog food.
i. Standard interventions for lip fold pyoderma duc to redundlant lips (anatomical
defect) have not resolved the problem. What other diffcrcntial diagnoses should be
considered?
ii. What initial diagnostic tests are indicated?
iii. What immunological mechanisms are believed to be responsible for thc
development of food allergy in dogs?
145
-146.jpg
138,139:Answers
138i.Dermoid sinus,a hereditary disorder of this breed.
i.The clinical signs vary depending upon whether or not the sinus becomes cystic,
 inflamed, and/or if infection develops. In many dogs, the only symptom is a whirling
of hair along the back with a palpable cord of tissue descending in the skin toward
the spine.In some dogs, spinal fluid may drain from the lesion.If the sinus becomes
cystic and filled with debris, the sac may become inflamed and infected. This appears
as an area of pyogranulomatous dermatitis. Neurological signs may develop in
infected lesions. No treatment may be needed if the sinus is not causing medical
problems;however,cystic or infected lesions will require surgical removal although it
is not always possible to remove the entire sinus. Meningitis is a possible
complication of the surgery.Affected dogs should not be bred from.
ii.The dermoid sinus is caused by a neural tube defect. The sinus is caused by a
tubular indentation of the skin from the dorsal midline to the subcutaneous tissue or
to the dura mater of the spinal canal. The sinus ends in a blind sac, and the sac fills
with keratin, sebum, debris, and hair.
139i.The most obvious differential diagnoses are allergic skin disease: atopy and/or
food allergy.It is also possible that the original diagnosis (redundant anatomical skin)
was correct,but the continuing pruritus is due to an undiagnosed concurrent
infection of bacteria and yeast (Malassezia).Finally,the regional anatomy should be
carefully examined to make sure that the facial rubbing is not due to referred
pain/discomfort such as otitis externa or dental disease.
i. Cytological preparations of the lip fold exudates should be collected and examined
for bacteria and yeast.Malassezia is commonly found in dogs with lip fold dermatitis,
and it can cause intense facial pruritus. Skin scrapings for Demodex mites should also
be done. If clinical signs compatible with pruritus are found, atopy and food allergy
should be pursued.Skin scrapings were negativein this patient,and there were signs of
pedal pruritus and otitis externa.The lip fold inflammation resolved with concurrent
antibiotic and ketoconazole therapy, but the dog continued to lick its feet, roll on its
back, and rub its face. Both intradermal skin testing and an in vitro allergy testing
were negative. A diet trial with a different limited antigen protein (venison) was used,
and the pruritus resolved but returned when the dog was fed a lamb-based diet. This
was a case of severe Malassezia lip fold pyoderma secondary to a lamb food allergy.
ii.The immunological mechanisms involved in the development of food allergies in
dogs are unknown.Based upon the clinical signs exhibited by animals shortly after
exposure to an offending allergen, type 1 hypersensitivity reactions are well
animals exhibit clinical signs hours to days after exposure.
146
Copyrightedmaterial
-147.jpg
140,14l:Questions
140
140A chocolateLabradorretriever puppywaspresented for the acute onset of facial
swelling,depression,and anorexia(140).Upon physical examination, the puppy was
found to be febrile and have generalized lymphadenopathy.
i.This is a classic presentation of what disease?
iWhat diagnostic tests areindicated,andwhat is the treatment of choice?
i.What are the lesscommon presentations of this disease?
141A 3-year-old cat with a nonhealing
141
lesion on its front paw is examined (141).
Thelesionwas originally treated asa cat
bite abscess several months before and it
resolved,only to repeatedly recur.Today,
thecatisfrile,pressed,lme,andas
regional lymphadenopathy. Impression
smears of exudate reveal acid-fast bacilli,
repeated cultures are negative for
bacterial growth, and biopsy reveals an
epithelioid granuloma.
i.Which acid-fast bacteria are in the
differential diagnosis?
i.What is the most likely diagnosis,
whatarethetreatment options,andwhat
potential adversereactions to treatment
must be considered?
ii.Geographically,whereis thisdisease most likely tobe diagnosed?
147
Copyrighted material
-148.jpg
140,141:Answers
140 i. Canine juvenile cellulitis or puppy strangles. This is an inflammatory
 granulomatous and pustular skin disease that affects the face, pinnae, and lymph
nodes of puppies. The cause is unknown.
i. The clinical signs can present as deep pyoderma or severe pustular dermatitis. The
primary differential diagnoses are demodicosis,bacterial pyoderma,and drug reactions.
Skin scrapings are needed to rule out demodicosis. Impression smears should be
obtained to determine if there is a concurrent bacterial infection.Although not necessary
for diagnosis, skin biopsy findings are consistent with granulomatous panniculitis.
Glucocorticoids are the treatement of choice for this disease. Early and aggressive
treatment is needed because this disease can be life threatening and can cause severe
scarring.Prednisone or prednisolone (2 mg/kg PO q24h) is administered until the
lesions resolve (10-21 days）.After the lesions resolve, the dose of prednisone should
be gradually decreased and tapered over a 30 day period.If glucocorticoids are
discontinued too rapidly, relapse will occur. Topical therapy with warm antibacterial
soaksmay be used to remove debris and exudates.
ii. This disease can develop in older dogs (>6 months age) as periocular
granulomatous dermatitis. Puppies may also develop nodular panniculitis alone or
with classic lesions.
141i.Feline leprosy(Mycobacterium lepraemurium)and atypicalmycobacterium are
both acid-fast bacilli. Nocardia spp. organisms are only partially acid-fast branching
organisms.
i.Feline leprosy,or M. lepraemurium,the causative agent of rat leprosy.The clinical
signs are compatible with all of the considered differential diagnoses. However, the
biopsy and cytological findings are most consistent with feline leprosy. In addition,
the repeatedly negative bacterial cultures, even though organisms were seen on
cytological examination of exudate,is typical of feline leprosy.This organism is very
difficult to culture but can be identified via PCR from tissue specimens.Although
lesions may spontaneously resolve, surgical excision is the treatment of choice for
small well-circumscribed lesions. Some cats have responded to dapsone and
clofazimine. Clofazimine is relatively well tolerated in cats with reddish-orange skin
and adipose tissue being the major adverse effects.Dapsone,however,is more toxic
to cats and can cause neurotoxicities,blood dyscrasias, and hepatic toxicity.
Complete blood counts and serum chemistry panels should be monitored, and owners
should be warned to alert the clinician if any neurological symptoms occur.
ii. Feline leprosy is most prevalent in colder wet climates such as the Pacific
Northwest of the USA, Canada,New Zealand, the UK,and certain areas of Australia.
Most cases occur in the winter (Noli, 2002).
148
Copyrighted material
-149.jpg
142,143:Questions
142
142A5-month-oldmale boxer dogwas presentedfor evaluationof the small button-
like mass on the lip(142）.The owners of this dog have owned several other boxers,
all of which died from one type of neoplasm or another.The owners are very agitated
because this lesion developedvery rapidly in their new puppy.The dog is otherwise
healthy.Fine needle aspirate of the mass reveals sheets of round cells (histiocytes)
withahighmitoticindex.
i.Whatis themost likely diagnosis,what should theowners be told,andwhat isthe
treatment of choice?
i.This disorder represents a spectrum of malignancies.Briefly describe them.
i.What is leflunomide?
143Where areCandidaorganismsfoundin thebody?
149
Copyrighted material
-150.jpg
142,143:Answers
142 i.Histiocytoma.This is most likely a benign tumor that will spontaneously
regress and is common in all types of breeds.
ii.There are at least five histiocytic proliferative disorders of dogs. The most widely
recognized is histiocytoma of young dogs. These are usually solitary lesions that
spontaneously regress. Cutaneous histiocytosis is a benign skin disease that presents
with multiple, erythematous, dermal to subcutaneous plaques or nodules.Lesions
may be limited to the nasal planum giving the dog a‘clown nose’appearance. Lesions
tend to wax and wane.
Systemic histiocytosis ismost commonly seen in Bernese mountain dogs.It is a
slowly progressive disease. Clinical signs include anorexia,weight loss,respiratory
stertor,conjunctivitislesionsinvolving the eyes,and multipleraisedpapules,plaques,
andnodules over theentirebody.
Malignant histiocytosis can be seen in any breed of dog, but the Bernese mountain
 dog is overrepresented and a mode of inheritance is suggested as a cause in this breed.
It is usually a rapidly progressive and fatal disease with widespread distribution
throughout the body, including skin, lymph node, liver, spleen, bone, bone marrow,
and lung. Cutaneous lesions are uncommon,but are characterized by firm nodules in
the dermis or subcutaneous tissues. Clinical signs include lethargy, weight loss,
lymphadenopathy,hepatosplenomegaly,andpancytopenia.
Benign fibrous histiocytomas are rare tumors of dogs.These occur as single or
multiple raised nodules on the face, legs, and scrotum.Malignant fibrous
histiocytoma are rare malignant neoplasms,and they tend to occur in older dogs and
cats.They are usually solitary, firm, poorly circumscribed, and have a tendency to be
locally invasive tomuscle and bone.
ii. Leflunomide is an immunomodulatory drug used in human medicine for the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and in veterinary medicine for the treatment of
hemolytic anemia and prevention of kidney transplant rejections.Recently,the drug
has been used successfully to treat canine reactive histiocytosis (Cannon et al., 2000).
Cutaneous histocytosis and systemic histiocytosis are also referred to ascanine
reactive histiocytosis'.The dogs responded to therapy (2-4 mg/kg) within 7-10 days.
The most commonly observed adverse effects were vomiting, lymphopenia, and
anemia. Glucocorticoids are often ineffective in canine reactive histiocytosis,and
cyclosporin A,while expensive, offers an alternative therapy.
143 These organisms are normal inhabitants of the gastrointestinal and respiratory
tracts and on the genital mucosa. In addition, it can be found in ears,nose, oral
cavity, and anus of normal pets.
150
Copyrighted material
-151.jpg
144,145:Questions
144
144Anewly acquired12-week-oldpuppywaspresentedfor severe pruritus.There
was mild scaling present throughout the hair coat and a mild papular eruption on the
ventral abdomen.When the earflap margin was rubbed an itch-scratch reflex was
elicited (144).
i.What is the itch-scratch reflex associatedwith?
i.The owner is very concerned about possible drug toxicity during the treatment of
this disease.How should this concernbe dealtwith?
145A5-year-oldmaleLabrador
145
retriever dogwas presented for
examination.Theownerswere
complaining about the lesions in
the medial thigh and inguinal
region of the dog (145).
i.What dermatological abnor-
mality is depicted,what is the
most likely cause,what other
causes need to be considered,and
what should the owner be asked?
ii.What diagnostic tests are
indicated?
ii.How does this process
normally occur in dog skin?
151
Copyrighted material
-152.jpg
144,145:Answers
144 i.Severe pruritus associated with a papular eruption and a positive ear-flap test is
most suggestive of scabies, but is not diagnostic. Other parasitic diseases to consider
are demodicosis, fleas, and Cheyletiell; however, these parasitic infestations rarely
indicated to rule out secondary bacterial,yeast,and otherinfestations,respectively.
ii. Concern over the possible toxic effects of antiparasiticidal drugs is reasonable
when treating any pet,not just puppies.All effective antiparasiticidal drugs are
associated with potential adverse effects and possible toxicities.Lime sulfur can cause
oral and mucous membrane irritation and vomiting if ingested.Amitraz commonly
causes sedation,pruritus,depression,polyuria,and polydipsia.Ivermectin can cause
neurological signs such as tremors, salivation, sedation, seizures, and coma.In this
case, skin scrapings were positive for Sarcoptes mites, and this puppy was treated
with weekly lime sulfur sponge-on dips for 6 weeks.
145 i.Hyperpigmentation of the skin.This is commonly described as lacey
hyperpigmentation’ by veterinary dermatologists.The most common cause of
hyperpigmentation of the skin is inflammation. Other causes of diffuse hyper-
pigmentation include demodicosis,bacterial and/or yeast infections,endocrinopathies,
alopecia X,flank alopecia,and ultraviolet light damage.In cats, dermatophytosis
needs to be considered.The owner should be asked if this doghas any other clinical
signs of skin disease. In particular, questions should focus on whether or not the dog
is showing signs of pruritus.Atopic dermatitis is one of the most common causes of
lacey hyperpigmentation in the axillary, inguinal, and medial thigh regions.
i. Skin scrapings, impression smears of the skin, cytological examination of exudate
scraped from within hair folicles,Wood’s lamp, and dermatophyte culture (if
suspected).Most importantly,a complete dermatological history is needed along with
a dermatological examination.Although there is no specific treatment for
hyperpigmentation,treatment of secondary infections and primary cause often results
in a marked decrease in pigmentation.
ii.Melanin is produced in melanocytes, which are found in the basal layer of the
epidermis and hair follicle. Melanin is formed within a melanosome, a specialized
organelle within the melanocyte. Each melanocyte is associated with approximately
36keratinocytes.Melanocytes eject melanin into keratinocytes via a process called
cytocrinia.Skin coloris determined by number,size,type,and distribution of melan-
osomes.There are also dermalmelanocytes but they do not transfer their melanin to
cells. The exact mechanism of post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation is unknown.
152
Copyrightedmaterial
-153.jpg
146,147:Questions
146
146A5-year-old schnauzerdogwaspresentedfor theproblem of foot licking of
4years’duration.According to the owner,the dog's activity was diagnosed as an
anxiety related behavioralproblem.Over thelast 4years,theowner triedvarious
activity-related interventions,including hiring a dogwalker and sending the dogto
kennel to play every day.The dogwalker and thekennel operator reported the dog
chewed itsfeetregardless of the activities they offered the dog.The owneris seeking a
second opinion because the problem is worsening and the dog's behavior is not
altered by medications including mood modifying agents,tranquilizers,or
glucocorticoids.Note the salivary staining on thefeet (146).
i.What are the most common causes of foot licking in dogs?
ii.Whatdiagnostic tests are indicated?
ii.Whatrolemight theMalassezia organism play in the development of clinical signs
in thispatient?
147Amitraz is the active ingredient in the products Tactic@12.5%(large animal
formulation)andMitaban@19.9%(smallanimal formulation）.Normally,10.6ml of
Mitaban@ is diluted in 2 gallons (9.2 litres) of water and then used as a sponge-on
treatment.If the small animal formulationwasunavailable how should the amount of
Tactic?touseinplaceof the10.6ml Mitaban@becalculated?
153
Copyrighted material
-154.jpg
146,147:Answers
146 i.The most common causes of pedal pruritus include: demodicosis,atopy,food
allergy, contact allergy,bacterial or yeast infections,hookworm dermatitis (usually n
the ventral aspect of feet), and behavioral causes.
i. Material for a cytological examination should be collected before doing a skin
scraping using mineral oil. Black/brown debris from beneath the nail, around nail,
and/or between the interdigital webbing should be scraped off with a skin scraping
spatula or scalpel blade and smeared onto a glass slide,heat fixed, and stained.
Intense foot licking in dogs is a common clinical sign of Malassezia infections.
This is a case of Malassezia dermatitis due to atopy in a dog.The dogwas treated
with oral ketoconazole (5-10 mg/kg q24h) for 30 days and a topical antifungal
shampoo,which resolved the pruritus.Alternatively,the owner could have washed
ketoconazole or miconazole. It has been the author's experience that topical therapy
alone is less effective than systemic therapy with or without concurrent topical
therapy.The dog was eventually diagnosed with seasonal atopy.The year round
pruritus was due to a combination of seasonal atopy that triggered a secondary yeast
infection that went undiagnosed.
ii. Malassezia organisms are part of the normal flora of the skin. They readily
colonize the skin when the microenvironment favors their growth;in this case,
increased humidity from lickingmay have been a key factor.There is evidence
Malassezia contributes to the development of pruritus in atopic dogs via the
production of antigens that cause a type 1 hypersensitivity reaction; concurrent
infections may augment the pruritus. Dogs with atopic dermatitis and Malassezia
dermatitis have significantly greater intradermal skin test reactions to Malassezia
antigens than atopic dogs without Malassezia dermatitis.In addition, dogs with yeast
infections have higher concentrations of serum IgE against Malassezia than nonatopic
dogs (DeBoer and Marsella, 2001).
147First, calculate the number of grams of amitraz needed for the Mitaban@
dilution:
(19.9% = 19.9 g amitraz/100 ml of solution)
19.9 g amitraz/100 ml of solution x 10.6 ml of solution = 2.1 g amitraz
Then calculate how many ml of Tactic? is needed to get the same amount:
(12.5% = 12.5 g amitraz/100 ml of solution)
2.1 g amitraz ÷ 12.5 g of amitraz/100 ml of solution = 16.8 ml of Tactic@
Therefore,16.8 ml of Tactic@ can be used in the dilution in place of 10.6 ml of
Mitaban?.
154
Copyrighted material
-155.jpg
148,149:Questions
148A3-year-oldmalecatwas
148
presented for thelesion shown
(148).The lesion reportedly
developed rapidly，and it is
unclear if the cat is pruritic or not.
i.What is the common name for
the lesion depicted?
i.What is the etiology?What
diagnostics are indicated?How
should thelesion be treated?
ii.What are the histological
features of this condition?
149
149Aphotomicrographofpositive direct immunofluorescence testingfrom a skin
biopsy of a dog is shown (149).
i.What pattern of immunofluorescenceis shown?
i.Whatcommon autoimmune skin diseases show thispattern?
ii.What diagnostic test will help differentiate epidermolysis bullosa acquisita from
mucousmembranepemphigoidorBP?
155
Copyrighted material
-156.jpg
148, 149: Answers
148 i. Feline chin acne.
i. Feline chin acne is not a 'diagnosis', but rather a clinical finding. Thc classic
presentation is a primary disorder of lkeratinization. In these cats, there is marked
 comedone production on the chin and lower lip. Feline chin acne may also develop in 
 some cats without a history of lesions as they age. These cats tend to develop scattered
comedones that do not bccomc probleinatic. Dermatophytosis, bacterial pyoderma,
Malassezia, and demodicosis can trigger feline acne lesions very sinilar to those
pictured. In some multi-cat households, felinc acnc can appear to be contagious. These
outbreaks have been associated with fungal or bacterial discases, and in one case conta
gious deinodicosis. Finally, atopic cats will rub their face and chin causing these lesions.
If the lesions are mild (just a few scattered comedones) the best approach may be to
practice *watchful neglect and have the owner bring the cat back if the lesions spread.
In cases likc thc onc shown, material should be seraped off the chin using a skin-
scraping spatula and smcarcd on a slide for cytological examination. A dermatophyte
culture should be pcrformed if the cat is newly acquiredl, goes outside, or is from a
multi-cat household. Finally, skin scrapings for Demodex mites shouldl be performed.
I the lesions are mild and there is no discomfort to the cat, no treatment is required.
If the lesions are severe, the above diagnostics should help determine appropriate
treatment. Bacterial infections should he treated for 21-30 days with antibiotics (e.g.
cephalexin 30 mg/kg PO q12h) or longer if there is severe furunculosis. Yeast infcctions
respond well to itraconazole (5-10 mg/kg PO q24h) for 21-30 days. 1hese
antimicrobials may need to be given concurrently. Topical therapy can vary from daily to
every other day washings with a mild follicular flushing shampoo (e.g. benzoyl peroxide
or combined antibacterial/antifungal shampoos), or antiseborrheic shampoo. Tar-based
shampoos should be avoided in cats due to possible irritant or toxicity concerns. It is the
author's experience that topical shampoo or ointment therapy, although often effective,
fails due to lack of compliance by either the owner or the cat. Topical mupirocin
ointment, topical glucocorticoids, or vitamin A cream may be indicated in refractory
cases. It is inportant to determine if persistent lesions are associated with pruritus or not.
If so, underlying pruritic diseases such as food allrgy and atopy should be pursued. A
diagnosis of idiopathic feline chin acne' is a diagnosis of exclusion.
 u  ad p s r e s    
follicles and comedonc formation and, in advanced cases, folliculitis, furunculosis,
and pyogranulomatous dermatitis.
149 i. The pattern is positive basement memhrane immunofluorcsccnce staining.
i. This pattern of inmmunofluorescence is most commonly associated with SLE, lupus
crythematosus, BP, linear IgA bullous dermatosis, and epidermolysis bullosa acquisita.
ii. The diagnostic test needed is salt split substrates.
156
-157.jpg
150,151:Questions
150
150A 6-year-oldgolden retriever dog ispresented in thewinterfor the complaint of
bilateral otitis of 4 years duration (150).The owners report that the dog's episodes
are worse in the summer.The dogrubs and scratches at his ears and face and licks his
paws.The owners clean the ears regularly often removingblack waxy debris.Upon
physicalexamination,thedogisotherwisehealthy except formild salivary staining of
the paws,broken whiskers,and hair lodged between the teeth and gums. Otoscopic
examination reveals bilateral erythematous otitis externa involving only the vertical
ear canal.The skin of the external pinnae hasacobblestone²appearance.Cytological
examination of exudates reveals mild ceruminous debris, squamous epithelial cells,
and6-10Malassezia organismsper every highpowerfield.
i.What is the clinical diagnosis?
ii.What is the most likely underlying cause?
ii.What treatment options can be offered to the owners for long-term management
of this patient?
151What are themost common side-effects ofglucocorticoids?
157
Copyrighted material
-158.jpg
150,151:Answers
150i.This dog has otitis externa and a secondary yeast infection.Malassezia
 organisms are part of the normal flora of the ear canal but normally in numbers too
small to be easily found. This organism should be considered a complicating factor
when found on cytological preparations from patients with existing ear disease.
i.There are two possible underlying causes of this patient‘s ear disease.First, it is
possible that the underlying trigger or condition (e.g. swimming) that started the otitis
is no longer present, and the dog’s persistent ear infection is caused by an untreated
secondary yeast infection. Second,it is possible that there is a persistent underlying
skin disease causing the otitis and predisposing the dog to Malassezia infections.The
history,breed,and other clinical signs (salivary staining of the paws,broken
whiskers,hair lodged between the teeth and gums) suggest that he has an underlying
pruritic disease.Atopic dermatitis (seasonal or nonseasonal) with or without food
allergy is a likely cause of the otitis externa.
ii.At this point, it is important to determine if the dogs clinical signs are seasonal or
year round.The most conservative approach would be to treat the yeast infection for
30 days and reevaluate the case.The author's preference is to treat with ketoconazole
(5-10 mg/kg PO q24h) for 30 days and use a concurrent topical steroid-containing otic
preparation once daily for 10-14 days. Other clinicians may elect to use aggressive
topical therapy to treat the yeast otitis.The author uses topical therapy as a sole
treatment approach in only select cases where a diagnosis has been made, and topical
therapy is being used to contain symptoms, or when an episode is acute and less than
48hours in duration.It is important to remember in this case that the problem has
been ongoing for years, and systemic therapy is key to the diagnostic approach. The
goal of treatment is to determine if the dog’s otitis resolves, andwhether or not the dog
remains asymptomatic until summer. If the dog remains normal all winter but relapses
in the summer, then the likely diagnosis is seasonal atopy (i.e. allergic otitis externa),
and themost cost effective therapy would be medical management. If the dogs
primary symptoms are allrgic otitis, this patient could be managed with daily or every
other day otic glucocorticoids during the months the dog is symptomatic. On the other
hand,if the otitis externa resolves but recurs shortly after discontinuation of treatment
and/or if the dog's ear disease resolves but he still rubs his face and licks his paws
during the winter months, then the dog most likely has year round atopy and/or a food
allergy.In this situation,intradermal skin testing and/or in vitro allergy testing and a
food trial should be done to identify the allergens.
151Polyphagia,polydipsia,polyuria,lethargy,panting,muscle wasting,exercise
intolerance,secondary infections,slow hair regrowth,scaling,delayed wound
healing, calcinocis cutis, and muscle wasting.
158
Copyrightedmaterial
-159.jpg
152,153:Questions
152a
152 A dog was presented for weiglit
152b
gain, hair los, polyuria, and polydipsia
(152a). The owner is also concerned
about the loss of the dog's car tip. She
rcports the ear tip bleeds,becomcs
necrotic,heals.and then the cycle
repeats. Physical examination of the ear
tip revealed that approxinately one-third
of the right ear tip has been sloughed as a
result of these cycles (152b).
i. This dog is showing the classic clinical
signs of which endocrine disorder?
ii. What are the possible pathophysiologies
of car tip necrosis in this dog?
ii, What other nonendocrine diseases can
be characterized by ear tip necrosis?
153 The most common locations for cutaneous parasites to live are the superficial
epidermis on the surface, attached to hairs and/or in the ears.
i. What are the most cost effectivc diagnostic tests for finding parasitic infestations?
159
-160.jpg
152,153:Answers
152i.This dog is showing classis signs of canine hyperadrenocorticism.Note the
bilaterally symmetrical hair loss,pendulousabdomen andprepuce,andrat tail.
iEar tipnecrosis can be seen in cases of canine hyperadrenocorticism,particularly in
breedswith small thin ear pinnaeThe causeisunknown,but itmay berelated
micro thromboembolisms.Animalswith hyperadrenocorticism bruise easily and the
skin becomes thinner, possibly contributing to the development of these lesions.
Finally，high concentrations of circulating glucocorticoidsmay affect healing of the
lesions.
ii. Other causes of ear tip necrosis include vasculitis,lupus erythematosus,
proliferative thrombovascular pinnalnecrosis,cold agglutinin disease,feline auricular
chondritis,and familialvasculopathy of the German shepherd dog.Feline auricular
chondritis is characterizedby swollen,erythematous ears that are usually curled and
deformed.Familial vasculopathy has been reported in young German shepherd dogs.
It isinheritedvia an autosomalrecessive trait,and affected dogs develop alopecia,
crusts,andulceration of the ear tips.Depigmentation and crusting of the footpads
may be seen along with lethargy and pyrexia(Ferguson,2002).
153i.Skin scrapings,flea combings,
153
ear swab cytology,and acetate tape
preparations.
i.First a small amount of mineral oil
is placed on the target area. Second,a
foldof skin is pinched up and gently
squeezed.Third,a scalpel blade or
skin-scraping spatula held at 90° to
the skin and gently used to scrape the
skin until capillary bleeding is seen
(153）.Finally,the mixture of mineral
oil and skin debris is scooped or
scrapedoff theskin andput ona glassmicroscope slide forexamination.It iscritical
to squeeze theskinandscrapeuntilcapillarybleeding occurswhendoingadeepskin
scraping forDemodex mites；mites are found deep in the hair follicles,and this
method optimizes their discovery.Demodexmites are part of the normal flora of dog
and cat skinbut in very small numbers.If easily found on a skin scraping of lesional
skin,then their presence should be considered significant,and the patient has
demodicosis.Superficial skin scrapings are done similarly except that the skin isnot
squeezed,and thescraping doesnot produce capillary bleeding.
160
Copyrighted material
-161.jpg
154,155:Questions
154 Awell-circumscribed mass on
154a
thelateralabdomenofa5-year-
old dog was aspirated (154a).The
massenlargedslightly after itwas
manipulated,and a MCT was
suspected.FNAwasperformed,
andthe slidewas stainedwith
Dif-Quik.A photomicrograph of
the aspirate is shown (154b).
i.What is the interpretation of
theDif-Quik slide?
i.The photomicrograph(154c)
shows cellsina blood smear from
a dog.Arethesecellsofconcern?
154b
154c
155How should a superficial bacterialinfection(i.e.impetigo)versus a deep bacterial
infection be cultured?
161
Copyrighted material
-162.jpg
154,155:Answers
154 i.This slide contains a uniform population of round cells.A MCT is suspected
but distinct cytoplasmic granules are not clearly visible.A second slidewas stained
witha Giemsa stain,and the intracytoplasmic granules are much more clearly visible
(154b）.It is important to remember that the granules of less well-differentiated
tumorsdonotstain well withDif-Quik
i.These are mast cells in the blood.These cells can be seen from time to time in
normal dogs and do not necessarily warrant concern.In cats,mast cells seen in
peripheral bloodare always a concern and areusually associatedwith systemic
mastocytosis.
155Lesionsforcultureshouldnotbe
155
surgicallypreppedorwipedwithalcohol
prior to samplingin superficial bacterial
infections.An intact pustule isruptured
with a sterile25gauge needle(155),and
a sterile cotton-tipped swab is used to
collect the sample (blood and/or pus).
Holding the swab at 90°(vertically) over
the ruptured pustule and‘twirling’the
swabwhileapplyinggentlypressure is a
common collection technique.Because
there are Staphylococcus spp.on the
clinician’s skin,it is important NOT to
touch thelesion.
The techniques for culturing a deep pyoderma vary depending upon the
presentation of the lesion.If there are intact furuncles present, samples can be
collected asdescribedfor superficial bacterialinfectionorvia aspirationwitha sterile
needle and syringe.In cases of severe exudation where thereiscontamination of the
surface,matting of the hair coat,and/or a mixed population of bacteria seen on
cytological smears ispresent,surgical prepping of the area is indicated.If there isa
draining tract,a swab can then be inserted into the area.Incases where the infection
is more diffuse, a deep wedge of tissue for culture should be collcted using a scalpel
and blade.Skinbiopsy punchescollct too superficiala sample;pathogens are often
locatedin the deep dermis and/or panniculus.After collecting the sample,it is
importanttoputitinto sterilesalineor transportmedia pendinginoculation onto
agar plates.In the case of tissue samples,the laboratory should be asked tomacerate
the tissue prior toculture.
162
Copyrighted material
-163.jpg
156,157:Questions
156a
156The skin of a 10-year-old female cocker spaniel dogpresented for a second
opinion is shown (156a).The owner's complaint is increasing generalized pruritus,
excessive scaling,and diffuse erythema of 3months’duration.The doghasnoprior
history of skin disease,and skin scrapings have been negative.There has been no
responsetofleacontrolorivermectin therapy.The dog didnotrespond to a3week
course of oral antibiotics. Impression smears did not reveal any Malassezia organ-
isms,and a fungal culture was negative.The pruritus is nonresponsive to gluco-
corticoids.Physical examination todayreveals that the dog has generalized lympha-
denopathy.Large sheets of exfoliating epidermal cells are present throughout the
hair coat.
i.What diagnostictest is indicated andwhy?
ii.What ismycosis fungoides',andwhat is the current name for this disease?
i.What are the clinical characteristicsof Sezary syndrome or Sezary-like disease in
dogs and cats?
157What are thegeneralfunctions of theskin?
163
Copyrighted material
-164.jpg
156,157:Answers
156 i.A skin biopsy.It is important to
156b
determine what cell infiltrate is
accounting for the diffuse erythema
and scaling.Previous diagnostics have
ruled out common causes of pruritus.
The lack of a history of prior skin
disease makes atopy unlikely,as does
the lack of response to glucocorti-
coids.The age of onset of symptoms
and thegeneralized lymphadenopathy
are suggestive of a cutaneous lym-
phoma.On skin biopsy,histological
findingsrevealed that this doghad epitheliotropic lymphoma(previously called
mycosis fungoides).One of the most common findings on a skin biopsy is a lichenoid
(band-like)infiltratebeneath andinto theepidermis(156b）.The sudden development
ofgeneralized scaling,erythema,pruritus,and lymphadenopathy should raise
suspicion.The prognosis for this neoplasia is grave.
i.Mycosis fungoides refers to cutaneous lymphoma.The name originated from the
human literature becausethe skinlesions associatedwith thisdisorderlooked like
“fungi’growing on the skin.The current terminology is‘epitheliotrophic lymphoma,
a T-cell lymphoma that is difficult to treat.Treatments are considered palliative,and
prednisone offers some relief from the pruritus. CyclosporinA's antipruritic benefits
have not been reported in dogs with cutaneous lymphoma.Retinoids have been
reported to be effective in slowing the progression of the disease; isotretinoin
(3-4mg/kg q24h) is most commonly used.Drug combinations that have been most
effective are those that include doxorubicin.
ii.Sezary syndrome orSezary-like disease is subset ofcutaneous lymphoma in dogs
andcats characterized by the concurrentpresenceofcutaneous lymphoma and
leukemia.Pruritus is common.The disease gets its name from the presence of
circulatingneoplastic lymphocytes with convoluted,hyperchromaticnucleiwith a
high nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio(i.e.the‘Sezary cell).
157The generalfunctionsofthekinincludeactsasanenclosingbarrierorenvelope
for the internal organsprotects the body against the environment,produces adnexa
(e.g.hair,claws,horny skin),regulates body temperature, storage (e.g.electrolytes,
water,vitamins,ats）,indicatorfunctions（e.g.health,disease,physical identity,sexual
identity),immunoregulationoftheskinimmunesystem,productionofpigmentationfor
protection against ultraviolet light and for hair and skin,protection against infection,
sensory perception,VitaminDproduction,and secretionof sweat and sebum.
164
Copyrighted material
-165.jpg
158,159:Questions
158a
158b
158 A 2-year-old blue doberman pinscher dog was referred for the problein of an
‘endocrine alopecia? of unknown etiology. Previous diagnostic tests were normal or
negative and included: skin scrapings, dermatophyte culrure, complete blood count,
urinalysis, scrum chcmistry panel, thyroid hormone evaluation, low-dose
reveals a thin hair coat, nodular-like hair follicles, comedoncs, bacterial pyoderma,
and scaling (158a, b). All of the other littermates are similarly affected.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis, and what is the cause?
ii. How is this disorder treated?
ii. What are the most common histological findings?
159 An adult mixed breed dog is
159
presented for examination. The owners
report the dog developed weeping lesions
on his inguinal region. The inguinal
rcgion of the dog is shown. Note the
diffuse ulceration and crosion of the skin
(159). Similar lesions are present in the
axillary region, oral mucosa, and at other
mucocutaneous junctions. Intact vesicles
are present on the soft palate. Except for
the skin and a mild fever, the dog is
otherwise healthy. There is no history of
recent drug administration.
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. The following histological findings were reported : subepidermal clefting and
vesicle formation without acantholysis, DIF revealed a linear deposit of inmuno-
globulins, ANA testing was negative. The skin biopsy findings are incompatible with
which of the differential diagnoses? What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. How is this discase trcated?
165
-166.jpg
158, 159: Answers
158 i. Color dilution alopecia (previously called color mutant alopecia). This is a
 genetic disorder of the hair coat commonly associated with a blue or fawn coat color.
The causc is unknown, but it is believed to be due, in part, to a defect in the coat
 color gencs at the D locus. Affccted dogs are born with normal hair coats and, as they
mature, they develop hair loss on thc dorsum, recurrent bacterial infections,
generalized thinning of the hair coat, secondary scborrhca, and cystic or dilatcd hair
follicles. As hairs regrow, they grow more slowly and arc often deformed. This
disorder has been seen in cats with blue- or cream-colored coats.
i There is no effective treatment for this disorder. In the early stages of the disorder,
hair loss is caused by hair shaft fracture. As a result, excessive grooming and harsh
shampoos should be avoided. It is important to control the recurrent bacterial
pyodermas associated with this disorder. Affected dogs will continue to lose hair, and
many are alopecic by 2-3 ycars of age.
ii. Common histological findings show melanin clumping in the cpidermal and
follicular basal cells, macromelanosomes in the hair shafts or hair bulbs, and
follicular dysplasia. The melanin clumping and macromelanosomes are key findings
for diagnosis of this disease.
159 i. The major differential diagnoses include SLE, BP, erythema multiforme,
 pemphigus vulgaris, drug reactions, candidiasis, and cutaneous lymphoma.
i. The skin biopsy findings are inconsistent with candidiasis, cutaneous lymphoma,
pemphigus vulgaris, and crythema multiforme. Lichenoid interface dermatitis is the
most common histological pattcrn secn in lupus erythematosus. In this case, the ANA
test was negative, and the dog was otherwise healthy. Thc histological findings and
DIF are most compatible with BP or a drug reaction. However, the historical finding
of no known recent drug administration make this unlikely. BP is a vesiculobullous,
ulcerative, autoimmune skin disease of dogs and cats. It can affect the oral cavity,
mucocutaneous junctions, and skin in any conbination. There are several clinical
presentations including the aggresive form described above. In addition, some
animals devclop lcsions limited to the oral mucoca or footpads and mail beds. The
disease is caused by autoantibodies directed against the BP antigen in the basement
membrane resulting in clefting and vesicles in the skin and mucocutancous regions.
This was a case of BP.
iii. This disease is treated by a combination of immunosuppressive drugs such as pred-
nisone or prednisolone, azathioprine, and chlorambucil. T'reatment is usually life-long.
166
-167.jpg
160,16l:Questions
160Raised,nodular lesionsare shown
160
(160)on the ventral aspectof a dogs
paw. These lesions are painful, and the
dog is lame.Ruptured lesions exude a
blood-tinged, purulent exudate.
i.This is a common skin lesion, and it is
often incorrectly referred to as‘inter-
digital cysts.This skin lesion is a common
presentation of what type of skin disease
andwhat is thecorrect term for this
lesion?
ii.How is it treated?
ii.Skin biopsy may be needed to diagnose
what parasitic disease that is often
associatedwithrecurrent pododermatitis?
161
161The caudal thoraxof a5-year-old cat is shown.Note theraised,erythematous
plaque-like lesions (161）.The lesions are exudative and intensely pruritic,and the
owner reports the lesions are recurrent.Initially,the cat's lesions would resolve for
5-6 months ata time after treatment with methylprednisone acetate
(20mg/cat SC).However,over the last 2years,the number of steroid injections
required to resolve the lesions has increased,and the interval between relapses has
shortened to1-2months.Skin scrapings,flea combingsand a dermatophyte culture
were negative.Impression smears showed eosinophilic inflammation andexudation
with no visible organisms.
i.What is the clinical diagnosis,and how should it be confirmed?
i.What is the most likely cause of these recurrent lesions?
167
Copyrighted material
-168.jpg
160,161:Answers
160 i. These lesions represent deep pyoderma. Bacterial, fungal, neoplastic,
inflammatory,and traumatic etiologies can all producepyoderma’in the skin.The
correct term for the lesions pictured is interdigital furuncle, and it should be noted the
lesions are not interdigital cysts'. A true cyst is a non-neoplastic sac-like structure with
an epithelial lining.Interdigital furuncles are common in dogs with pododermatitis.
These lesions are painful, exude pus, and impression smears reveal neutrophils and
bacteria.A furuncle is caused by an infection and subsequent rupture of a hair follicle.
Interdigital furuncles may be single or multiple and are often recurrent. Scar tissue can
often be palpated in the interdigital webbing where previous lesions have occurred.
The misnomer ‘interdigital cyst is used because the lesions are fluctuant,recurrent,
andrupture easily exuding a liquid-like material.
i.The underlying causes of these lesions are multiple.Impression smears,bacterial
cultures,and skin biopsy may be needed to determine/confirm the presence of a
bacterial infection. If confirmed, the condition is treated with aggressive antibiotic
therapy for at least 4-6 weeks (e.g. cephalexin 30 mg/kg PO q12h). Almost always,
these lesions are the result of an underlying disease (e.g. atopy, demodicosis)
predisposing the dog to pododermatitis. In some dogs, the lesions are the result of
chronic friction, moisture, and maceration of the interdigital webbing leading to
bacterial infection of hair follicles.Interdigital furunculosis is complicated by poor
conformation,obesity,and foreign body reactions.Free hair shaftsin the dermis,asa
result of hair follicle rupture,create an inflammatory foreign body reaction that can
result in chronic granulomatous inflammation perpetuating the lesions.In some cases,
surgical excision or debridement may be needed to resolve the infection.
ii.Demodicosis.Demodex mites are often easily found on properly performed deep
skin scrapings.
161 i.Feline eosinophilic plaques.Feline eosinophilic plaque is not a diagnosis but
rather a dermatological reaction pattern that can be caused by parasitic, infectious,
allergic,neoplastic, and idiopathic causes.This eosinophilic reaction pattern can be
confirmed by skin biopsy. It is important to rule out proliferative (e.g.mastocytosis) or
i.Recurrent feline eosinophilic plaques are most often caused by hypersensitivity
disorders such as FAD, food allergy, and/or atopy. Recurrent eosinophilic plaques
and/or plaques that become refractory to previously effective therapies should make
the clinician suspicious of allergic skin disease.Core diagnostic tests,including a trial
of flea control, should be done before pursuing more expensive and time-consuming
tests (i.e.food trials, intradermal skin testing, and/or in vitro allergy tests).This cat's
lesions responded to monthly spot-on flea control; the cause of the lesions was flea
infestation/FAD.
168
Copyrighted material
-169.jpg
162,163:Questions
162
162A9-year-old malecocker spaniel dogwith alife-longhistory ofprimary
seborrhea waspresented for examination of the ventral abdomen.The owner
reported the dog developed the lesions slowly over the lastmonth(162）.The dog has
gradually become pruritic,and the skin is malodorous.Dermatological examination
reveals extensive hyperpigmentation,erythema,and crusting throughout the hair
coat,most notableon theventral abdomen.Individual hyperpigmented lesions have a
waxy crust adhered to them andare bordered by erythema and a papular eruption.
There is lichenification in the axillary region,and similar lesions are scattered
throughoutthedog'scoat.
i.What is theworking diagnosis?What in-house diagnostic testing should be
performed?
i.Assuming no complicating causes are found or pending laboratory test results,
what treatments shouldberecommended?
ii.What are the most common ingredients in antiseborrheic shampoos, and which
onesaremosteffective atremovingscale?
163Priorto the availability of commercially compoundedenrofloxacinotic solutions,
it was necessary to compound this preparation using the injectable formulation.How
would30mlofenrofloxacin at 3mg/ml becompounded?Enrofloxacinis available in
a 22.7mg/ml injectable solution.
169
Copyrighted material
-170.jpg
162,163:Answers
162 i.Primary seborrhea complicated by secondary microbial infections
(Staphylococus spp. and/or Malassezia spp.). In-house diagnostic testing should
include skin scrapings for Demodex or Cheyletiella mites, impression smears to
confirm the presence or absence of yeast,and flea combings for mites and fleas.
i.It is important that owners of dogs with primary seborrhea understand that the
condition can only be managed and not cured.Attention to grooming details is
critical.The hair coat is best kept at a very short length including the removal of any
“feathering'. This patient will require frequent bathing (at least 2-3 times a week) in
medicated shampoos.The author would recommend alternating between an anti-
microbial shampoo (single ingredient or combination product) and an antiseborrheic
shampoo. In addition, antimicrobial therapy for at least 30 days will be needed.For
example,if yeast were found cytologically,the author would treat this patient with
cephalexin (30 mg/kg PO q12h) and ketoconazole (5-10 mg/kg PO q24h). It is the
author's preference to treat both bacterial andyeast infections with systemic therapy
especially if the dog is pruritic;concurrent therapy hastens resolution of pruritus.This
patient had primary seborrhea and a dual microbial infection caused by bacteria and
yeast.The lesions responded completely to a 30 day course of oral antibiotics and
antifungal drugs,along with grooming and regular bathing. Subsequent relapses
occurred if the owners became lax in the bathing routine.
ii.Themost common ingredients in antiseborrheic shampoos are tar, sulfur, salicylic
acid,benzoyl peroxide,and selenium disulfide.In an ultrasonographic biomicroscopic
study of the ability of these ingredients to remove scale from the skin of dogs,
selenium disulfide and colloidal oatmeal were the most effective, tar and sulfur-
salicyclic acid were moderately effective,and benzoyl peroxide,ethyl lactate,and
chlorhexidine were ineffective (Paterson et al.,1999; Scott et al., 2001d).
163First,calculate the number of mg of enrofloxacin needed in 30 ml of 3 mg/ml
solution:
3mg/mlx30ml =90mg ofenrofloxacin
Next, calculate how many ml of enrofloxacin at 22.7 mg/ml is needed to get that
amount:
90 mg ÷ 22.7mg/ml = 4 ml
Then,calculate the quantity of NaCl0.9% to add to get 30 ml of enrofloxacin 3mg/ml:
30 ml - 4 ml = 26 ml of NaCl 0.9%
Therefore,4 ml of the stock solution (22.7 mg/ml) of injectable enrofloxacin would
be diluted in 26mlof NaCl 0.9%.
170
Copyrighted material
-171.jpg
164,165:Questions
164
164A 2-year-old dogwas presented for evaluation of a mass on its forepaw(164）.
The lesion was raised,erythematous,moist,and firm to the touch.Closer exam-
inationrevealed an erosive,circular lesionwith a raised border;thelesionwas slightly
crater-like.A second healed lesionjust distal to thefirstwas also found,andextensive
salivary stainingwas present on the paw.The owners reported the lesion had
developed overthe last several weeks,and thiswas the first occurrence of the lesion.
i.What is theclinical diagnosis?
ii.What are the twomajor causes of this syndrome?What core diagnostictestsneed
tobe doneat this time?What is the firstline of therapy?Howwould treatment
proceedif theinitialtherapyfailed?
ii.What is a tail dock neuroma?
165What is the difference between a pyrethrin and a pyrethroid?
171
Copyrighted material
-172.jpg
164,165:Answers
164i.Acral lick granuloma or dermatitis.
i.The two major causes of this lesion are organic diseases and behavioral
(obsessive-compulsive disorder).The latter is a diagnosis of exclusion, and this cannot
be emphasized enough.Pruritus in dogs is manifested by licking,and in many dogs this
may be the only clue that the dog is pruritic.Sometimes the differentiation between the
two major causes is obvious. The dog has other compelling clinical signs of an
underlying skin disease,there is a clear history of separation anxiety,or recent
trauma/disruption in the dog's life. Clinical clues of an underlying pruritic skin disease
may include signs of salivary staining on other limbs, a history of lesions developing on
as ou ne uno ss y dn noe usey wpun u sao o
time, or a history of trauma.Initial diagnostic tests should include skin scrapings to
rule out Demodex mites,impression smears to look for bacteria and/or yeast, and
dermatophyte culture to rule out mycotoic infections, especially if the lesion is acute.
Assuming the skin scraping is negative, and while the fungal culture is pending, oral
antibiotics, e.g. cephalexin (30 mg/kg PO q12h) would be the first choice therapy.In the
author's experience, more than 75% of these lesions respond to antimicrobial therapy.
This indicates that this lesion has an underlying trigger, particularly if the lesion responds
completely but recurs at a later time. Purely psychogenic lesions show only a minimal
response to antibiotic therapy.The most common cause of recurrent acral lick granu-
lomas is atopy;atopic dogs often have multiple lick granulomas on different limbs,and
owners report that the lesions shift from one site to another. Lesions that do not respond
to antimicrobial therapy should be biopsied to rule out foreign body reactions,kerion
reactions,neoplasia,folliculitis,and/orfurunculosis.Radiographs of the region shoulde
taken looking for evidence of an underlying cause,e.g.fracture, osteosarcoma.The dog
should be carefully examined for evidence of joint disease.Atopy and/or food allergies
should be investigated before making a definitive diagnosis of psychogenic dermatitis.
ii.Tail dock neuroma is a rare complication of surgical tail docking.In this
condition,the nerve endings regrow in a disorganized manner forming a neuroma.
Clinically,this appears as a swelling at the tail tip that stimulates pain or some other
unpleasant sensation causing the dog to lick, chew, or mutilate the tail. Surgical
removal is the treatment of choice.
165Pyrethrins are extracted from chrysanthemum plants and have immediate flea
killing activity (fast knock down). They have little residual activity and are very
sensitive to ultraviolet light.They are relatively nontoxic and are safe to use on young
animals. Pyrethroids are synthetic drugs that are very stable in ultraviolet light.They
work on sodium channelsofinsect nerve axons and cause nerve excitement and
paralysis.They are rapidly adulticidal and have some repellant activity.Examples of
pyrethroids include D-trans-allethrin,resmethrin,fenvalerate,and permethrin. Cats
are especially sensitive to these drugs and they are best avoided in this species.
172
Copyrightedmaterial
-173.jpg
166:Question
166a
166b
166 A 16-week-old golden retriever puppy is presented for matting, odor, and bleeding
around the cyes (166a). The owner reported that the lesions began as focal areas of hair
loss and rapidlly progrcsscd ovcr the last week. Careful examination of the skin reveals
similar lesions on the dorsum (166b). The areas are painful upon manipulation, but the
puppy is otherwise normal. The lesions are erosive, exudative, and malted with serum
neutrophils, rare plasna cells, numerous macrophages, and red blood cells. Large
numbers of cocci both intracellularly and extracellularly are also seen. A clinical
diagnosis of deep pyoderma is made.
i. What is the most likely cause of deep pyoderma in a puppy?
il. How should the puppy be treated?
ii. Recently, a zenograft mouse model has been used to study demodlicosis. What are
the highlights of that work?
173
-174.jpg
166:Answer
166i.Demodicosis.Rarely, deep pyoderma as a result of a kerion reaction may occur.
i. If the puppy is febrile, it may require hospitalization and fluid therapy. After
confirming the presence of the mite, oral antibiotic therapy for the deep pyoderma
should be started and continued for at least 4-6 weeks. Impression smears should be
done to determine if there is a mixed population of bacteria (rods and cocci) present.
Topical therapy with amitraz at weekly intervals can be started once the areas of deep
pyoderma are no longer eroded. This usually happens within 7-10 days. In this
patient, whole body clipping of the hair coat and concurrent antibacterial shampoo
therapy will speed resolution of the infection.Miticidal therapy should be continued
until there are at least three negative skin scrapings at weekly intervals.
Alternative therapies such as daily ivermectin (600 μg/kgPO for at least 90 days)
or daily milbemycin oxime(3mg/kgPOforat least90 days)can be used concurrently
with the treatment of deep pyoderma.This is one indication for the use of systemic
miticidal agents. Another indication may be a dog that is not tractable and/or cannot
be treated topically due to owner related issues. The author treats dogs with
demodicosis with weekly amitraz dips for at least 20 weeks before considering
alternative therapies.If a progression from live to dead mites and immature to mature
mites is seen, therapy should be continued. If not, then an alternative therapy should
be considered.This puppyhad generalized demodicosis that responded to weekly
amitraz sponge-on dips.
ii.Recently, a zenograft mouse-model has been used to study the development of
demodicosis. In this study,full thickness canine skin grafts from normal dogs were
grafted onto SCID mice, and the canine skin was inoculated with Demodex canis
mites. There were several interesting findings from this pilot study.First, large
numbers of mites proliferated on the normal dog skin. If local immunity was the
primary mechanism for controlling mite populations, this should not have been
observed.This finding supports other studies that suggested that systemic host
factors,rather than local immune factors,may be more important in the control of
mite populations (Linder et al.,2002).Furthermore,the study revealed that
lymphocytes interact in a mechanism that may enhance,rather than limit, mite
populations. Finally, mite proliferation did not result in hair loss unless secondary
inflammation developed,contradicting a long-held belief that mites induce
nonspecific histological changes in the skin.
174
Copyrightedmaterial
-175.jpg
167,168:Questions
167A 12-year-old cat is pre-
167a
sented for weight loss,anorexia,
depression,and excessive scaling
（167a,b）.The owner reports the
cat developed these signs over the
last 2 months.The cat has no
previous history of skin disease
and is not pruritic.The scales are
large and thickly adherent to the
skin.In addition, there is thick
adherent debris in and around the
nailbeds.
167b
i.What primary differential diagnoses
should be considered in this case?
ii.What diagnostictests are indicatedin
thispatient?
ii.Radiographs reveal a mediastinal mass.
Histologicalexamination of a skin biopsy
reveals a cell-poor,hydropic interface
dermatitiswithlargenumbers of
Malassezia organisms. What is the most
likely diagnosis,andwhat is the prognosis?
168a
168b
168A 2-year-old maleSiberianhusky dogwaspresentedfordepigmentationof the
lips (168a).Closer examination revealed he was photophobic and had areas of
depigmentation on the margins of the eyelid(168b).The doghad difficulty navigating
in the examination room,but the owner wasnot aware of any visualproblems until
the examination.
i.What is the most likely diagnosis?
i.Whatwould the dermatological and ophthalmic examinationsbe lookingfor?
i.How should this disease be managed?
175
Copyrighted material
-176.jpg
167,168:Answers
167i. This cat has two major problems: signs of systemic illness, and exfoliative
dermatitis.The major differential diagnoses for severe scaling in cats include
pemphigus complex, generalized dermatophytosis secondary to an underlying disease,
generalized Malassezia dermatitis secondary to an underlying systemic disease (e.g.
FeLV,FIV),SLE, drug eruptions, cutaneous neoplasia,hyperthyroidism,and
exfoliative dermatitis associatedwith thymoma.The age of the cat and the concurrent
signs of systemic illness make it very unlikely this is a case of dermatophytosis alone;
however, this should be considered because it can develop in cats debilitated from
other illnesses.
i. This cat will need both a dermatological evaluation and a medical evaluation. Skin
scrapings,dermatophyte culture,impression smears of the skin and crusts,skin
biopsy, a complete blood count, serum chemistry panel, FeLV and FIV tests, and
radiographs of the chest and abdomen should be performed.
ii.The most likely diagnosis is exfoliative dermatitis and thymoma.Most thymomas
are benign and surgical excision of the thymoma often results in resolution of clinical
signs in cats. This was the case in this cat.
168 i. Canine uveodermatologic syndrome.This is a rare autoimmune disease
involving the skin and the eyes.It is believed to be caused by autoantibodies against
melanin,gangliosides,and photoreceptors.There is no age or sex predilection,but
breeds such as akitas, chow chows, samoyeds, and Siberian huskies appear to be
predisposed.
i. The disease is characterized by depigmentation of the skin and acute concurrent
uveitis.Depigmentation may occur on the nose,lips, eyelids,footpads, scrotum,
prepuce,anus, and hard palate.The disease causes uveitis,photophobia,blepharo-
spasms, lacrimation, injected conjunctiva,corneal edema,retinal detachment,
cataracts,and glaucoma.If left untreated, these dogs may develop blindness.
ii.The skin lesions usually develop within 7-10 days of the ocular lesions; however,
the owner is more likely to notice the depigmentation first.Because this disease can
cause blindness, aggressive treatment and rapid diagnostics are indicated. Skin
biopsies should be taken of the depigmented areas, and a thorough ocular examina-
tion performed. The eyes should be examined for uveitis. Life-long systemic gluco-
corticoids and azathioprine will be needed to control the disease, and periodic ocular
examinations should be performed to monitor uveitis.The skin lesions may respond
to therapy but should not be used as an indicator of remission.Dogs may have
active ocular lesions even though the skin lesions are static or have repigmented.
176
Copyrighted material
-177.jpg
169, 170:Questions
169 A 2-year-old cat was pre-
169a
sented for acute, intensely
pruritic, erythematous, exuda-
tive, raiscd lcsions on the
medial thigh (169a). The
regional lymph nodes were
enlarged, and skin scrapings
and flea combings were nega-
tive. Cytological examination
of an imprcssion smear
revealed predominantly eosino-
philic inflammation (169b),
and FNA of the regional lymph
nodes revealed eosinophilic
inflammation.
i.
Whatis
the clinical
169b
diagnosis?
ii. What are the most common
170 Kctoconazolc, itraconazole, fluconazole, and terbinafine are systemic antifungal
drugs used in veterinary dermatology. What are the mechanism, common adverse
effects, and spectrurn of aetivity of each drug?
177
-178.jpg
169,170:Answers
169 i. Eosinophilic plaque.
i.These lesions were once thought of as adiagnosis’,but it is now known that they
represent a dermatological reaction pattern commonly associated with allergic skin
diseases. The most common underlying cause is FAD. If lesions recurr or persist
despite flea control, food allergy and atopy should be investigated.
170 i.Ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fluconazole are azole antibiotics.They work
by inhibiting cytochromeP450 and the conversion of lanosterol to ergosterol, causing
an accumulation of C14 methylated steroids.They also inhibit intracellular
triglyceride and phospholipids biosynthesis,cell wall chitin synthesis,and oxidative
and peroxidative enzymes.Side-effects and adverse effects are more common with
ketoconazole than with itraconazole or fluconazole.Inappetence,vomiting,alopecia,
and lightening of the hair coat have been reported as the most common side-effects of
ketoconazole administration.Elevated liver enzymes are also common.Ketoconazole
is embryotoxic and teratogenic. It can also suppress adrenal function.
Itraconazole is more potent than ketoconazole and can cause vomiting and
anorexia.Adverse effects on adrenal function are not common with this drug.A rare
vasculitis and necroulcerative skin eruption has also been reported in dogs.Hepato-
toxicity can also occur with this drug and is most common in animals receiving high
doses for longperiods of time.When compared to ketoconazole,itraconazole is more
potent.Fluconazole, when compared to ketoconazole, is more potent and is associated
with decreased toxicity.Unlike other azoles,therapeutic concentrations are achieved in
the cerebral spinal fluid. Fluconazole is the most fungal enzyme specific drug with
respect to its mechanism of action, and side-effcts are rare. High doses are embryo-
toxic and teratogenic; endocrine abnormalities are not associated with this drug.
The spectrum activity of ketoconazole includes yeast, some dermatophytes,
Candida,Malassezia,and some of the dimorphic fungi associated with deep mycoses.
Since the introduction of itraconazole and fluconazole, it is not commonly used as a
‘core’therapy for deep mycoses as the other azoles have a better spectrum of activity.
Itraconazole has a wider spectrum of activity than ketoconazole; it is more efficacious
against Microsporum and Trichopbyton than ketoconazole. In addition,it is
efficacious against Candida, Malassezia, intermediate and deep mycoses (Aspergillus,
Sporothrix spp.)and the protozoans Leishmania and Trypanosoma.Fluconazole has
the widest spectrum of activity of the azoles,particularly against deep and
intermediate mycoses.
Terbinafine is an allylamine that inhibits ergosterol biosynthesis and squalene
epoxidase,which results in fungal cell wall ergosterol deficiency and the intracellular
accumulation of squaline.This drug is both fungistatic and fungicidal.The major
adverse effects are gastrointestinal. This drug does not affect cytochrome P450. This
drug is used to treat dermatophytosis,sporotrichosis,candidiasis,and aspergillosis.
178
Copyrighted material
-179.jpg
171:Question
17la
17lb
171An18-month-old male dalmatian dogwaspresented for theproblem of intense
pruritus （171a,b) in early June.The pruritus started when the dog was less than
4 months of age and involved the face,feet, ears,ventrum,axillary and inguinal
reginsandrineum.hepurituswasnsasnautwaswrseinoors
evenings,and in the morning.The dog sleeps in bed with the owners.The pruritus
was only mildly responsive to oral antibiotics butwasresponsiveto glucocorticoids;
however,pruritus always returnedwhen the glucocorticoids were discontinued.The
owners practiceflea control,and they have no other pets.The dogwas acquired as a
4-month-old puppy from a pet store.At the time of presentation, the dog was
receivingglucocorticoids(0.5mg/kgPOq24h).
i.What is themajor dermatological problem in this patient?
i.List the differential diagnoses for this patient's dermatological problem.Some of
these differential diagnoses are more likely than others;list them in order of
importancegivingexplanations.
ii.What diagnostic tests should berecommended to the owner?
179
Copyrighted material
-180.jpg
17l:Answer
171 i. Pruritus.
i. Lice and fleas are unlikely causes of the pruritus in this paticnt sincc the owners
practice flea control, and the pattern and severity of the pruritus does not match that
scen with flea or louse infestations. The pruritus associated with Cheyletiella is mild and
dorsal in distribution, while this patient's pruritus is severe, and the pattern is ventral in
distribution. Thcrcfore, of the parasitic diseases in the differential diagnosis, Sarcoptes
and Demodex are possiblce causes. Demodex should always be considered in the differ-
ential diagnosis of any dog with skin discasc. Scabics is suspected in this patient because
the dog was acquired from a pet store, the pruritus bcgan at a young age, the paltern of
the lesions and pruritus is ventral, the severity of the pruritus is scvcre, and the pruritus
is worse at night. The latter three syimptoms are very common in scabics paticnts.
Bacterial pyoderina, Malassezia dermatitis, and dermatophytosis should all be
considcrcd as possible causes for pruritus in this patient. A concurrent bacterial and
yeast infection is highly probable, but this is most likely to be secondary to another
disease. The fact that the lesions do not respond to antibiotics alone is consistent with
a concurrent bacterial and yeast infection and/or an undiaguosed underlying trigger.
Dermatophytosis should be included in the diferential diagnosis because of the youg
age of onset, and the fact that the puppy was obtained from a pet store. What argues
against dermatophytosis as a cause is that glucocorticoid administration did not
worsen the lesions, and the owners have no history of having contracted a skin
disease from their dog.
The pattern of lesions (face, feet, ears, ventrum) suggests that these infections
were triggered by allergic skin disease. The two most likely allergic skin diseases are
food allergy and atopy. The clinical signs are inconsistent with FAD; the pattern of
FAD in dogs is caudal. Food allergy is more likely than atopy because of the young
age of onset of the lesions. Atopy is still a rcasonable differential diagnosis, especially
a house dust mite allergy, because of the young age of onsct, and the fact that the
lesions are worse indoors.
ili. The diagnostic tests include: skin scrapings, a treatment trial for scabies,
impression smears for yeast and bacteria and/or a 30 day treatment trial with anti-
microbials, and a dermatophyte culture. A food trial and an intradermal skin test or
in vitro alcrgy test may be necessary if the abave diagnostics are negative or normal.
180
-181.jpg
172,173:Questions
172 The patient in 171 presented with almost classic signs of atopy, yet intradermal
skin testing (ILST) was dclayed.
i. Why was IDST delayed in this patient?
i. Would an in vitro diagnostic test for food allergy and/or atopy have been helpful at
the first visit?
ii. What variations must a veterinarian bc aware of with respect to commercially
available in vitro allergy tests?
173
173 The lesion on the lumbosacral area of a dog shown (173) was initially diagnosed
as an area of pyotraumatic dermatitis secondary to a flea infestation. The lesion was
treated with a course of oral antibiotics and topical antibiotic ointmcnt for 30 days.
The lesion did not respond to therapy. What skin rumor of dogs can appear to be
similar to an arca of pyotraumatic dermatitis?
181
-182.jpg
172,173:Answers
172 i. Intradermal skin testing was dclayed in this patient for several reasons. First.
the dog was receiving glucocorticoids at the time and an adequate withdrawal period
(>6 wecks) was needed before testing. Second, the dog had severe secondary skin
infections that needed to be resolved. Although atopy was considered a likely cause of
the pruritus, it was unclear if this dog truly had year round pruritus. Dogs with
seasonal atopy that develop secondary bacterial and/or yeast infections that are left
untreated, can mimic year round pruritic dogs. It is always importaut to know
whether or not the patient is still pruritic once the infections resolve. In addition,
IDST is best delayed in patients with inflamed skin to avoid false positive reactions.
Third, the onset of symptoms started at 4 months of agc; most atopic dogs develop
were the more likely differential diagnoses considering the age of onset in this patient.
Fourth, the time of the year can impact on the results of IDsT, especially in
geographic regions with seasonal allergens. A negative result on the first IDST
possibly occurred becausc thc primary allrgic discase was a food allergy and/or the
dog had not been exposcd to enough of the allrgens to show positive reactions on
the IDsT. In this case, both of these were true.
i. Because in vitro blood allergy tests are not reliable, restricted diet triais of
4-12 weeks are currently the only reliable method for diagnosing a food alergy. An
in vitro blood allergy test for environmental allcrgens could have been done at the
firsr visit; however, thc question would suill remain as to how the rcsults should be
interpreted. In vitro blood allergy tests and intradermal skin tests do not answer the
question as to whether the patient is atopic or not. Instead, they establish which
envirounental allrgens the patient reacts to. These tests (IDST or in vitro allergy
tests) identify environmental allergens that will be used in formulating
immunotherapy.
il. Variations among tests may include source of allrgen extract, reacting phase of
the allrgcn (solid phase or liquid phase), specificity of the IgE detection reagent
(some rcagcnts may be conlaminated with cross-reacting antibodies, i.e. IgG), signal
molecule (enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay or radioallergosorbent test), sample
processing (some lahoratories pre-treat samples to remove nonlgF antibodies),
reporting and interpretation of results (test results are not quantitatively reported),
and standardization and quality control measures are voluntary in many countries
(DeBocr and Hilliar, 2001).
173 Apocrine gland carcinuma may look similar to pyotraumatic dermatitis. In this
case, the lack of response to what appeared to be appropriate therapy should alert the
clinician that the dog has a differcnt skin disease. The lack of response to appropriate
therapy is one of the most important criteria for performing a skin biopsy.
182
-183.jpg
174,175:Questions
174
174 A 2-year-old cocker spaniel dog was presented for recurrent otitis externa. The
 opening to the external ear canal could not be found, and the vertical ear canal was
hard upon palpation (174). Dermatological examination was normal except for nasal
digital hyperkeratosis and mild scaling on the skin.
i. What common clinical syndrome is being depicted?
i. What is the most likely underlying cause in this patient?
ii. H low is this condition treated?
175 A 10-year-old male Labrador retriever dog was presenited for evaluation of vomit-
 ing, diarrhea, and weight loss In addition, the dog had numerous nonhealing draining
 lesions on the legs. A diagnosis of zygomycosis was made via intestinal biopsy.
 i. What is zygomycosis and what are the most conmon clinical presentations of this 
disease?
ii. What organisms cause this disease?
i. How is this disease diagnosed and what is unique about specimen handling?
183
-184.jpg
174,175:Answers
174 i. Proliferative otitis externa.
ii. The most likely cause in a 2-year-old cocker spaniel dog is a primary disorder of
keratinization. The nasal digital hyperkeratosis and scaling in the hair coat are also
compatible with a disorder of keratinizatian.
ili. There are several treatment options, and the goal of therapy is to reestablish an
required to determine that the canal is calcified. In other cases, a skull radiograph 
should be taken to determine if there is calcification in the soft tissue of the ear canal,
and/or to determine if the proliferative otitis is limited to the pinnae. If no
calcification is present, systemic glucocorticoid therapy (2.2 mg/kg PO q24h for
responds to systemic glucocorticoids, topical daily glucocorticoid otic preparations
can be used to maintain the patency of the ear canal, especially in dogs with mild
proliferative otitis. Alternatively, oral cyclosporin A (5 mg/kg q12h) for 12 weeks
may be another option. If the proliferative tissue is limited to the pinnae, laser therapy
can be used to remove the polyp-like tissue. lf there is no response to glucocorticoid
therapy or if calcification of thc car canal is prcscnt, the cars arc considercd cnd
stage' and total ear canal ablation is the best surgical option. It is important for
owncrs to undcrstand that dogs with prolifcrativc otitis cxterna duc to a disordcr of
keratinization will be predisposed to furthcr cpisodes and may cventually require
surgery. Although the owncrs arc focuscd on thc cars, it is important that they
understand the dog's generalized seborrhea will need to be treated and will require
treat dogs with severe prirnary disorders of keratinization.
175'i. Zygomycosis is a fungal disease caused by saprophytes that live in the soil or
decaying vegetation. Affected animals may present with gastrointestinal, respiratory,
or cutaneous lesions. Single or multiple wounds, or nonhealing wounds characterize
the cutaneous presentations.
ii. Zygomyocetes are are divided into two orders: Muorales (Rhizopus, Mucor, or
Absida, antd Morlierella) and Enomophthorales (Conidicbohus and Basidobolus).
i. Definitive diagnosis is made via biopsy and culture. Characteristic biopsy findings
often prominent. The inflammation tends to be centered around amorphous eosino-
philic material and poorly staining fungal hyphae are often seen. Fungal elements are
usually found within foci of necrosis. The organism can be cultured on Sabouraud's
dextrose agar by embedding a wedge of tissue into the media without cyclohexinmide.
It is important not to macerate the tissue as this may destroy the organism.
184
-185.jpg
176,177:Questions
176The ear margin of a 3-year-
176
old springer spaniel dogis shown
(176). The owners report that this
material accumulates on the ear
margin within 2-3 days after
bathing. The ear margins are
mattedwith greasy accumulations
of follicular casts adhering to the
skin and to the hair.The remain-
der of the dog's skin is normal.
Skin scrapings are negative,and
previous impression smears of the
exudate revealedpoorly staining
ceruminous debris,with some
cocci and Malassezia organisms.
The doghas been treatedwith oral antibiotics andconcurrentketoconazole several
times previously,but the condition always recurs.
iWhatis thelinicaldiagnosisandhowshould thedogbetreate
i. Ear margin dermatoses are common in which dog breed(s), and how do lesions
progress?
177The dorsal planum ofa
177
2-year-old female cocker spaniel
dog is shown (177).This lesion
startedto developwhen the dog
was<1year of age.Physical exam-
ination reveals hyperkeratotic
footpads,follicular fronds sur-
roundinghermammae,andmildly
malodorous ears with a thick
yellow discharge.
i.What is the clinical name for the
condition described?What is the
etiology?How is this condition
managed?
ii.If these lesions occurred sud-
denlynanolerog,whatcould
be the cause?
i.What skin disease has been describedrecently in Labrador retriever dogs that
appears similar to this one?
185
Copyrighted material
-186.jpg
176, 177: Answers
176 i. Ear margin scborrhca/dermatosis complicated by secondary bacterial and yeast
seborrhea in some dogs. If this is the case, the condition is best managcd by closc
clipping of the hair coat, and frequent bathing of the car margins several times a week
with an antiseborrheic shampoo. Close clipping of the hair coat facilitates the bathing.
i. Ear margin dermatosis is common in dachshunds and other breeds with pendulous
ears. The clinical signs consist of follicular casts matting the hair and plugging hair
follicles. As the disorder progresses, the scaling starts lo involve the entire ear margin,
resulting in any combination of inflanmation, hair loss and/or thickening of margin.
Advanced lesions can lead to head shaking and the development of fissures and
crusts. The ear margin is notorious for poor healing, and some patients require
extensive surgical debridement (ie. ear cropping) to arrest fissuring. Laser surgery can
be very helpful in these cases.
177 i. Nasal digital hyperkeratosis. The young age of the dog and the other clinical
findings suggest that this dog has a primary disorder of keratinization. Such dogs
develop a wide spectrum of clinical diseases, and dogs with nasal hyperkeratosis can
be managed hut not cured. If the lesions are mild, they should be hydrated for
5-10 minutes and treated with a keratolytic agent such as tretinoin gel. This will need
to be done daily until the nose (and footpads) is normal and repeated as needed. If
there is severe fissuring and/or hyperkeratosis, the excess keratin should be surgically
trimmed first. 'This is hest done under sedation by a clinician. The author finds it
helpful to hydrate the tissues for 10-15 minutes prior to trimming the keratin. Care
must be taken not to be too aggressive since a normal amount of keratin is needed to
protect the nose and footpads. In some patients, white petroleum jelly can be applied
to hydrated tissue to soften the lesions.
i. The acute onset of nasal and/or footpad crusting should make the clinician
suspicious of PF, lupus erythematosus, and hepatocutaneous syndrome. Other
diffcrcntial diagnoses for nasal hyperkeratosis include zinc responsive dermatosis and
ichthyosis, usually discascs of younger, hcalthy dogs.
ii. Hereditary nasal parakcratosis in Labrador retricver dogs (Page et al., 2003). This
is an inherited disorder with an autosomal recessivc mode of inheritance. Lesions are
often first seen between 6 and 12 months of age and start as mounds of
hyperkeratosis on the dorsal aspect of the nasal planum. The scvcrity varics, with
some dogs having only small ainounts of brownish dry keratin on their nose while
others develop severe fissures and erosions. Histologically, this syndrome is
characterized by parakeratotie hyperkeratosis. Dogs with this condition do not
respond well to systernic therapies and the lesions are managed medically with topical
emollients such as vitamin E, petroleun jelly, and propylene glycol.
186
-187.jpg
178,179:Questions
178
178A dogwas presented as an after-hours emergency for the complaint of acute
rectal bleeding.Note the perianal furunculosis,erythema,and exudation(178).After
sedation,fistulous tractswerefound1-2cm lateral to the anus inpositions between
6and 8o'clock.
i.What is the diagnosis?
i.How should the dog be treated?
ii.What is the source of secretions of the anal sac andwhat is its function?
179A Wood's lamp is an ultra-
179
violetlightwithawavelengthof
253.7nmthat isfilteredthrough
a cobalt or nickel filter.It is used
as a screening tool in the diag-
nosis of dermatophytosis(179).
i.What is the principle of its use,
and how is the lamp prepared for
use?
ii.Whatarethecommonmis-
takes made in interpretation of
results?
ii.What species of dermatophytes does it screen for?
187
Copyrighted material
-188.jpg
178,179:Answers
178 i. Anal sac abscessation with rupture and perineal furunculosis.
ii. This is a chronic problem duc to cxtensive perianal furunculosis and cellulitis.
Under general anesthesia, all of the hair from the surrounding arca should bc clippcd.
 The abscesses should be incised and debrided by curettage, and the wounds should be
flushed with a large volume of a dilute antibacterial solution (povidone-iodine or
chilorhexicline). Appropriate analgesic treatment should bc prcscribed, as home care
will require twice-daily hydrotherapy. Oral antibioties (e.g. cephalexin 30 mg/kg PO
q12h for 30 days) should be prescribed. Hlealing of the lesions will occur by
 granulation. There is the risk that damagc to the anal sacs and/or ducts may lead to
chronic fistulous tracts and recurrent infections. If this oecurs, surgical removal of the
anal sacs may be necessary. In this dog, the diffuse perianal furunculosis suggests that
there may be an underlying pruritic trigger. Surgical excision may resolve the
infections, but relapses of perianal furunculosis and inflammation will persist unless
the underlying cause is found.
ii. Ihe walls of the sac are comprised of sebaceous glands and the ducts are lined
with nunerous epitrichial swcat glands. The anal sac fluid is a mixture of fatty acids.
serous secretions. and cellular debris. The function is tunknown but is presumed to be
part of scent marking/social function.
179 i. The Wood's lanp is a sereening tool for dermatophytes that produce a
fluorescing metabolite as they grow on hairs. This metabolite is only produced on
growing hairs. lhe Wood's lamp should be turned on for at least 5 minutes prior to
use. The stability of the wavelength and its intcnsity arc temperature dependent. The
animal should be placed in a dark roon and the light held over suspect lesions for
3-5 minutes. Some dermatophytes are slow to show the apple-green fluorescence. In
addition, it takes several minutcs for thc clinician's eyes to adapt to the dark, allowing
them to see the fluorescence.
i.. The Wood's lamp is suggestive, hut not diagnostic of a dermatophyte infection.
Glowing hairs should be cultured to confirm the infection. These hairs can also he
 exanined with a clearing agent to look for the presence of fungal spores and hyphae
 on or in hairs. Topical medications and shampoos can cause false positives or destroy
the fluorescence altogether. Keratin, sebum, and bacterial organisms will also glow.
True fluorescence is present only on hairs. If the distal portion of the hair glows, the
hair should be plucked to see if the proximal portion (intrafollicular) also glows.
ii. Only a limited number of dermatophytes produce fluorescence: Microsporum
canis, M. distortum, M. audouini, and Trichophyton schoeleinni. The only pathogen
 of veterinary inportance that glows is M. canis and not all strains fluorescc. It has
been estimated that only 50% of strains of M. carnis fluoresce.
188
-189.jpg
180,18l:Questions
180a
180b
180Anadult Persian-mix catwas
180c
presented for examination ofresistant
Microsporum canis infection.The
breeder,who had had several cats before
with dermatophytosis,made this
diagnosis.The cat started to develop skin
lesions several months ago,and she
treatedthe cat topicallywith twice
weekly lime sulfur rinses.After several
months of treatment,the cat was still
developing lesions andwas presentedfor
examination.Dermatological exam-
inationrevealedthickadherentcrusting
on the nose,eartips,and footpads
(180a-c).Small crusts could be palpated in thehair coat,and careful examination of
the catrevealedintact pustules around the nipples.Theowner reported thecat was
intermittently depressed,and today the catwas depressed andhada fever.
i.What are the two most likely differential diagnoses?Which is the most likely
diagnosis?
i.What diagnostic tests should be performed?
ii.How is this disease treated, and what is the prognosis?
181A dog is presented with firm,hard,painful footpads.There are areas of
ulceration with a discharge consisting of a white chalky material.Histological
findings reveal calcinosis cutis.
i.What is themost likelycause of the cutaneouscalcinosis cutis?
i.What is calcinosis circumscripta?
189
Copyrightedmaterial
-190.jpg
180, 18l: Answers
180 i. Facial and footpad crusting (pododermatitis) in cats is most cominonly causedl
by dermatophytosis or PF. Howcvcr, the most likcly diagnosis in this cat is PF. There
is no hair loss as expected in dermatophytosis, and the intact pustules found ncar the
nipples are a classic finding in feline PF.
il. Skin scrapings of the exudates from the footpads should he ohtained to rule out
mites. Even though dermatophytosis is unlikely, a fungal culture should be performed
to elinminate this cause, and to make sure it is not now a concurrent skin disease, Early
cases of PF in cats can look surprisingly similar to dermatophytosis. Even though it is
difficult to biopsy the fragile pustules found in feline PF, an elliptieal skin biopsy
using a scalpel bladc should be used to harvest an intact pustule fron the nipple area.
Skin biopsy punch instruments are best avoided because they may rupture the fragile
pustules. The pustule should be carefully collected and mounted subcutancous side
down on a piece of a wooden tongue depressor. If there are multiple intact pustules,
several should be submitted for examination. Lastly, impression smears of the
exudates from the loot pads, underside of the crusts on the ear, and pustules should
be made to look for cytological evidence of PF, i.e. acantholytic cells.
ii. This is a case of PF in a cat. It is an autoinmune skin disease that requires life-long
therapy, although some cats may have remissions of several months duration. Cats
arc often trcated with a combination of glucocorticoids, chlorambucil, and gold salts.
 e se    s   sr re r
therapy. Azathioprine is toxic in cats and should not be uscd. Thc prognosis for a
good quality of lite is high.
181 i. The most lilkely cause is metastatic caleinosis cutis. Calcinosis cutis is most
anywhere but are most common on the dorsum and in the axillae and groin. Calciun
deposits solcly in thc footpads are rare and are most commonly associated with dogs
clinical manifestation of a systemic disease. The underlying cause of calcinosis cutis is
determined by history, physical examination findings, and laboratory tests 
ii. Calcinosis circumseripta is a localized form of dystrophic calcification in areas of
previous trauma (pressure points, bite wounds, ear croppings). The cause is
unknown. Lesions occur in young dogs and are dome shaped, firm or fluctuant.
uleerated or haired.
190
-191.jpg
182,183:Questions
182A4-year-oldmalecat
182
was presented for“feline
hyperesthesia syndrome'.
The cat was growling,
overgrooming,and biting
itself. The neurology
servicerequesteda derma-
tological examination
because the cat's symp-
toms didnotrespond to
phenobarbital or diaze-
pam,but thelesions didrespondtoglucocorticoids.Further questioning of theowner
revealed the cat hadbeen symptomaticfor3years.The symptoms occurredyearround
butwere clearlyworseinthefalland again at Christmas time.The owners always had a
fresh cut Christmas tree,and the cat spent a lot of time in and around the tree.The
most dramatic dermatologicalfindingwaspatchyhair loss characterized by short
broken hairs that appeared to be chewed off and‘twitching and biting of the skin’when
scratched(182).Other dermatological findings included scattered erythematous
papules,linear excoriations in the pre-auricular area,patchy hyperpigmentation in the
innerpinnae,brokenand bentwhiskersblackdebrisatthenail base,scalespiercedby
hairs throughout the coat,and broken and frayed nails.Two other cats in the house
were normal.The people hadno skin lesions.
i.What is this cat's primary dermatological problem?
i.What are themost likely differential diagnoses?
ii.Based upon the information presented,what are the possibleworking diagnose?
iv.What is themost likely reason the catbecomesmore symptomatic at Christmas
time?
183Thefocalareaofhairlossshown
183
is darkly pigmented (183).Upon
closer examination,diffuse follicular
plugging is causing the skin pigmen-
tation.Thisgray’discolored lesion is
verytypical of acommon skin disease
seen in dogs,especially puppies.What
is it?
191
Copyrighted material
-192.jpg
182,183:Answers
182 i. Generalized pruritus.The cat's clinical signs and history are not compatible with
felinehyperesthesia syndrome.In feline hyperesthesia,affected cats violently groom and
self-mutilate themselves in random, unpredictable, explosive attacks. They often growl,
vocalize,run, and may attack others.Owners describe the cats acting as if they are in
pain.The skin over the dorsum of the back may twitch or ripple just prior to an episode.
i.The most common causes of generalized pruritus in cats include: parasitic diseases
(fleas,lice, Cheyletiella and Demodex mites),infections (bacterial and/or yeast
pyoderma,dermatophytosis),and allergic skin diseases (atopy, food allergy,lea
allergy). Several key historical points help limit the differential diagnoses.First, two
other cats in the house are normal making a contagious or infectious skin disease
unlikely (i.e. fleas,lice,Cheyletiella,contagious feline demodicosis,and
dermatophytosis). Second, the response to glucocorticoids suggests an underlying
cause is more likely to be an allergic disease rather than a contagious or infectious
disease.Third, the owners have no lesions making contagious mites and fleas
unlikely.Finally,although the symptoms are year round, there are two points in the
year where seasonal spikes are observed (fall and Christmas time).
ii.There are four possible working diagnoses.First, this cat could have year round
pruritus due to a food allergy and seasonal atopy. Second, it could have year round
pruritus due to a food allergy and year round atopy that happens to have seasonal
spikes.Third,it could just have year round atopy with seasonal spikes.Finally,the
cat could have seasonal atopy and untreated/unrecognized complicating secondary
bacterial and/or yeast infections giving the impression that the pruritus is year round.
This cat was examined in January after the owner had removed the Christmas
tree. Large numbers of Malassezia spp. were found in cytological examinations of the
black nail bed debris scraped from beneath the cat's nails.The scaling with hairs
piercing the scales was compatible with a bacterial infection.The cat's pruritus
resolvedwith 35 days of oral antibiotic and antifungal therapy. The cat remained
normal until the fall when it exhibited signs of pruritus. The episode was managed
with alternate day glucocorticoid therapy.The ownersbought an artificial Christmas
tree, and the cat did not relapse during the holiday season.
iv.Atopic dogs and cats often become more pruritic during Christmas time if owners
have a fresh cut tree in their home. Relapses are triggered by the sudden concen-
tration ofpollen.
183 This common skin disease is demodicosis.Demodex mites live in the hair
follicles; when they proliferate they plug the follicles, impeding the release of sebum
from the sebaceous glands. Clinically this appears as a focal area of gray pigmen
tation.The surface of the skin is often waxy.
192
Copyrightedmaterial
-193.jpg
184:Question
184A2-year-oldspayedfemalesamoyed
184
dogwaspresented for the problem of hair
loss that spared the dog's head and legs.
Physicalexamination revealednoninflam-
matory hairloss on the dog's trunk,
ventral chest, and caudal thighs (184).
The dogwas polyuric and polydipsic,but
not pruritic.All other diagnostics were
normal or negative.Skin biopsies were
compatiblewithanendocrinealopecia.
Theresultsofthethyroidandadrenal
function testing are shown.
Results
Normal
Total thyroxine(TT4)nmol/l
30
15-67
Total triodothyronine（TT3）nmol/1
1.4
1.0-2.5
FreeT4by dialysispmol1
8
6-42
Free (unbound)T3(FT3）pmol/
6.5
4.0-12.0
T4 autoantibody
5
<20
T3autoantibody
0
<10
Thyroid stimulatinghormonemU/L
15
0-37
Thyroglobuline autoantibody %
11
<200
Low-dosedexamethasone suppression test(ng/ml)
Results
Normal
Pre-
84
2.1-58.8
4hr
7
<10
8hr
6
<10
ACTH stimulation test (ng/ml)
Results
Normal
Pre-
45
2.1-58
Post-
80
65.0-174
Adrenalfunctionpanel clinicalendocrinology service/University ofTennessee,TennesseeUSA
Result
Normal
Result
Normal
(baseline)
range
(HV-)
range
Cortisolng/ml
152.4
2.1-58.8
159.7
65.0-174.6
Androstenedioneng/ml
21.2
0.1-5.7
29.5
2.7-39.7
Estrogen
60.4
30.8-69.9
51.5
27.9-69.2
Progesteroneng/ml
1.83
0.01-0.49
2.15
0.10-1.50
17-OH Progesterone ng/ml
1.98
0.01-0.77
2.63
0.40-1.62
Testosterone ng/ml
<0.01
0.01-0.32
0.01
0.02-0.45
i.What is the interpretation of the ACTH stimulation, low-dose dexamethasone sup-
pression,and thyroid function tests?
i.An adrenal panel test was performed several months later.What is the most likely
diagnosis?What are the characteristics of the disease that the adrenal panel is
screening for?
193
Copyrighted material
-194.jpg
184:Answer
184 i. When interpreted as a whole, the thyroid hormone screening panel indicated
normal function.The ACTH stimulation test indicated an elevated basal cortisol
concentration, but when stimulated the dog was within the normal range. The low-
dose dexamethasone suppression test revealed an elevated basal cortisol,but
suppression was normal.At this point,hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism
were unlikely,but there did appear to be increased adrenal activity.
ii.The findings were compatible with increased adrenal activity.At this time, the dog
had a markedly increased basal cortisol, but again the dog's post-ACTH stimulation
test was within laboratory normals.There was also an increased basal
androstenedione and increased pre- and post-ACTH progesterone and 17-OH
progresterone.These findings were most compatible with adrenal hyperplasia-like
syndrome;however, an adrenal tumor should not be ruled out based upon these
findings. An abdominal ultrasound was normal, and the final diagnosis was adrenal
hyperplasia-like disorder (alopecia X).
This is an endocrine disorder of dogs characterized by coat changes and hair loss
that starts between 1 and 2 years of age. The earliest clinical signs are a gradual
dulling of thehaircoat,dryhaircoat,andloss ofprimary hairs.Hairloss starts inthe
frictional areas of the tail head, caudal thigh region,and caudomedial thigh and
collar region.The head and extremities are spared.Polyuria and polydipsia can be
seen as in hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, but are usually not as severe.
Studies on dogs with this syndrome showed they have either elevated baseline and/or
post-ACTH concentrations of sex hormones, especially progesterones.The most
commonly affected breeds are pomeranians, chow chows, keeshonds, and samoyeds.
The diagnosis is made by history,clinical signs,ruling out other causes of hair loss,
particularly endocrine diseases and follicular dysplasia, and by specialized pre and
post-ACTH sex hormone assays.A skin biopsy should be performed to rule out hair
follicle dysplasia and to confirm the hair loss is due to an endocrine disorder.Hypo-
thyroidism should be ruled out as an underlying cause. Both an ACTH stimulation
test and a low-dose dexamethasone suppression test are recommended to rule out
hyperadrenocorticism.If these are normal then an adrenal sex hormone panel is
indicated. In some dogs with chronic disease, there may be elevations in pre- and
post-ACTH stimulation cortisol concentrations. Therefore, a low-dose dexa-
methasone suppression test should be done as part of the diagnostic evaluation.
Currently, the only reliable diagnostic laboratory performing adrenal sex hormone
testing is the Endocrinology Laboratory at the University of Tennessee, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Knoxville TN.
194
Copyrighted material
-195.jpg
185-187:Questions
185The chin of an 11-year-old
185
male black Labradorretriever
dog is shown (185).
i.What condition is being
depicted?
ii.What is poliosis?
186A 3-year-old female Siberian
husky dog is presented for the
complaintof‘crusties'.The
owner reports the dog has
pruritic crusty lesions on the face
and ears.On dermatological
examination,the lesions around
the eyes are symmetrical (186),
and similar lesions are present on
the ear margins,chin,ears,foot-
pads,and pressure points.The
skin is thickened and hyperkera-
totic crusting is present.The dog
ishealthyotherwise.The dogis
fed a complete and balanced diet.Twolittermates,owned by other people,have
similarlesions.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis and how should this be confirmed?
iHowshouldthedogbetreatedand howsoonwouldresolutionof clinical signsbe
expected?
iWhat endocrine diseasemay play arole in thepathogenesis of this disease?
187Whatareoomyceteinfections?
195
Copyrighted material
-196.jpg
185-187:Answers
185 i. The condition shown is graying of the hair coat due to age. Depigmentation of
the hair coat is called leukotrichia.
i. Poliosis is premature graying of hair.
186 i. Zinc-responsive skin disease. The signalment, clinical signs, and affected
littermates are compatible with zinc deficiency The diagnosis could be confirmed by
skin biopsy.The key finding is diffuse parakeratosis, especially of the follicular
epithelium. Serum and hair concentrations of zinc may be abnormal, but it is difficult
to find a reliable laboratory to do the testing.Siberian husky,Alaskan malamute and
some bull terrier dogs have an inherited defect that decreases their capability to
absorb zinc from the intestines.This is called syndrome I of zinc-responsive skin
diseases.Syndrome II occurs in rapidly growing dogs that are fed zinc deficient diets
high in phytates or minerals (e.g. calcium), or diets oversupplemented with minerals
and vitamins that interfere with zinc absorption.
i. This dog needs 1 mg/kg of elemental zinc each day. The most commonly used
supplements are zinc sulfate (10 mg/kg/day), zinc gluconate (5 mg/kg/day), or zinc
methionine (1.7 mg/kg/day). Feeding a dog food with zinc' is not adequate nor are
vitamin supplements containing zinc.Some Siberian husky dogs do not respond to
oral supplementation andmay require intravenous injections of zinc sulfate solutions
(10-15 mg/kg) weekly for at least 4 weeks,and then every 1-6months thereafter.
Therapy is life-long. Improvement in clinical signs is usually evident within a few
weeks.After the diagnosis,the lesions should behydrated and the crusts soaked off.
ii. Thyroid hormones are important in the absorption and utilization of zinc. Dogs
that develop spontaneously occurringhypothyroidism may develop clinical and
histological signs of zinc-responsive skin disease.These dogs may fail to respond to
zinc supplementation if their hypothyroidism is not diagnosed and treated.
187 Oomycete infections are caused by aquatic pathogens of the protoctistid class
oomycetes.These organisms are found in wet tropical and subtropical climates and
infection is caused by exposure and/or consumption of contaminated water.The
organisms exist as motile zoospores that show chemotaxis toward damaged plants or
animal tissues.Phythiosis is caused by Phythium insidiosum and has three clinical
presentations: gastrointestinal, subcutaneous, and nasopharyngeal.Recently a new
organism,Lagenidium,has been identified in this class and is associated with
cutaneous and/or subcutaneous lesions as well as systemic lesions.Treatment for both
diseases is difficult and prognosis is grave.
196
Copyrighted material
-197.jpg
188,189:Questions
188a
188b
188A3-year-oldmale castratedpolice
dogwas presented for a secondopinion
(188a).The dog had been diagnosed with year round atopic dermatitis and had face,
muzzle,periocular,and otic erythema,and hair loss at the time of examination.The
policeofficerwho owned thedogwasverywillingto carry outimmunotherapy for
the treatment of the dog’s atopic dermatitis.The reason,however,for the second
opinion was the dog had bilateralproliferative otitis externa,and the dogs hearing
was impaired.The previous veterinarian hadradiographed the dog's skull and
determinedtheverticaland horizontal ear canalswere completelyobstructed by soft
tissue(188b).Bilateralear canal ablations were recommended to resolve this
situation.The dog's functionwas impairedin its current state and surgical treatment
would not return the dog tonormal function.The owner is inquiring if thereis any
othertreatment option.Onexaminationof theradiographs,no evidence of soft tissue
calcificationis seen.Whatother treatment options are available,if any?
189A kitten was born dead to a queen
189
treatedwithgriseofulvin for dermato-
phytosis during the first trimester of her
pregnancy (189).
i.What is the most likely cause of the
kitten's death?
ii.Whatis themechanism of action of
griseofulvin?
ii.How is the drug absorbed and
delivered to the skin?
197
Copyrighted material
-198.jpg
188,189:Answers
188Proliferativeeartissueisoftenvery
188c
responsive to glucocorticoid therapy.The
proliferative tissue often shrinks when
the patient is treated with oral gluco-
corticoids.If adequate patency of the ear
canal is obtained, the proliferative tissue
can often be controlledwith ear cleaning
andcontinued administrationoftopical
otic glucocorticoids.The lack of calcifi-
cation of the ear tissuemakes thisdoga
good candidate for this therapy.The
patient was treated with prednisone
(1mg/kgPOq24h） for 15 days and then
every otherdayfor an additional15days.
The proliferative tissue regressed,and the
ear canal regainednormal patency(188c).Concurent topical steroids and successful
immunotherapy were able to maintain normal patency of the dog's ear canals.For dogs
that cannot tolerate prednisone therapy,cyclosporin A therapy is another option
(5mg/kgPOq12h for up to 12weeks).
189i.This kitten died as a result of a griseofulvin-induced birth defect. Griseofulvin
is aknown teratogen and shouldnot be administeredtopregnant cats.Pregnant
queens cannot be safely treatedwith any of the commonlyused systemicantifungal
agents.Topical therapy with lime sulfur (sponge-on dips twice weekly） is
recommended as a safe alternative therapy.
i.Griseofulvin is a fungistatic antifungal drugproduced byPenicillium griseofulvum.
Itworks byinhibition of cellwall synthesis,nucleic acid synthesis,andmitotis.Itis
primarily active against growing organisms,but it may keep dormant cells from
dividing. Griseofulvin inhibits nucleic acid synthesis and cell mitosis by arresting
division at metaphase,interfering with the function of spindle microtubules,
morphogenetic changes in fungal cells,and possibly interferingwith chitin synthesis.
ii.Griseofulvin is not well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract,and should be
administered with a fattymeal to enhance absorption.Since particle size also affects
absorption of thedrug,it is formulated in amicrosize and ultramicrosize formulation.
The drugcan be detected in the stratum corneumwithin 8hours to3days of
administration.The highest concentrations are in the stratum corneum.The drug is
deliveredto the stratum corneum by diffusion,sweating,and transepidermal fluid
loss.It is deposited in keratin precursor cells and remains there throughout the
differentiation process.Griseofulvin concentrations droprapidly after discontinuation
of therapy,as it is not tightly bound to keratin.
198
Copyrighted material
-199.jpg
190-19l:Questions
190A 4-year-oldgreatDane
190
dogwaspresentedfor a second
opinion forresistantdermato-
phytosis.According to the
medicalrecord,a dermatophyte
culturewasperformedon one
ofthemultifocal areasofhair
loss (190).The fungal culture
was recorded as‘positive
because the DTM turned red.
However,there was no micro-
scopicconfirmation ofdermato-
phytosis.The dog was treated
with griseofulvin(50mg/kgPO
q24h)for thelast 6weeks.The lesions havenot diminished in sizeorfrequency and
may be spreading. On examination today,multifocal areas of hair loss can be found.
The hairs are not broken or frayed but shed completely.The lesions areWood’s lamp
negative,and skin scrapings are negative forDemodexmites.This doghas a common
skin disease that is often confusedwith dermatophytosis.What disease does it have?
191
191Anintactmalegoldenretrieverdogispresentedforexaminationbeforeplace-
ment in fostercare prior to adoption.It is thin,but otherwiseappearshealthy.During
the examination,matted hairfrom around the prepuce and scrotal area was clipped
and a scrotal ulceration found (191）.The doghas a nice temperament but is not
easily controlled.
i.What are the differential diagnosesfor scrotal ulceration in dogs?
i.How should theveterinarian proceed?
199
Copyrighted material
-200.jpg
190,191:Answers
190i. Bacterial pyoderma; these lesions are frequently misdiagnosed as‘ringworm
lesions.The dermatophyte culture in this dogwas incompletely evaluated.The red
color indicator on DTM is not diagnostic of dermatophyte growth, it only indicates
that the organism seen is using the protein in the medium. Definitive diagnosis of a
dermatophyte culture requires microscopic identification of the colony growth (i.e.
confirmation of the identity of the dermatophyte).The dog’s lesions resolved
completelywith a 21 day course of oral antibiotics.
191 i.The causes of scrotal ulceration in the dog are numerous and include,but are
notlimited to:BP,drug eruptions,erythema multiforme,lupus erythematosus,
pemphigus vulgaris or PF, irritant or allergic skin disease, bacterial pyoderma, self-
trauma,yeast dermatitis,canine babesiosis,leishmaniasis,and canine Rocky
Mountain spotted fever (Rickettsia rickettsia).
i. This patient requires a careful and thorough re-examination, particularly of
mucocutaneous regions. In addition,it is necessary to biopsy suspect skin lesions
rather rapidly as vesicles, bulla, and pustules are fragile and transient.Finally, scrotal
ulceration is very painful, and any diagnostic testing would be diffcult to perform.
Thus,chemical restraint is indicated in this patient.A careful examination of the oral
cavity and all mucocutaneous junctions, axilla,and inguinal areas should be
performed.Because immune-mediated diseases are suspect,any bullae,vesicles,or
pustules should be biopsied immediately.Impression smears of the scrotal ulceration
should be performed looking for cytological evidence ofinfection and/or microbial
overgrowth. Serum and blood samples should be collected for antinuclear antibody
testing and rickettsial diseases, and a complete blood count performed.
After sedating this patient,large numbers of small,but flaccid,intact pustules
were found in the haired area bordering the scrotal ulceration.Impression smears
revealed large numbers of degenerate neutrophils,cocci,and rafts of acanthocytes.A
skin biopsy of the pustules was obtained. There was a delay of 14 days before a final
diagnosis was made,pending laboratory test results.During this time,no treatment
was prescribed (at the request of the rescue agency).The foster family reported the
dog wasintermittently depressed and febrile every5-7 days.In addition,thehair coat
became crusted and lesions developed on the face, inner pinnae, and footpads.The
final diagnosis was PF.
Lesions in this dog began on the scrotum even though facial lesions and footpad
crusting are often the first lesions seen in this disease.This disease is treated most
commonly with glucocorticoids and concurrent immunosuppressive drugs, e.g.gold
salts and azathioprine.
200
Copyrighted material
-201.jpg
192-194:Questions
192The footpadof a 6-month-
192
old stray puppy found in Texas,
near the USA-Mexico border is
shown(192).Careful examina-
tionrevealeda small amountof
nasalhyperkeratosis in addition
to small amounts of ocular and
nasal discharge,and a fever.
i.What are the differential diag-
noses for nasal digital hyper-
keratosis?
ii.Which of these differential
diagnoses is the most likely cause
of the digital hyperkeratosis?
193A 5-year-old female cocker spaniel dog is
193
presentedfor treatment of a chronic skin disease
of1year's duration.The owner reports the dog
gradually developed crusting,dark skin,and
scalesinher hair coat.She also described the
skin as havingscales that stick out of hair
follicles making the dog look like she has fish
scales'.The axillary area of the dog is shown
(193).Note the hyperpigmentation caused by
follicular plugging and hyperkeratotic plaques.
Follicular frondsare alsopresent throughout the
coat,giving the dog thefish scale appearance
the owner mentioned.The erythema is suggestive
of a bacterial infection.
i.What is follicular plugging? Marked follicular
plugging occurs most commonly in which skin
diseases?
ii.Skin scrapings were negative,and the dogwas
otherwise healthy.This dog's lesions did notrespond completely to a course of
antibiotics and topical antiseborrheic therapy.What is the next diagnostic step?
ii.What are retinoidswhat is their proposedmechanism of action,what diseases are
they used to treat,andwhat adverse effects do they cause?
194What is swimmer'sitch?
201
Copyrighted material
-202.jpg
192-194:Answers
192i. The common causes of nasal digital hyperkeratosis include zinc deficiency,
leishmaniasis,primary disorder of keratinization,drug eruptions,PF,lupus
erythematosus, hepatocutaneous syndrome, and canine distemper virus.
ii. The vaccination history of this puppy is unknown, and the dog is showing signs of
systemic illness; therefore, distemper is the most likely cause. Canine distemper is
endemic in this region of the USA.
193 i. Follicular plugging is an accumulation of keratin in the follicular ostium.
Follicular plugging may be seen n hyperadrenocorticism, sebaceous adenitis,Vitamin
A deficiency, hypervitaminosis A, generalized demodicosis, and follicular dysplasia.
i.Skin biopsy.Vitamin A-responsive skin diseases,follicular dysplasia,and sebaceous
adenititis are all diagnosedvia skin biopsy.This is a case of vitaminA-responsive skin
disease.This disease is most common in cocker spaniel dogs, and it is unknown if it is
heritable. Skin biopsy findings revealed marked follicular orthokeratotic hyper-
keratosis, with microscopic fronds of keratin oozing out of the hair follicle ostium.
The dog responded to 10,000 IU of oral vitamin A with a fatty meal. Improvement
was seen within a few weeks, but complete resolution of lesions took >8 weeks.
Concurrent topical therapy with antiseborrheic shampoos every 2-3 days was also
prescribed. Discontinuation of the oral vitamin A resulted in a relapse.
ii.Retinoids may be synthetic or naturally occurring drugs that have vitamin A
activity. The synthetic retinoids include retinol, retinoic acid, and retinal derivatives.
Retinoids have a wide range of biological actions including regulation of prolifera-
tion, growth, and differentiation of epithelial tissues. Retinoids are used in
dermatology to treat disorders of keratinization.Adverse effects include kerato-
conjunctivitissicca,ecreased tearroduction,vomiting,diarrhea,stiffness,ruritus,
and mucocutaneous erythema in dogs. Laboratory abnormalities include hyper-
triglyceridemia,hyperchlolesterolemia,and increased alanine animinotransferase,
 aspartate aminotransferase, and serum alkaline phosphatase. These drugs are also
teratogenic.
194 Swimmer's itch is the common name for Schistosoma dermatitis.Schistosoma
cercariae are parasites of ducks, shore birds,voles,mice,and muskrats.When the
miracidia hatches it must find a natural host within 12 hours or die. In lakes heavily
infested with this organism,people and their pets may become infested.Dogs show
symptoms within 1 day of exposure.The lesions are intensely pruritic and may
resemble mosquito, chigger, or fleabites.The author has seen several suspect cases of
this disorder where both the dog and owner developed symptoms after swimming in a
lake reported to have infestation with this parasite.
202
Copyrighted material
-203.jpg
195,196:Questions
195A 4-year-old female spayed
195
Labrador retriever dog was
presented for multiple cutaneous
masses of 8 months’ duration.
Physical examination revealed
multiple raised,firm,cutaneous
masses in the dermis and subcu-
taneous tissue(195).Thelesions
were nonpruritic and haired.
According to the owner,the
lesions tend to wax and wane.
The dog is otherwise healthy.
i.Nodules and tumors in dogs are classified as inflammatory (infectious and
noninfectious)or neoplastic.What initial diagnostic tests are indicated in this case?
i.List the noninfectious differential diagnoses for this dog’s lesions.
ii.What advanced diagnostic testing techniques are available that enhance
identification of various cell types from biopsy specimens?
196Akitten is oneof a litter of
196a
sixpresented for examination.
The kittens were presented for
scratching at their ears.Upon
examination,there was black
brown waxy debris in the ears
(196a).A mite was foundon the
examination ofanearswab
(196b).
i.What is the diagnosis?
ii.What is the recommended
treatment?
i.List three other pediatric
196b
diseaseswhich can presentwith a similar
appearance.
203
Copyrighted material
-204.jpg
195,196:Answers
195 i. Initial diagnostic testing should include a skin biopsy, fine needle aspirate,
cytological examination of cut sections of tissue,and tissue culture.Neoplasia is
unlikely due to the age of the dog and overall good health.Thus, the most likely cause
is an infectious disease. Cultures should be done on aseptically collected surgical
specimens and submitted for aerobic, fungal,and mycobacteria cultures. After
blotting the blood from a tissue specimen, multiple tissue imprints on a glass slide
should be obtained and submitted,unfixed and unstained,to a diagnostic laboratory
for acid-fast staining. Mycobacterial organisms are rare on histological sections but
maybe more numerous on cytological preparations.
This was a case of idiopathic sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma. The dog was
treated with oral prednisone (2.2 mg/kg PO q24h) until the lesions resolved.Relapse
is common in this disorder,and affected dogs may require intermittent life-long
therapy.Refractory cases can be managed with azathioprine (2.2 mg/kg PO q24h).
ii.Noninfectious causes of nodules include urticaria, angioedema, eosinophilic
granulomas,arthropod bite granulomas, calcinosis cutis,calcinosis circumscripta,
xanthoma,panniculitis,hematomas, seroma,cutaneous amyloidosis,canine cellulitis,
histiocytic diseases,nodular dermatofibrosis, sterile nodular granuloma and
pyogranuloma, and foreign body reactions (Shearer and Dobson, 2002).
ii.Advanced diagnostic testing procedures routinely available for identification of
various cell types in biopsy specimens include,but are not limited to:electron
microscopy, immunostaining with polycolonal anti-Mycobacterium bouis (BCG),
enzymehistochemistry,immunocytochemistry,and immunofluorescence testing.Anti-
BCG testing immunohistostaining is useful for rapid identification of many infectious
agents (bacterial, fungal,mycobacterial, and nocardial organisms).
196i.Otodectes cyanotis (ear mites).
i.The ear should be cleaned out to remove debris.The ear mites can be treated
topically with any number of ear mite preparations licensed for use in cats,for at least
30 days.It is important to treat all other dogs and cats that have been in contact with
the kittens.Ear mites are highly contagious,even to adult animals.Finally,it is very
important to treat the hair coat of the kittens, especially the head and ear margins
with a flea spray. Ear mite eggs are often laid on the hairs of the ear margins, and
males migrate along the margins of the ear looking for females to breed. Using a flea
control product on the body easily prevents reinfestation of the ears from mites
migrating on the body.
ii. Microsporum canis and Malassezia spp. yeast can cause otic disease in kittens.
Demodex spp. can also be found in the ears of kittens. Otic examinations, ear swab
cytology,and mineral oil smears of ear exudate are the minimal diagnostics for cats
or kittens presented with pruritic ears.
204
Copyrighted material
-205.jpg
197-199:Questions
197The inner pinna of amixed breed
197
dog is shown.Both inner pinnae are
similar in appearance.The owner
reports the dog developed small
erythematous patches on the inner
pinnaeabout1monthago.Sincethat
time,the patches have become
bilaterally symmetricalulcerative
lesions that are slowly enlarging
(197).Thedogisotherwisenormal.
i.What are thedifferentialdiagnoses
for these lesions?
ii.What diagnostic test is indicated?
i.What is proliferative thrombo-
vascular necrosis?
198A 1-year-oldmalecastrated
198
orange tabby catwas presented
for examination.of black spots in
the mouth.The cat is healthy,
and the spots are multifocal areas
of black pigmentation on the cat's
lips and gums (198).
i.What is this condition called?
ii.How should this condition be
treated?
i.What is unique about this
syndrome?
199Lactophenol cotton blue stain is a‘vital stain'.This means it stains living cells
although thecells die after contact with the stain.What is it used for?
205
Copyrighted material
-206.jpg
197-199:Answers
197i.The most likely differential diagnoses include drug eruptions,lupus
erythematosus,vasculitis,thrombosis,ulcerations dueto hyperadrenocorticism,and
idiopathic proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of thepinnae.
iThemost useful diagnostic testis a skin biopsya full thicknessbiopsy isnecessary
for diagnosis.Due to the location of the lesion and the technical difficulty involved in
obtaining a sample from the ear pinnae,a wedge of tissue must be removed,asmight
be done in a cosmetic ear trim.
ii.Proliferative thrombovascular necrosisis a disease ofunknown etiologywith no
age,breed,or sex predilection.Affected individuals develop small ulcers or erosions
on the apical margin of the pinnae that spread along theconcave surface.Eventually
an elongated necrotic ulcer develops at the center of the lesion.The margins of the
lesion may be thickened andscalywith a hyperpigmented margin.The lesions are
often wedge shaped.As the lesion enlarges,necrosis occurs,and the ear margin
becomes deformed (Scott et al.,2001i).This was a case ofproliferative thrombo-
vascular necrosis of the pinnae.The patient responded to pentoxifylline therapy.
198i.Lentigo,avery common hereditary pigmentary condition found in orange and
yellow cats.Multifocal areas of black pigmentation on the gums,lips,andnose
develop as the cat ages,and it is diagnosed based upon clinical signs.
i.This is a cosmetic condition and does not require therapy.
ii.Lentigo simplex is unique because it is the only recognized inherited form of
hypermelanosis in small animals.
199This stain is used for the ident-
199
ification of fungal pathogens.The sticky
side of clear acetate tape is pressed gently
against the surface of a suspect colony
(white or pale colony),and then placed
overadropoflactophenolcottonblue
stain on a glassmicroscope slide.A
second dropof stain isplacedover the
tape and a glass coverslip situated before
microscopic examination.The macro-
conidiaofMicrosporum canisare shown
(199).This slide was stained and
examined approximately 1 hour later.The lactophenol cotton blue stain was
absorbed intracellularlymaking it easiertoidentify themacroconidia as those of
M.canis.This stain is readily available through medical suppliers.
206
Copyrighted material
-207.jpg
200,201:Questions
200A 2-year-old goldenretriever dog
200
from thenorthernUSAwaspresentedfor
the problem of seasonal anal licking.The
owners reported the dog had similar
problems last year during the warm
weather months.Careful questioning
revealed that the symptoms were present
during the warm months but tended to
wax and wane every few weeks.The dog
was otherwise healthy except for ery-
thema on its paws.The owners couldn't
agree astowhether ornot thesymptoms
seen today were ‘as bad as it gets, or
not'.The owners took the dog home,
decided to watch the lesions,keep a log
of lesion severity,and note any changes
in diet, or environment.Approximately
2weeks later,the owners called and
reported the dog's erythema had almost
completelyresolvedbut suddenlyreap-
peared thismorning.Yesterday they took
the dogto an off-leashpark for several
hours.Examination revealed severe erythema of the perineum,ventral inguinal
region,and plantar surfaceof thepaws(200).
i.What is the clinical diagnosis,and how can it be confirmed?
ii. The owners do not want to stop taking the dog to the park. What treatment
options can the owners beoffered?What other allergic disease could this dogbe
predisposed to?
201Antihistamines are commonly used in veterinary dermatology as adjuvant
therapy for the treatment of pruritus.Currently，both first and second generation
antihistamines are used in clinical practice.
i.What is the primarymechanism of action of antihistamines?
i.What is the primary differencebetween first and second generation antihistamines?
iii.What are the side-effects and adverse effects associated with the use of
antihistamines?
207
Copyrighted material
-208.jpg
200,201:Answers
In this case, it is important to confirm if the dog is having an allergic reaction to
vegetation in the park. The dog should not be allowed to return to the park until all 
of the erythema resolves. Ideally,the dog should be examined to confirm this. Once
the dog is normal, the owners should take the dog back to the same park under
weather and temperature conditions similar to those on the day of the allergic
reaction.The dog should be watched carefully for signs of anal pruritus andventral
erythema. If these develop within 24-72 hours after exposure to the park, a contact
allergy is almost certain.
i. It is possible this dog has a contact allergy to vegetation unique to this one park.
The owners could wait until lesions resolve and then visit other parks to test this
theory.It is also possible the dog has a contact reaction to vegetation that is common
 in the geographic region where they live. The most obvious solution to the problem is
avoidance,but this is not always possible.Bathing the dog after it visits the park and
pre-treatment with glucocorticoids are an option.Pentoxifylline (10 mg/kg
q24h-q12h) has been used to treat dogs with contact allergies, and it may be
reasonable to manage this dog's seasonal symptoms with this drug.The dog should
be watched closely for development of clinical signs consistent with atopic dermatitis.
201 i.Antihistamines are classified as H1 and H2 receptor antagonists; the latter
includes drugs such as cimetidine,ranitidine,and famotidine.Antihistamine drugs are
considered competitive inhibitors and are most effectiveif used before histamine
binds to receptor sites.
i.Second generation antihistamines do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier.
Therefore, they are associated with less sedation compared to first generation anti-
histamines. Second generation antihistamines also do not have antimuscarinic
properties.
ii. Side-effects are unavoidable reactions associated with a drug’s mechanism of
action.Adverse effects are more severe and can be life threatening.The most common
side-effects of first generation antihistamines are sedation and restlessness or
excitement. These drugs can also cause antimuscarinic anticholinergic (atropine-like)
side-effects. Animals may have a dry mouth leading to dental disease and halitosis.
This may also lead to an increase in water consumption. Coughing due to a dry
respiratory tract may also occur. Some animals become constipated or have diarrhea,
have decreased appetite, and can develop abdominal bloating. Overdoses of second
generation antihistamines can cause life-threatening cardiac episodes.These drugs
should not be used concurrently with ketoconazole,itraconazole,or erythromycin or
other drugs that aremetabolizedvia theliver.
208
Copyrighted material
-209.jpg
202,203:Questions
202 The external ear canal of a
202
Chinese shar-pei dog is shown
(202).Both ear canals appear
similar.The owner reports the
dog's hearing is diminished,and
the dog has chronic ear infec-
tions.The external auditory canal
isnot visible.
i.What condition is being
depicted here?
ii.What is the cause in this
patient?
iii.What are the treatment
options?
203A female doberman pinscher dog
203
waspresentedfor the complaint offlank
sucking (203).The owner reported the
skin in the flank area was chronically wet
and the dog sucked,not nibbled,at the
area.
i.What isflank sucking?”
i.What diseases can mimic this disorder?
209
Copyrighted material
-210.jpg
202, 203: Answers
202 i. Stenotic ear canals.
i. Stenosis of the ear canals occurs most commonly from inflammation and secondary
fibrosis and calcification of the cartilaginous walls of the canal. In Chinese shar-pei
dogs, the ear canal may be stenotic due to a conformational defect in which the car
canals are abnormally smaller and/or as a result of mucin deposition in the tissue,
resulting in occlusion of thc cxtcrnal car canal. In some dogs, both conditions are
present.
ii. Permanent resolution of stenotic ear canals in Chinese shar-pei dogs is not often
possible since the underlying cause of the problem is usually a congenital
malformation (narrowing of the ear canal) along with concurrent deposition of
mucin, A lateral ear resection might provide relief to this patient; however, this does
not usually resolve the problem because the healed surgical sitc is infiltrated with
mucin and, ovcr time, thc surgical opening to the horizontal canal becones occluded.
'The first thing to deterrmine in this patient is whether or not there is a complicating
bacterial or yeast infection. This may require sedation and careful sample collction
using a microtip culture swab; the ear canal may be too occluded to pass a normal
sized cotton tip applicator.
Second, skull radiographs or a CT scan will help determine the location, degree,
and extent of the stenosis. In some dogs, the ear canal is of normal width, and the
stenosis is located very distally (at thc opening of the external meatus) in the vertical
car canal. In these patients, medical intervention (glucocorticoids) may be helpful. If
the canal is unifarmly small (vertical and horizontal canal), medical management of
the stenosis tends not to be beneficial. Surgical trcatments (i.c. lateral ear resections)
are often unsuccessful in this brced for the reasons mentioned above. Systemic
glucocorticoids (1-2 mg/kg PO q24h) for 10-30 days will often decrease mucin
production and provide some relief of the stenosis. This relief is temporary, but it is
often the only option available.
203 i. Flank sucking is currently believed to be a rype of psychomotor epilepsy. It is
similar to tail sucking in cats. Flank sucking can occur in any brccd of dog but is
particularly common in doberman pinschers.
i. Any skin diseasc that affects the flanks of dogs and causes discomfort must be
ruled out prior to making this diagnosis. Clinical signs of hair loss, erythcma,
hyperpigmentation, lichenification, inflammation, nibbling or chcwing, and salivary
staining, should be considered evidence that there is an underlying skin disease
causing the behavior. Skin biopsies should also be performed prior to making this
tliagnosis. Any evidence of inflammation suggests an organic diseasc. Flank sucking
may respond to anticonvulsant thcrapy (c.g. phenobarbital), and response to
glucocorticoids is evidence that there is an organie pruritic cause.
210
-211.jpg
204,205:Questions
204Theownerreportsthatforthelast3
204
years,this 6-year-oldmale boxer dog has had
recurrent hair loss every winter over the
dorsum and the lumbosacral area(204).The
hair coatregrowsin the spring,butbyfall,the
alopecicpattern shown starts todevelop.Skin
scrapings and dermatophyte cultures are con-
sistently negative.Thyroid function tests,low-
dose dexamethasone suppression test,ACTH
stimulation test,and adrenalpanel arenormal.
The lesions do not respond to oral antibiotics,
andtheownerpracticesflea control.Thedog
isnotpruritic.
i.What is the most likely diagnosis or
diagnoses?
ii. What is the cause of this syndrome, and
how is it treated?
ii.What histological findings characterize this
disease?
205
205The ownerof agoldenretrieverdogreported afocal areaofscaling andhair loss
on the proximal thirdof her dog's tail.Over the lastyear,the area has become
increasinglymore alopecic,swollen,andotted.Aftrloserexaminationitisot
that thedottingis caused by follicular plugging and comedones (205).
i.This is a common lesion in older dogs.What is this condition called, andwhat
treatment is needed?
i.What skin diseases can occur at this site?
ii.What is this lesion’s origin?
211
Copyrighted material
-212.jpg
204,205:Answers
204 i. Seasonal flank alopecia. Despite the naine, there is no consistent season for the
hair loss. Some dogs lose their hair in the spring and summer and regrow it in the fall
and winter, while in other dogs the reverse pattern occurs.
ii. The etiology of seasonal flank alopecia is unknown. It may be due to seasonal
variations in hormones, particularly melatonin; howcvcr, this has not bccn provcn.
Because some dogs will havc only onc cpisodc whilc others will develop this condition
year after year, the prognosis is unpredietable. Antcdotally, soue dogs have
responded to subcutaneous implantation of melatonin (3 × 12 mg SC implants), while
others responded to oral melatonin (3-6 mg q8h). Response was slow, and
improvement may have been coincidental. These dogs have normal endocrine
function tests.
ii. Compatible histological findings include folicular atrophy and infundibular
hypcrkcratosis. Hair follicles are dysplastic and are described as being octopus- or
 jellyfish-like in appearance (Miller and Dunstan, 1993).
205 i. Oval tail gland hyperplasia. This lesion may occur in all dogs but is most
noticeahle in intact male dogs. The glands of this region are testosterone sensitive,
explaining why they are more likely to be problematic in intact male dogs.
ii. In dogs with primary or secondary seborrhea or increased concentrations of
the primary hairs are lost, and the area becomes scaly and/or greasy. In some cases,
the gland may become infected. In addition, skin tumors (adenomas and adeno-
carcinomas) may develop at this site. In most cases, hair loss and comedones reqnire.
no treatment and are considered cosmetic defects. If the gland becomes infected, it
should be treated as an area of local deep pyoderma. The arca should be hot packcd,
lanced if necessary, and systemic antibiotic therapy administered for 21-30 days.
These lcsions tend to recur, and castration may be helpful if the dog is intact.
ii.The oval tail gland (tail gland, preen gland, supracaudal gland) is a specialized
skin gland foud in all wild Canidae and in dogs. It is conprised of simple hairs and
 numerous large sebaceous and circumanal glands, starts at the fifth to seventh 
coccygeal vertebra, and can extend the entire length of the tail. It is clinically visible in
most dogs. The function of the gland is unknown, but it is believed to be involved in
olfactory species recognition in canines. Histologically, the gland is comprised of
hepatoid clls. These glandular structures empty directly into hair follicles.
212
-213.jpg
206,207:Questions
206A5-year-olddachshund dog
206a
is presented for pruritus,hair
loss, and crusting of 4 months
duration (206a,b）.Skin scrapings
and dermatophyte cultures are
negative,but impression smears
reveal large numbers of cocci and
smaller numbers of Malassezia
organisms.The dog's clinical
signs do not improve after
4weeks of cephalexin and keto-
conazole treatment.The dog is
also treated for scabies,and the
owners practice flea control.At
206b
the time of presentation, the dog
is depressed and febrile.The
owner reports the crusting lesions
tend to wax and wane,and the
dog becomes depressed approxi-
mately 24hours before new
lesions develop. Clinical examina-
tion reveals largeflaccidpustules
spanning several hair follicles,
and thereis a slight greenish tinge
to the pustules.
i.What are the dog's dermato-
logical problems?
i.What is the most likely dif-
ferential diagnosis,andwhat diagnostic test(s)areneeded toconfirm it?
ii. Is there any in-house diagnostic test available to make a presumptive diagnosis
pending confirmation?
207Cyclophosphamide,chlorambucil,azathioprine,and chrysotherapy are com-
monlyused to treatimmune-mediatedskin diseases.
i.What is the mechanism of action of these drugs andwhat are the most common
adverse effects?
i.Which of these drugs is contraindicated in cats?
213
Copyrighted material
-214.jpg
206,207:Answers
206 i.Pruritus and pustular eruption.If intact pustules were not found,crusting
would have been an appropriate problem to pursue. The major causes of pruritus
were ruled out by previous diagnostics or treatments, and the clinical signs are
inconsistent with allergic skin disease. Therefore, the pustular eruptions should be
considered the primary problem.The pruritus is most likely the result of
inflammation associated with the underlying disease.
i.The most likely diagnosis is PF.Multiple skin biopsies for routine histopathological
examination should be taken, and collection should occur immediately because intact
primary lesions (pustules) are very transient and fragile. Since the pustules span
several hair follicles, a 6-8 mm skin biopsy instrument will be needed. Submission of
intact pustules is critical, so the skin should not be scrubbed or wiped before speci-
men collection.Alternatively,an elliptical incision using a scalpel blade can be used to
collect a specimen. It is important to mount the material on a piece of a wooden
tongue depressor subcutaneous side down prior to putting the specimen in formalin.
A bacterial culture of the contents of an intact pustule should also be submitted to
rule out the rare possibility that this is a cephalexin resistant bacterial pyoderma.
i. Since this patient is presenting with a wave of pustules, impression smears of
pustular contents can be made. Rafts of acanthocytes (noncornified epithelial cells)
amid a sea of neutrophils are often seen in cases of PF.It is also helpful to look for
the presence of bacteria.This was a case of canine PF.
207 i. Cyclophosphamide is an alkylating agent that inhibits mitosis by interfering with
DNA replication and RNA transcription and replication. The major toxic side-effects
includemorrhagicystitis,ladrrosisratogenesisnertility,lopciaausa,
bone marrow depression, and increased susceptibility to infections. Chlorambucil is
another alkylating agent that cross links DNA.It is slow acting and less toxic than
cyclophosphamide.The most common adverse effects include bone marrow
suppression, anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea. Alopecia and delayed hair growth can
occur.Azathioprine is a synthetic 6-mercaptopurine that is metabolized in the liver to 6-
mercaptopurine and other active metabolites. This drug antagonizes purine metabolism
and interferes with DNA and RNA synthesis.The most common adverse effects include
bone marrow suppression, vomiting, pancreatitis, alopecia, and diarrhea. The
mechanism of action of chrysotherapy (gold salts) is unknown. It is available in two
forms oral (auranofin 29%) and aurothioglucose (50% gold). Gold salts have anti-
inflammatory and immunomodulating activity with a delayed onset of action.Themost
common adverse effects are skin rashes, proteinuria,and bone marrow suppression.
ii.Azathioprine should not be used in cats because it can cause fatal leucopenia and
thrombocytopenia.
214
Copyrightedmaterial
-215.jpg
208,209:Questions
208
208A Siamese cat was presented fora lesion on its lip (208）.This type of lesion is
very common in cats.
i.What is the clinical diagnosis?
i.What are the treatment options?
209A 7-year-old male collie dogwith
209
nasal depigmentation and crusting on the
dorsum of thenosefor the last6years is
shown (209）.Lesions are worse during
the summer and almost completely
resolveduring thewinter.The owners
presentedthedogforexamination
because thelesionshavenotresolvedthis
winter.The nose is proliferative and
deformed,and the dog has intermittent
nasal bleeding.
i.The waxing and waning lesions are
initially most suggestive of which disease?
ii.Given that the lesions have worsened
over time and areno longer resolving,
what is theworking diagnosis now?
i.The owners declined a skin biopsy，,
butwould likemedical management.How should thedogbe treatedgiven thelimited
information available?
215
Copyrighted material
-216.jpg
208,209:Answers
208i. Eosinophilic ulcer or indolent ulcer. This is a reaction pattern lesion in cats,
and it may occur bilaterally or unilaterally. Cats with these lesions frequently have
eosinophilic granulomas and/or eosinophilic plaques. These lesions may or may not
be recurrent after initial treatment. If recurrent, underling allergic diseases (FAD, food
allergy, and/or atopy) should be investigated.Unilateral lesions on the upper lip are
common at the site of a previous dermatophyte infection, and focal inflammation or
trauma may be triggers for unilateral lesions as well.
i.The lesions may resolve spontaneously, especially those that are small and
unilateral.Large unilateral or bilateral lesions should be treated because they can
rapidly enlarge and become disfiguring.Methylprednisone acetate (20 mg/cat SC)
every 2weeks until the lesions resolve (4-6 weeks) is effective.Although oral
prednisone (2.2-4.4 mg/kg) is also effective,many cats do not seem to respond to oral
medications as well as they do to parenteral therapy. This is most likely due to the
difficulty encountered by owners when orally medicating cats. Progestational
compounds are not recommended due to the risk of development of diabetes melltus
and adrenal suppression. Surgical excision or laser therapy is not necessary except in
rare refractory cases, which are often due to an undiagnosed allergic disease.
209 i. The symptoms are most suggestive of nasal solar dermatitis orcollie nose'
Collie nosewas a name given to a waxing andwaning skin disease of the dorsal nose
and nasal planum of collies and Shetland sheepdogs, exacerbated by sun exposure.
i.Cutaneous lupus erythematosus.It is common for cutaneous lupus erythematosus
to wax and wane over time and gradually worsen,especially if left untreated,orif no
effort is made to minimize solar-induced relapses.
ii.The owner's decision not to allow a skin biopsy to confirm the diagnosis is
unfortunate.Although themost likely diagnosis is cutaneous lupus erythematosus,the
deformity of the nose is worrisome,and it is possible this dog has developed a
squamous cell carcinoma. This tumor is common in chronic cases of cutaneous lupus
erythematosus. In addition, cutaneous lymphoma can masquerade as cutaneous lupus
erythematosus.If a definitive diagnosis of cutaneous lupus erythematosus were
known, this dog would be a good candidate for aggressive immunosuppressive
therapy with glucocorticoids and/or azathioprine to induce the lesions into remission.
Once the lesions are in remission,potent topical glucocorticoids and sunscreens could
be used to minimize relapses and control active lesions.In this patient, oral vitamin E
therapy,tetracycline and niacinamide,topicalfluorinated glucocorticoids,and
sunscreens would be recommended.The cost of systemic immunosuppressive therapy
and monitoringwould far exceed that of a skin biopsy procedure and histopathology.
Cost constraints do not justify forgoing a skin biopsy.
216
Copyrightedmaterial
-217.jpg
210-212:Questions
210Raisedwhite lesions are
210
shown on the head of a cat (210).
Similar lesions are present else-
where on the body,and some of
these lesions have ulcerated.The
lesions developed approximately
6months ago,and the cat was
recently diagnosedwith diabetes
mellitus.Skin biopsy findings
revealed a nodular to diffuse
infiltrate of macrophages,and
multinucleated histiocytic giant
cells.
i.What is the most likely diag-
nosis based upon the information provided?
ii.What is the treatment of choice?
211Amiddle-aged dog was
211
presented for evaluation of its
ventralabdomen.Note the multi-
focal,raised,fluctuant nodules
(211).The owner reported the
lesions developed rapidly,
ruptured,and drained an oily,
yellow-brown material.The
lesions were painful upon pal-
pation,and thedogwas depres-
sed,febrile,and had generalized
lymphadenopathy.Additional
historical and physical examina-
tion findings include depression,
fever,anorexia,painupon palpation of theabdomen,andvomiting.
i.What are the differential diagnoses?The oilyyellow-brown discharge is consistent
with which differential diagnoses?
iHowshould skinbiopsy specimensbe collected for histopathology?
iiWhat is the pathogenesisof this condition,andwhatmetabolic diseases canlead
totheselesions?
212Chlorhexidine solution(8oz[240ml])of0.05%） is tobe dispensedfor wound
flushing.The stock solution is 2%.How is this prescription compounded?
217
Copyrighted material
-218.jpg
210-212:Answers
210 i. Xanthomatosis. This is a benign granulomatous skin disease resulting from
abnormalities in lipid metabolism. It is most comnonly sccn in cats with idiopathic
hyperlipidemia or diabetes melltus due to naturally occurring causes or drugs (i.e.
glucocorticoids, megestrol acctatej.
ii. Lesions associated with diabetes mellitus will spontaneously resolve with
appropriate treatment for the diabetes meltus. If the lesions are due to drugs, they
will resolve once the drug is discontinued.
211 i. Deep pyoderma, cutaneous cysts, neoplasia, infections, panniculitis, and
foreign body reaction. The oily yellow-brown discharge is the result of fat necrosis
due to inflarnination of subeutaneous fat, and the most likcly diagnosis hcrc is
panniculitis.
i. A deep wedge biopsy spcimen or an cxcisional nodular hiopsy using cold steel is
recommended. Spccial stains for microorganisms and examination of the specimen
under polarizcd light for foreign hodies should be requested.
i. The lipocyte is a relatively fragile cell that is vulnerable to trauma, ischemia, and
inflammatory diseases. Upon injury or death, lipid is released that is degraded into
glycerol and fatty acids. The latter are very inflaminatory and start a cycle of inflam-
mation and further cell death. The free lipids and inarked inflammatory rcaction
result in a granulomatous tissue reaction. Panniculitis has been associated with a
number of metabolic discascs. Pancrcatitis has been diagnosed in dogs with
necrotizing stcatitis and concurrent gastrointestinal symptoms. Mosr cases of nodular
panniculitis are idiopathic in origin.
212 First convert both strengths from % to mg/ml:
Available: 2% = 2 g/100 ml = 2000 mg/100 ml = 20 ng/nl
Needed: 0.05 % = 0.05 g/100 ml = 50 mg/100 ml = 0.5 mg/ml
Then, calculate the number of mg of chlorhexidine needed in 240 ml of solution:
0.5 mg/ml × 240 ml = 120 mg
Next, calculatc how many ml of chlorhexidine 2% (20 mg/ml) is needed to get that
amount:
120 mg ÷ 20 mg/ml = 6 ml
Then, calculate the quantity of distilled water to add to get a 240 ml solution of
chlorhexidine 0.05 %:
240 ml- 6ml = 234 ml ofdistilled water
Thereforc, 6 ml of 2% chlorhexidine solution would be diluted in 234 ml of distilled
water to obtain 240 ml (8 oz) of 0.05 % chlorhexidine solution.
218
-219.jpg
213:Question
213 A dog is presented by the
213a
ownersfor examinationbecause it
‘yelps’when petted on or near the
ears.They also report that he has
stopped chewingon his toys and
refuses to eat hard food.The dog is
irritable and doesn't want to play.
These symptoms havebeen present
intermittentlyforover4months.
The ear is erythematous, exuda-
tive,and malodorous (213a）.The
doghasbeen treated several times
for otitis externa with various
topical ear flushes and topicalear
medications.Upon physical exam-
ination,it is difficult to examine
213b
the ears without causing pain to
the patient.There is an odorous
creamy brown exudate present.
Cytological examination of the
exudate is shown (213b,c）.The
dog resists having its mouth
opened.
i.What is the working diagnosis,
andwhatdiagnostics should be
performed?
i.Pending theresults,what is the
treatment plan?
ii.What is the long-term treat-
ment plan?
213c
219
Copyrighted material
-220.jpg
213:Answer
213 i. The working diagnoses are otitis externa and otitis media. The pain upon
examination andmanipulation of the ear canalis consistentwith both otitis externa
and otitis media.The reluctance to chew on hard toys or food and to have its mouth
opened is compatible with pain at the temporomandibular joint or region. These
symptoms are common in dogs with otitis media, but not in dogs with otitis externa.
Finally, the cytological preparations show septic inflammation with bacteria (cocci
androds).Similar cytological findings could be found in patients with otitis externa,
but in this case, the clinical signs and duration of the otitis are more compatible with
otitis media.At this visit, a bacterial culture and sensitivity should be done as it is
important to determine which microbial organisms are present. Yeast may be present
but not seen on the cytological preparation due to the amount of exudates.
iPending the culture and sensitivity,treat with systemic antibiotics(ciprofloxacin
20 mg/kg PO q24h) because Pseudomonas is suspected as the cause of the otitis
media. Topical ear preparations will be ineffective in this patient for several reasons.
First, these products are rarely eficacious in the presence of purulent exudates.
Second, owners are often unable to medicate adequately dogs with painful ears.
Finally, therapeutic concentrations of antimicrobials in ear canal tissue and/or in the
middle ear cannot be achieved with most commercially available topical drugs. In
addition to the systemic antimicrobial therapy,oralprednisone was prescribed for
both its analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects since much of the pain in these
patients is due to swelling of ear tissue.Furthermore, the ear canal epithelium and
lining of the tympanic bulla is very secretory and glucocorticoid therapy helps to
diminish the secretions.The owners reported the dog’s attitude and appetite improved
within 48hours of starting therapy.
ii.This dog has a history of recurrent otitis externa, and the most common cause of
this is an undiagnosed otitis media. The ear should be reexamined every 3-4 weeks
via otoscopic examination, cytological examination,and ear culture.The end point of
treatment is a negative ear culture. The dog will also require frequent and careful ear
cleaning. Depending upon the severity of the infection, a middle ear irrigation to
remove debris from the tympanic bullae may be needed.This is often necessary in
cases of Pseudomonas ear infections and is performed under general anesthesia. Ear
cleaning could be done at the first visit or 2-3 days after systemic initiation of
antimicrobial therapy.
220
Copyrighted material
-221.jpg
214,215:Questions
214Apurebred2-year-oldfemale
214a
vizsla dog waspresented for the
complaint of hair loss. Note the multi-
focal circular areas (214a).Close
examination of the skinrevealed fine
white scales and hair casts. Previous
diagnostics and treatments included
skins scrapings,impression smears,
fungal cultures,flea control, and 30
days of oral cephalexin(30mg/kgPO
q12h).There was no response to
treatment,and all previous diagnostic
testing was negative. A skin biopsy
214b
was performed,and a photomicro-
graph of the specimen is shown.Note
the accumulation of inflammatory
cells at the level of the sebacecous
gland(214b).
i.What is the diagnosis?
i.Whatare the recommendationsfor
breeding and treatment?
ii.What is the pathogenesis of this
disorder?
215Pythium insidiosumandLagenidiumspp.areaquaticoomycetesthatcause
systemic and dermatological disease in dogs living in the south-eastern USA.Dogs
with dermatological lesions areoften presented for the problem ofnonhealing
wounds.Diagnosis is made via history,clinical signs,culture of the organism (if
possible),and histological findings.Unfortunately,itif often difficult to distinguish
between the histological findings caused by lagenidiosis and zygomycosismaking
diagnosis difficult.Recently,a Pythium insidiosum-andLagenidium-specificPCR
assay was described to detect the oomycete DNA in animal tissues (Znajda et al.,
2002).This assay is to be tested on several samples from infected dogs.Primers
specificforP.insidiosum(322bpproduct)and the canine pathogenicLagenidium
species (266bp product) are provided.The samples arrive labeled 1-6,but no other
information isprovided other than one of the samples isfrom an uninfecteddog and
is to beused as a control.No further information is needed;the PCRreaction can be
run and the results analyzed using a 1%agarose gel containing EB.
i.What is expected to be seen on the gel?
i.Howwould it be determined that one of the samples was indeed thecontrol,and
theresults observed on the agarosegelarenot simply because thePCRreaction failed
towork?
221
Copyrightedmaterial
-222.jpg
214-215:Answers
214i.Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis.
ii.Breeding from affected dogs should be avoided because of the possible hereditary
nature of this disease.There is no effective, or predictable treatment for this disorder,
 and care should be taken to monitor dogs for the development of secondary bacterial
and/or yeast infections.
ii. The pathogenesis of this disease is unknown but may include an inherited and/or
developmental defect in sebaceous glands,a cell-mediated immune attack on sebaceous
glands, or a defect in keratinization. In some breeds (e.g. standard poodles), there is
evidence of an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.There is a breed predilection
for standard poodles, akitas, vizslas, samoyeds,and Belgian sheepdogs.
215iA product of 322bp,indicating P.insidiosum,or a 266bpproduct,indicating
the canine pathogenic Lagenidium spp should be present. No product would be
expected from the control sample.A representative gel is shown (215). Note that
molecular weight markers must also be loaded on the gel in order to identify the size
of the products. The markers used are 100-1000 bp in size and increase 100 bp for
each marker.Lanes 1,2,and 5 indicate P.insidiosum infection,lanes 3 and 6 indicate
canine pathogenic Lagenidium spp.,lane 4 is the control (no band present), and lane
7 contains the molecularweight markers.
i.Because a band is not present in lane 4,the PCR reaction may have failed for this
sample.However, a band would not be expected in one of the lanes since it is known
that one sample is the control.An easy way to verify that the reaction worked,and that
 the sample was indeed from an uninfected dog is to run a separate PCR assay for a gene
made by all animal cells, such as the
genes encoding the protein β-actin or
215
GAPDH,an enzyme found in the
2
5
6
glycolyticpathway and thuspresent in
1000
all animal tissues. If primers for
GAPDH areprovided thatgeneratea
300 bp product, a PCR assay for all six
samples should be run, using these
primers. If a product of 300 bp is
present in all the samples this indicates
500
that sample 4 contained intact DNA
that could be used for a PCR reaction,
and the lack of a band in the experi-
mental gel lane 4wasbecause the dog
100
was not infected.
222
Copyrighted material
-223.jpg
216-218:Questions
216
XXXXX
216A diagrammaticrepresentation of theDEJis shown(216).
i.What is the purpose of the basement membrane zone?
i Identify the fourmajor regions of the epidermis (1-4).
ii.Identify each of the components of theDEJ (a-i).
217Amiddle-agedcatwas
treatedwith repeated subcu-
taneous injections of methylpred-
nisone acetate for chronic
asthma.The owner reported the
hair on the lateral thorax,which
was clipped 6months ago for an
ultrasound evaluation,has not
regrown (217).A skin biopsy of
the area is'compatiblewith an
endocrine alopecia'.What is the
most likely diagnosisof the lackof hairregrowth?
218Canine demodicosishas three clinical presentations.What are they and how are
they characterized?
223
Copyrighted material
-224.jpg
216-218:Answers
216i.The basement membrane zone is important because it anchors the epidermis to
the dermis,maintains a normal and functional epidermis,maintains tissue
architecture,helps in wound healing, functions as a barrier, and regulates the
transport of nutrition between the epidermis and dermis.
i.Basal layer (1), lamina lucida (2), lamina densa (3), and sublamina densa (4).
ii. The components are as follows: adherens junction (a), basal cel(b), anchoring
filaments (c), focal adhesion (d), desmosome (e),hemidesmosome (f), basal plasma
membrane (g), anchoring fibrils (h), anchoring plaques (i).
217Iatrogenicfeline hyperadrenocorticism.Exogenous administration ofglucocorti-
coids can cause slow hair regrowth in both dogs and cats. Compared to dogs, owners
of cats report fewer adverse effects of exogenous glucocorticoid administration.It
may be that cats have fewer problems or the common adverse effects (i.e. polyuria,
polydipsia, and polyphagia) are less noticeable in house cats. Long-term administra-
feline hyperadrenocorticism, including muscle wasting,hair loss, thin hypotonic skin,
easy bruising, spontaneous tears of the skin, and mild seborrhea.
Unlike dogs, cats rarely show signs of polyuria and polydipsia from glucocorticoid
administration.Diabetes mellitus is common secondary to chronic glucocorticoid
administration in cats, and this disease is the primary cause of polyuria and poly-
dipsia. One unique clinical feature of iatrogenic disease in cats ismedial curling of the
ear pinnae,an element not been seen in naturally occurring disease.This cat regrew
his hair coat approximately 1 year afer the glucocorticoids were discontinued. Focal
areas of hairloss at the site of glucocorticoid injections can occur in cats, and owners
should be warned of this complication.If this cosmetic risk is a concern to the
owners, the injection can be administered in the inguinal region.
218 Localized, generalized,and adult-onset demodicosis.Localized demodicosis is
characterized by one or more focal areas of hair loss in which mites are found on
deep skin scrapings.Mites are not found in normal adjacent skin.Approximately
90% of these cases will resolve without treatment. Generalized demodicosis is
characterized by the finding of Demodex mites on skin scrapings in both affected and
normal appearing skin. Only 50% of dogs with generalized demodicosis will be cured
with therapy.Adult-onset demodicosis is characterized by the development of
demodicosis in an older dogwith no known priorhistory of demodicosis.Adult-onset
demodicosis is believed to develop as a result of an underlying systemic disorder, e.g.
diabetes mellitus,neoplasia,or excessive glucocorticoid administration.If the
underlying disease is treated,adult-onset demodicosis will often resolve.
224
Copyrightedmaterial
-225.jpg
219:Question
219a
219b
219A kitten was presented forhair loss and erythema on the face(219a).The kitten
was obtained from a farm.AWood’s lampevaluationwaspositive,and several hairs
were plucked and examined under potassium hydroxide(KOH).A preparation of a
normal hair and an abnormal hair that was Wood’s lamp-positive is shown (219b).
i.WhatisaWood’slamp,whatisitused for,what are thelimitations,andwhatis
the possibleinterpretationof the positiveWood'slamp evaluation?
ii.Whatis the possibleinterpretation of theKOH preparation,and can a definitive
diagnosisbemade atthistime?
ii.Whatadvantagewould therebe using a killedMicrosporum canisvaccinein this
patient?
225
Copyrightedmaterial
-226.jpg
219:Answer
219 i. A Wood’s light is a hand-held lamp that emits long-wave ultraviolet radiation
through a nickel or cobalt glass filter (Moriello, 2001). The filter is opaque to allight
except for a band between 320 and 400 nm. Fluorescence occurs when shorter
wavelengths of light (340-400nm) emitted by the Wood’s light are absorbed,and
radiation of longer wavelengths (visible light) are emitted.The Wood’s lamp is not
very helpful in the diagnosis of dermatophytosis in small animals because it is only a
screening tool.False positives can occur from ointments, shampoos,and misinterpre-
tations. A true positive is apple gren in color, and many people mistake the yellow-
green of oily seborrhea as positive, or the blue white of dust as positive.In addition,t
is very important to note that many fibers, especially carpet fibers will glow bright
green when exposed to a Wood’s lamp.The lamp needs to be warmed up for 5-10
minutes prior to use to stabilize the wavelength.Furthermore,the examination should
take at least 5 minutes in a darkened room, allowing a clinician’s eyes to adapt and
see the fluorescence. In this case, the Wood's lamp examination is suggestive of a
possible dermatophyte infection.The only organism of veterinary importance that
fluoresces is Microsporum canis; however, <50% of strains are detected by this
method. If apple green glowing hairs are found, they can be sampled for culture
and/or direct examination with KOH.
i.Clearing agents cause the material in the background to swell and become some-
what opaque,leaving keratinized hairs and spores more refractile.The microscope
condenser should be low along with the lamp light intensity. From a 10x magnifi-
cation,infected versus noninfected hairs can be seen.This KOH preparation shows a
normal hair and two infected hairs. The infected hairs are wider, more filamentous,
and large numbers of ectothrix spores can be seen in a cuff surrounding the hairs.
These results allow a diagnosis of dermatophytosis to be made in this kitten,
specifically M. canis dermatophytosis.
ii. Topical therapy alone with lime sulfur or enilconazole is an effective therapy.
Lufenuron is ineffective in the treatment of dermatophytosis and as a possible
preventative,thus,it is not recommended. Killed M.canis vaccines have been
approved as an adjuvant therapy in the treatment of dermatophytosis.The vaccine
alone will not cure a clinical case of dermatophytosis. It will, however, induce an
immune response in the cat resulting in a temporary lessening of clinical signs.
Presumably, this will decrease the severity of the lesions and may lessen shedding of
infective hairs and spores into the environment.
226
Copyrightedmaterial
-227.jpg
220,221:Questions
220An adult dogwas presented for
220a
examination of itsmucocutaneousjunc-
tion and oral mucosa.The owner reported
the dog was depressed,anorexic, drooling,
and hada strong odor emanatingfrom its
mouth.Note the ulcerations and erosions
(220a,b）.These lesions did not respond to
a course oforal antibiotics,and similar
lesions are present on the prepuce and
anus.Intact vesicles were found on the
borders of these lesions.Except for the
skin lesions,no other abnormalitieswere found on
220b
physical examination.A complete blood countrevealed
a leukocytosis and a stress leukogram.A serum
chemistry panel,urinalysis,ANA,and skin scraping
were normal or negative.Impression smears of the
lesions showed neutrophils and cellular debris,but
fungal organisms were not found. Skin biopsy findings
report suprabasilar acantholysiswith cleft andvesicle
formation.Basal epidermal cells in a row of ‘tomb-
stoneswere attached to thebasement membrane zone.
Minimal dermal inflammation was seen.DIF testing
revealed intercellular fluorescence,and special stains
were negative foryeast orbacteria.
i.What are the major differential diagnoses for oral
and mucocutaneous ulcerations?
ii.Based upon the clinical signs and biopsy findings,
whatis themost likely diagnosis andwhy?
221 Scaling can be noted on the dog's hair
221
coat shown(221）.Clinical examination
reveals bacterial pyoderma and fleas.The
scalingresolves with treatment of the
bacterial pyoderma and fleas.
i.Thescales’are also referred as seborr-
hea.What is the difference between
primary and secondary seborrhea?What
type does this patient have?
i.What arekeratolyticandkeratoplastic
agents?
i.What is the mechanism of action of
tar, sulfur, and salicylic acid?
227
Copyrighted material
-228.jpg
220,221:Answers
220i.The major differential diagnoses include SLE,BP, erythema multiforme,
pemphigusvulgaris,drugreactions,candidiasis,and cutaneous lymphoma.
i. The most likely diagnosis is pemphigus vulgaris. The skin biopsy findings are
incompatible with the other differential diagnoses except cutaneous drug reaction,
which can mimic almost any known skin disease.The presence of acantholytic cells is
typical of the pemphigus complex.The differentiation of the pemphigus group is
based upon clinical signs, and the location of clefting and acantholysis in the
epidermis.Pemphigus foliaceus/erythematosus are characterized by diffuse scaling and
crusting and acantholysis in the intragranular layer (high in the epidermis).
Pemphigus vulgaris is characterized by mucocutaneous ulceration and clefting and
acantholysis in the deep epidermis.The description of the*row of tombstones’(i.e.
basal cells just below the cleft)is a classic descriptive finding compatible with
 pemphigus vulgaris. DIF in pemphigus is intercellular but is not always positive. It
should not be done in lieu of routine histopathology, and the diagnosis should not be
discarded because it is negative.This was a case of pemphigus vulgaris.
221 i.The general term for scaling is called ‘seborrhea’.This is not a clinical diagnosis,
but rather a clinical description of a type of skin lesion. Seborrhea has two basic
etiologies: primary seborrhea and secondary seborrhea.Primary seborrhea is caused by
an inherited disorder of keratinization of the epidermis.This disorder is common in
many breeds of dogs including West Highland white terriers, cocker spaniels, and
German shepherd dogs.It is a chronic disorder and diagnosis is made by ruling out all
other possible causes.Secondary seborrhea occurs when any external or internal disease
alters the normal development of the skin.It is simply the skin’s response to insult. It
may occur as a result of inflammation,infection, self-trauma,and poor nutrition.In
clinical practice,some of the most common causes of secondary seborrhea are bacterial
pyoderma,leas,and Cheyletiella infestations.This patient had secondary seborrhea.
ii.A keratolytic agent facilitates decreased cohesion between keratinocytes, desqua-
mation, and shedding.This results in a softening of the stratum corneum and removal
of scales.A keratoplastic agent attempts to normalize the process of keratinization.
ii.Tar is keratolytic,keratoplastic, and mildly degreasing.It is believed to normalize
the process of keratinization by decreasing DNA production, with a resultant
decrease in the mitotic index of basal cells. Sulfur is keratolytic and keratoplastic,
probably through the interaction of sulfur with cysteine in keratinocytes. Salicylic
acid iskeratoplastic.
228
Copyrightedmaterial
-229.jpg
222-224:Questions
222The nose of the dog shown(222)
222
depictsa common syndrome seenin
Siberianhusky,golden retriever,Labrador
retriever,and Bernese mountain dogs.It
can be very distressing to owners.
i.What is the clinical name for this syn-
drome,what is the lay person’s common
name for this change?
ii.What is poliosis,andwhat disease has
it been associatedwith?
ii. In what breed of cat has periocular
leukotrichia been documented,andwhat
factors are associated with its develop-
ment?
223A 9-year-old female Siamese
223a
cat is presented early one morn-
ingby an overwrought owner for
the complaint ofits skin pulled
off.The owner was dragging the
cat out from under the bedwhen
the cat's skin literally ripped off
in her hand.There was minimal
bleeding associated with the epi-
sode, and the cat did not appear
to be in any discomfort.Physical
examination was normal,except
for the skin,which was extremely
223b
fragile.Full thickness tears were
produced with only minor trauma
to the skin (223a,b).
i.What is this cat's dermato-
logical problem?
i.What are the differential
diagnoses?
224What isphaeohyphomycosis?
229
Copyrighted material
-230.jpg
222-224:Answers
222 i. Nasal hypopigmentation. Owners frequently refer to this syndromc as 'snow
nose'. It is characterized by a strip of depigmentation down the centcr of the nosc. In
some breeds, e.g. Labrador retrievers, the nose may turn from black to brown instead.
There is no treatment for this condition, and affectcd dogs do not scem to be
bothered by it. Thc causc is unknown and may be genetic as it is often seen in related
littermates. The depigmentation can be scasonal (i.c. winter), and some noses will
spontancously repigment in the summer, hence the name ‘snow nose'.
ii. Poliosis is a premature graying of the hair or skin, and it has been associated with
caninc uvcodcrmatologic syndrome.
ii. Periocular leukotrichia has been diagnosed most commonly in Siamese cats,
usually females. Affected cats develop lightening of the hair around the eyes, and they
look like they have a white mask. The condition is transient, and normal coat color
usually returns within 1 3 cycles. It can be associated with pregnancy, dietary
deficiencies, and systemie illnesses.
223 i. Skin fragility or acquuired feline skin fragility syndrome. Feline skin fragility
syntrome is a term used to describe easily torn, damaged, thin skin that is damaged
with little or no trauma. The skin may be translucent, and there may be concurrent
partial alopecia. The skin is not hyperextensible as is seen in collagen disorders such
as cutaneous asthenia. This syndrome should he considered a dermatological
 manifestation of systemic disease.
i. Fragile full thickness tears in the skin of cats can occur with cutaneous asthenia,
pancreatic neoplasia. liver disease (hepatic lipidosis, cholangiohepatitis, or
cholangiocarcinoma), progesterone administration, iatrogenic and naturally occurring
hyperadrenocorticism, phenytoin administration, and nephrosis. In some cats, no
underlying abnormality is found. This patient had naturally occurring fclinc
hyperadrenocorticism. If the underlying metabolc discasc can be trcated, the cat will
regain normal skin integrity.
224 This is a subcutaneous infection of the skin caused by traumatic inoculation of
saprophytes. These lesions can be clinically indistinguishable from mycetomas,
tumors, or absccsscs. Thcy arc diagnoscd via histological examination of tissue, and
the hallmark findings are pigmented, septatc, branchcd or unbranched hyphac. Tissuc
granulcs arc not a fcature of this fungal disease. Treatment is difficult and surgical
cxcision of the lesion is the treatment of choice but recurrence is common. Commonly
isolated fungi includc Bipolaris spiceferum (Drechslera spp.), Phialenunium,
Pseudomicrodochium and Xylabypba iCladosporium spp.).
230
-231.jpg
222-224:Answers
222 i.Nasal hypopigmentation. Owners frequently refer to this syndrome as‘snow
nose'.It is characterized by a strip of depigmentation down the center of the nose. In
some breeds, e.g. Labrador retrievers, the nose may turn from black to brown instead.
There is no treatment for this condition, and affected dogs do not seem to be
bothered by it.The cause is unknown and may be genetic as it is often seen in related
littermates. The depigmentation can be seasonal (i.e. winter), and some noses will
spontaneously repigment in the summer, hence the name snow nose.
i. Poliosis is a premature graying of the hair or skin, and it has been associated with
canineuveodermatologic syndrome.
ii.Periocular leukotrichia has been diagnosed most commonly in Siamese cats,
usually females.Affected cats developlightening of the hair around the eyes,and they
look like they have a white mask.The condition is transient,and normal coat color
usually returns within 1-3 cycles. It can be associated with pregnancy, dietary
deficiencies, and systemic illnesses.
223i.Skin fragility or acquired feline skin fragility syndrome.Feline skin fragility
syndrome is a term used to describe easily torn, damaged, thin skin that is damaged
with litle or no trauma.The skin may be translucent, and there may be concurrent
partial alopecia.The skin is not hyperextensible as is seen in collagen disorders such
as cutaneous asthenia.This syndrome should be considered a dermatological
manifestation of systemic disease.
i.Fragile full thickness tears in the skin of cats can occur with cutaneous asthenia,
pancreatic neoplasia,liver disease (hepatic lipidosis,cholangiohepatitis,or
 cholangiocarcinoma), progesterone administration, iatrogenic and naturally occurring
hyperadrenocorticism,phenytoin administration,and nephrosis.In some cats,no
underlying abnormality is found. This patient had naturally occurring feline
hyperadrenocorticism.If the underlying metabolic disease can be treated, the cat will
regain normal skin integrity.
224This is a subcutaneous infection of the skin caused by traumatic inoculation of
saprophytes. These lesions can be clinically indistinguishable from mycetomas,
tumors, or abscesses.They are diagnosed via histological examination of tissue, and
the hallmark findings are pigmented, septate, branched or unbranched hyphae. Tissue
granules are not a feature of this fungal disease.Treatment is difficult and surgical
excision of the lesion is the treatment of choice but recurrence is common.Commonly
isolated fungi include Bipolaris spiceferum (Drechslera spp.),Phialemonium,
Pseudomicrodochium andXylabypha(Cladosporium spp.).
230
Copyrighted material
-232.jpg
225-227:Questions
225 The owners of a 3-year-old dog
225
presented it on emergency hecause it was
depressed and showed pain when touched
(225). The dog had acutcly devclopcd
anorexia, lethargy, and depression over
the last 24 hours. Upon physical examina-
tion the dog was febrile and had general-
ized erythema of the skin. Because touch-
ing the skin was very painful for the dog
during the examination, a thorough exam
was difficult, and the dog needed to be
sedated. Aftcr sedation, oral ulccrations
and cutaneous bullae were found on the
skin. Skin biopsies were obtained at this
time, and the dog was treated sympto-
matically with fluid and electrolyte
thcrapy. The hair coat was clipped and
topical silvcr sulfadiazine was applied to
the lesions to manage sepsis.
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. The histological findings of the skin
biopsy were hydropic degeneration of the
basal cells, full thickness necrosis of the epidermis, and minimal inflammation in the
dermis. What is the diagnosis?
li. How should this case be managed, and what is the prognosis?
 226 A veterinary dermatologist reported using topical dexamethasone ear drops
(1 mg/ml in propylene glycol) for the chronic management of seborrheic otitis
cxtcrna. How should 60 ml of a dexamcthasone otic solution with a concentration of
1 ng/ml of dexainethasone be compounded from dexamethasone 2 mg/ml?
227 What is Norwegian scabies?
231
-232a.jpg
225-227:Answers
225i.The severe signs of illness limit the differential diagnoses to SLE,severe
erythema multiforme, superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis, cutaneous
lymphoma, drug eruptions, and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
i. The histological findings are compatible with toxic epidermal necrolysis. The cause of
this rare disease is unknown; however, it is usually associated with some other major
illness such as a drug reaction or neoplasia. Most cases are idiopathic.
ii.The prognosis for this patient is guarded to poor depending upon identification of
the underlying disease. These patients are managed as if they have severe burns:
aggressive fluid therapy with attention to electrolyte and colloidal losses,parenteral
nutrition,antibiotic therapy for sepsis,and wound management.Pain management is
critical for humanereasons.
226 First, calculate the number of mg of dexamethasone needed in 60 ml:
1 mg/ml × 60 ml = 60 mg
Next, calculate how many ml of dexamethasone 2 mg/ml is needed to get the same
amount:
60 mg ÷ 2 mg/ml = 30ml of dexamethasone at 2 mg/ml
Then,calculate the quantity of propylene glycol to add to get a 60ml solution of
dexamethasone1 mg/ml:
60ml-30ml =30 ml of propylene glycol
Note: the author commonly uses this dexamethasone/propylene glycol otic solution
for the treatment of allergic otitis externa and seborrheic otitis in both dogs and cats.
This formulation is especially useful in cases where the benefits of glucocorticoids are
 desired but concurrent application of antimicrobials is not needed or desired.
227Norwegian scabies'is the common name for a heavy infestation of scabies mites
in a host.This can occur in people or in animals.What is unique about this type of
scabies is that the animal is heavily crusted and large numbers of mites are found on
skin scraping. It is presumed that the host is immunosuppressed, and this allows large
numbers of mites to proliferate.The author has seen one case of Norwegian scabies in
a dog with lymphosarcoma.The dog presented with no pruritus and had generalized
crusting from the nose to tail, at least 0.5 cm thick.Hundreds of mites were found on
skin scraping. Concurrent chemotherapy and lime sulfur were used to treat the dog.
232
Copyrighted material
-233.jpg
228-230:Questions
228
228 The tail base region of a Chinese shar-pei dog is shown (228). The owner
complained that the dog is malodorous.It did not take long to localize the source of
the odor to the tail region.
i.What is the clinical name for this syndrome,and how is it treated?
i.What is the pathogenesis of these lesions?
ii.How doesbody odor'occur?
229Monitoring thevarious life cycle stages of Demodexmites is important in the
treatment of demodicosis.What are the various stages of theDemodex mite life cycle
andhowaretheyidentified?
230Whatarefipronil,imidacloprid,selamectin,andnitenpyram?
233
Copyrighted material
-234.jpg
228-230:Answers
228 i. Intertrigo or fold pyoderma. When folds of skin are in constant apposition,
moisture and humidity increase, and bacterial overgrowth results. Fold pyodermas
are commonly seen on the facc, lips, tail fold arca, and vulva. Dogs or cats with
anatomical predispositions to fold pyoderma will have chronic bacterial infections
of these areas. Surgical correction may or may not be helpful. The success of
therapy depends upon whether or not the anatomical dcfeet will redevclop on its
own. Daily washings with a mild antibacterial shampoo (e.g. chlorhexidine) are
needed to minimize odor, overgrowth, and discomfort. Response to therapy and
 owner compliance with topical therapy is often hastened by a 21-30 day treatment
course of antimicrobials. Concurrent topical therapy with mupirocin ointment may
be helpful. Relapses will occur if the client becomes lax with topical therapy. It is
important to rememher that many of these areas are also colonized by large
numbers of Malassezia organisms; thus, systemic antifungal and antibacterial
therapy may be needed in severe cases.
i. The primary cause of intertrigo is chronic irritation from repeated friction
between two skin folds. Repeated friction occurs in areas where the skin is in
constant apposition and also where there is poor air circulation. These two
situations result in increased moisture, sebum, glandular secretions (skin, tears,
saliva, urine), and an optimal environment for maceration of the skin. Macerated
skin is easily over-colonized by bacreria and yeast, that otherwise might not
invade the surrounding tissues. These organisms multiply and produce cellular
breakdown products that result in odor and increased irritation.
ii. Skin odor is the result of bacterial decomposition of secretions from scbaccous
glands, cpidermal lipids, and epitrichial and atrichial sweat glands. Epitrichial
 glands are present on haired skin just below sebaceous glands and open onto the
surface via the piliary canal. These glands are largest and most numerous in
mucocutaneous junctions, interdigital spaces, and over thc dorsal back, and
lumbosacral areas. Not surprisingly, this is often where odor concentrates in pets.
Atrichial glands are located only on footpads. Sweat contains unsaturated
fatty acids, ammonia constituents, and their volatile salts. Sehum and epidermal
lipids on the skin surface are degraded by lipases of Grain-positive bacteria to
glycerol and unsaturated fatty acids, which are further metabolized to odorous
compounds. It is these by-products that give sebum its antihacterial and
antifungal propertics. Some of thc acids produced by the degradation of these
Oral odor may be associated with systemic illnesses such as uremia, diabetes
mellirus, or periodontal disease. Malodor associated with periodontal disease is
due to the production of volatile sulfur components. Oral odors are most oftcn
the result of by products of bacterial metabolism resulting from bacteria
colonization of plaque. gingival sulci, and the dorsal surface of the posterior
tongue. Oral odors may also be the resulr of something the pet has ingcsted (c.g.
fccal material).
2.34
-235.jpg
228-230:Answers
229a
229b
229Egg,larva,nymph,and adult.Eggs arelemon shaped(229a,arrow),larvae have
six legs(229a,arrowhead),and nymphs and adults have eight legs (229b,arrow).
230 These drugs are primarily flea adulticides.Fipronil is a phenylpyrazole that is
effective against fleas and ticks.It acts as an antagonist at theflea's GABA receptor
and blocks chloride passage.It is a selective neurotoxin and is safe for use in
mammals.Imidacloprid is a chloronicotinyl nitroguanidine thatbindsto nicotinyl
receptors on the post-synaptic portion of theinsectnerve cell,preventing acetylcholine
from binding.This drug has a higher affinity for insect than mammalian receptors and
is relatively safe in mammals. It is effective against lice and fleas and newer
formulations are also effective against ticks.Selamectin is a semi-synthetic avermectin
andis considered tobe an endectocidebecauseit iseffective against both external and
internal parasites (e.g.heartworms,fleas,ear mites, scabies).Nitenpyram is a
neonicotinoid and it inhibitsnicotinic acetycholinereceptors.Thisproduct has a rapid
onset ofaction and kills fleas within 15-30 minutes.It does not have anyresidual
activity and is best used for its short actingquickkill in acute flea infestations.
References and recommended reading
BelistDV（1999）.Allriccontactematitis:FitaticsDematlogyiGenralPracticV.MFree
(ed).McGraw-Hill,NewYork,p.1447.
BolonB,CalderwoodMaysMB,HallBJ(1990）.Characteristicsofcaninemelanomas andcomparisonf
Greene(ed）.WBSaunders,Philadelphia,pp.337-343.
histiocytosis(abstract)VeterinaryDermatology,11(Suppl.1):29.
CurtisCF(2001）.Evaluationofacommerciallyavailableenzyme-linkedimmunosorbentasayforthediagnosisof
copticmange.VeterinaryRecord,148:238-239
DeBoerDjHiliarA (2001）.TheACVDtaskforceoncanineatopic dermatitisXVI:laboratory evaluationof
DeBoer DJ,MarsellaR(2001）.The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis(XIl）:the relationship of
cutaneousinfectionstothepathogenesisandclinical course ofatopicdermatitis.VeterinaryImmuologyand
Immunopathology,81:239-249.
235
Copyrighted material
-236.jpg
References and recommended reading
atsoucesterDa
GrossTLlivryTTobinDK(20o0).Morphologic andimmunologiccharacterizationofacanineisthmusmral
folliculitisresemblingpseudopeladeof humans.VeterinaryDermatology,11:1724.
GuilttManjD,lhtR0）onf tmpydu
Vet-D.VeterinaryDermatology,12:123-127.
DermlgyCaeWalielldsBalleTnlnn01
2ndednFosteCFoilds）BritishmallnmaltrinarAociationGlouestrK110.
Foster,CFoil(eds）ritshmalnmalinaryAssociatonlouesteUKp3145.
LinderKE,Kunkle GA,Parker WM,Yager JA (202）.Applications of the skin zenograft mousemodel in
MathwsE(1981).Mechanisf skinpenertionofhooormlarvaeVetraryDermatoogyNesle, 6:
Miller MA,Dunstan RW (1993）.Seasonal flank alopecia in boxers and Airedale terriers:24 cases (1985-1992).
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation,203:1567-1572.
MinorRR（1987)）.Geneticdiseasesof connective tissue in animals.CurrentProblems inDermatology17:199.
MorielloKA(2001）DiagnostictechniquesfordermatophytosisCliricalTechniquesinSmallAimalPractice16:
219-224.
Tscharereds）utteworthHinman,rdUKp23524.
Power HT,Olivry T,Woo J,Moore PF (1998).Novel feline alopecia areata-like dermatosis:cytotoxic
RosrEnstanRW(1sporoticsis:Ifectiosiseasesf thDogandCatdedEGree
Saridomichelakis MN (199).Sensitization to house dustmites in cats with Otodectes cynotis infestation.
VeterirDematlogy10994.
ScottDW(2002)Anaroachdiseaseof clawsand clawols.I:SAASallAnmalDematlogd
Scott DW,MillerWH,Griffin CE (2001b）.Bacterial skindiseases.In:Muller Kirk’sSmall Animal
ScottDW,MillerWH,GriffinCE (2001f).Congenital and hereditary defects.In：Muller Kirk'sSmall Amal
Dermatology, 6th edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 96.
ScottDWMillerWHGriffinCE2001g）AquiredalopeciasIn:MullerKirksSmallAmalDermatology，
6th edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,Pp. 87-893.
236
Copyrighted material
-237.jpg
Index
ScottDW,MillerWH,Griffin CE(2001i）.Immune-mediated disorders.In:Maller Kirk'sSmall Animal
Dermlgy6tWehli89
1121:161-163.
ThammDHVailDM20o1.MastclltumorsIn:SmallAnimalCliicalOncology3rddnSJWithrow,EG
MacEwen(eds).WBSanders,Philadelphiap.261282.
Turiniv,GabiGCanllT）Fatsmlendhigsnsitiveoublrudedolach
reaction assaytodetectmedicallyrelevantfungiindermatologicalspecimens.EuropeanJournalofClinical
Investigation,30（6):511-518.
VailDMWichowS 2001)Tumorsof theskinand suutaneoustisuesSmalAnmalClinicalOncology
3rd edn.SJWithrow,EGMacEwen(eds）.WBSaundersPhiladelphia,pp.233-260.
WaldergisM0）.Conicmderaeeattitseryhmabgeivegecat
one silvered langur.VeterinaryDermatology,13:283-292.
ZnajdaRGrtrMMarsell2002）CRbaseddt
ofPyth
and ethanol-fixed animal tissues.Veterimary Dermatology,13:187-194.
Ind
ex
Note:referenc
tocase
alopecia(continued)
antibiotics
numbers
ear pinnae30.134
adverse reactions129
endocrine causes L, 217
bacterial sensitivity
abamecin133
determination64
abdominalmass 154
abscesscatbit102123
acanthocytes49.191
nonpruritic Z381
seealsonamedantibioticagents
acitretin20
pattern30.81,122
antidepressant drugs 36, Z3
acne66.148
post-clipping 21
antifungalagents
ACTH-stimulation test 81184
post-injection114
activity and modes of action
actinicskindamage4861
puppy13.86
170
adenitis,granulomatous sebaceous
seasonal flank204
adverse effects/toxicities170,
214
189
adenocarcinoma,apocrine gland
systemic112108,118,170
173
tail205
adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome
tardive122
stamines6.201
184
mechanisms and adverse effects
adrenalsex hormone testing184
201
alkylaring agents 180,207
amitraz 8, 60,Z3 96, 144, 147,
apocrine gland carcinoma 173
allergiccontactreactions46200
166
asthenia,cutaneous54
allergies
adverse effects Z3
atipamezoleZ3
food 85,98,139,171,172
amoxicillinZ25124
atopicdermatitis145
see also atopy;fleaallergic
amphotericinB118
atopy 84124,125,171,172182
dermatitis
diagnosis172
allopurinol 14
feline Z2,134
alopecia
anal sac disorders 117,178
acute onset95
anaphylaxissystemic6
color dilution158
angioedemaS6
atrichial glands 28
237
Copyrighted material
-238.jpg
Index
mune skin disease 159,
dermoid sinus138
168,180
dexamethasone otic solution226
avermectins133
cystic51
dexamethasone suppresiontest
azathioprine 40,168,180,207
schnauzer syndrome 43
81.184
conformation defects 78.202
diabetesmellitus210,217
bacteria
congenital disorders 13, Z8
Dif-Quick stain154
culture and sensitivity 64
cryptococcosisfeline18
dimethyl metatolulimide(DEET)
L-form 1Z
Ctenocepbalidesfelis100
2
seealsonamedbacteriaand
Cuterebra fly128
diphenhydramine 27
cyclophosphamide 207
distichiasisS2
cyclosporin A142,156,174188
DNA ploidy 106,126
cyromazine S0
Doberman pinscher dog158203
basal celllayer 29220
doramectin60.133
basal cell tumor 19
dachshund dog Z0.81.206
doxorubicin156
basement membrane zone 216
dalmatian dog 91,171
drug reactions 18.74,129
benzoyl peroxide 27,39, 43, 1
dapsone 141
odexmites13,Z2,96,183
drugs
77,148.162
Dem
adverse effects/toxicities3
birthdet,grisflvin-indud
D.cati136
144,170,189,201,207
189
D.gatoi136
concentration calculations115,
blastomycosis,canine 11
diagnosis153
13,147,163,212,226
‘blisters'94
life cycle229
Sposppu
blood smear,MCT154
categories
breed-spec
ecific disorders 6,30,38
40.43,209
ear-flap test 144
bullae osteotomy (BO）79
218
bullous pemphigoid 159
deeppyoderma 96,166
earpinnae
alopecia30.134
bumps，skin110
hematoma125
burns 3. 91
marginal seborrhea 1Z6
calcinosiscircumscripta181
localizedZ3
tip necrosis 33,152,197
pododermatitis96,160
calcinosis cutis 37,181
ears
canal stenosis 202
lips168
exudates9Z137
see also hypopigmentation
mite infestation16698196
catbiteabscess102123
dermatitis
otitis6379150,1881
cat scratch disease （CSD）102
allergic contact 46.200
ear swab97 137
ceftazidime21
atopic145
ectodermal defects13
cellulitis,canine juvenile140
chronic heat 3
cephalexin29,85,124,129.148
exfoliativeL4
162,178
fea allergic172,105,110,
cephalosporin25
119,169
enrofloxacinSZ163
Cheyletiella mite 44, 68,69, 120
hookworm1
enzymes, staphylococcal 24
idiopathic ulcerative40
eosinophilicgranuloma,feline
irritant contact 129
miliary 110
eosinophilic (indolent ulcer 208
cosinophilic plaques S5161
chlorambucil180,207
169
chlorhexidine 12,27,39,77,162,
psychogenic36
eosinophilicreactions110
212
epidermal collarette4
chondritisricl
epidermalecrolysisoxic5
Schistoso
oma(swimmer's itch)
epinephrineS6
chrysotherapy 180,207
194
epiphora,bilateral2
ciprofloxacin213
dermatofibrosis,nodular 96
epistaxis
clavulanic acid 25
dermatomyositisfamilial canine
epitrichial glands228
claws
38
erythema
dermatophilosis93
perineum200
normal histology
dermatophyte testmedia(DTM)
scrotal skin129
92,190
erythema ab igne
dermatophytosis 386,171
erythromycin25
diagnosis Z6,92,179,190
eschar91
clofazimine 141
diagnosis in cats 219
ethidium bron
mide (EB)131
cocker spaniel dog 20. 79. 82.
kerion reaction108
ethyl lactate ZZ 162
156,162,174,177,193
misdiagnosis190
etretinate 20
collagen synthesis defects4
dermatosparaxis(Ehlers-Danlos
collarete,epidermal4
syndrome）54
facial lsions9111,142
collie dogs 3840.60.209
dermoepidermal junction(DEJ）216
208
238
Copyrighted material
-239.jpg
Index
feet
goldenretrieverdog205
inmunological disease 6 Z1, 159,
burns3
gold salts180,207
168,180,207
granuloma
immunosuppressivetherapy159,
acrallick164
eosinophilic50
immunotherapy 101.188
pruritus 1963,146
injection site6Z
antigen selection 63
tickinfestation&
sterile96,195
papillomavirus Z5
feline im
mmunodeficiency virus
great Dane dogs 60. 190
(FIV)23
griseofulvin 12,189
feline leukemia virus(FeLV)23
grooming,excessive4S5182
see alsopyoderm
superficial
fenoxycarb80
hair
fipronil 16,60.230
cycle of growth65
138,158,177
tires3
fungal infection99
injections
flanks
microscopy219
alopecia 114
alopecia204
slow/lack of regrowth 21
granuloma 6Z
sucking 203
217
insect bite hypersensitivity 52
hair follicle65
insect developmentinhibitorsSQ
folliculitis58
insect growth regulators 80
feline Z2
intertrigo(fold pyoderma)228
management105
intestinal parastes98
flea infestations100,105
intradermal skin test 24, 63, 70,
control80.165,230
146,172
flowcytomety106
helminth parasites 144
Irish setter 130
fluconazole118,170
irritant contact reactions 62.129
fluoroquinolone antibiotics 625
hematoma,aural125
isotretinoin20
立
hepatocutaneous syndrome132
itch-scratch reflex144
folliculitisupericialacteral
histiocytoma 142
itraconazole11,12,118,170
hookworm dermatitis 1
ivermectin 1,16.60.96133,135
hot spots (pyotraumatic
144.166
dermatitis)83.84124
toxicity 18. 60
food trial, restricted 98,172
hunting, duckraccoon 11
keratinization disorders 20,43
footpads
hydrocordone 3Z
66, 113,174, 177
crusting180
keratoacanthoma2
hyperkeratosis 177,192
hygroma1
keratolytic agents 221
pruritus1
hyperadrenocorticism37184
keratosis,follicular148
tug of warblister1
canine3Z,109,152
kerionreaction108166
Fortaz(ceftazidime）21
feline iatrogenic 217
ketoconazole112729,109,118,
frostbite 61
pituitary-dependent 81
146,150,162,170
fungal contaminants Z6
treatment109
hypereosinophili syndrome110
hyperesthesiafelne4182
Labradorrerieverdog177222
cryptococcosis118
see also dermatophytosis; yeast
infections
hyperpigmentation 2935,145
lameness8
hypersensitivity161
leflunomide142
intestinal parasites 98
leishmaniasis14
furunculosis 51 148
mosquito-biteS2
lentigo simplex198
analsac178
leprosy,feline141
canine chin 66
seealsoatopy;feaallg
leukotrichia185222
interdigital160
dermatitis food allergy
L-form bacteria1Z
lick granuloma,acral 164
gar
aminobutyric acid (GABA)
133
hypothyroidism 184,186
German shepherd dog 68Z 89
canine 22,70,81
feet 146
221
feline103
lime sulfur12,60, 86,136,144,
glucocorticoids40134140,142,
hypotrichosis, congenital 13
189.219
148,180,188,209,213
lincomycin 25
post-injection hair loss 114
imidacloprid 230
repositol114
immunofluorescence
lip lesions142,208
side effects 121,151
direct 149,220
lipoma28
topical117
intercellular41
louse infestation(pediculosis）26
glycerol-3-phosphate
34
dehydrogenase(GPDH）215
lufenuron 80., 219
239
Copyrighted material
-240.jpg
Index
lupus erythematosus 159
myositis 38
periocularregion
cutaneous209
edema46
lymphadenopathy14
nails, see claws
inflammation18
lymphoma,epitheliotropic156
nasal digital hyperkeratosis 174
leukotrichia222
177,192
phaeohyphomycosis108,224
Malassezia59146,182
nasalpraratsisdiy
photophobia168
177
phythiosis187
nematodes4
piedra99
identification137
depigmentation;
otitis 150
hypopigmentation;
mast cell tum
lors (MCT)
hyperpigmentation
canineZ126
nipples,pusules180
pinnae,see ear pinnae
piroxicam48
feline 106, 134
plaques
prognosticfactors126
noninfectious causes195
eosinophilic 85 161, 169
meglumine antimonate14
pedal 160
nonhealing wounds 10,19.23,36,
pododermatitis96,160180
seborrheic 29
meibomian glad18
melanin
102,104,123,128,134,138
poliosis185,222
Notoedres mites 60.6972
polydactylyZ8
formation145
polydipsia1528417
oatmeal, colloidal 27, 162
ocular disorders
polyuria152,18417
melatonin30122,204
Portuguese water dogs122
methoprene80
see alsoperiocularregion
potassum hydroxide hair 219
methylprednisolone2,110
odors,skinandoral228
pramoxine27
methylprednisolone acetate 134,
onychomadesis 32
prednisolone140
208
prednisone 2138.56,94,140,
methylprednisone acetate 50.8
infections187
188,195,208
miconazole 12,27,146
PCR assay215
pre-operative procedures56
otitis externa150,213
identification 199
milbemycin16.60.96,133,136
pruritus
Otodectesmites 16,6985,196
allergic/atopic causes 98,171
166
overgrooming 45,55,182
combined bacterial/yeast
minimalinhibitory concentration
demodicosis136
intections12
(MIC)64
pain,respon
s to 45,182
mites
panniculitis 211
sss
Cheyletiela spp. 4, 68,69
facial 462.63.72.85.139
ear mites16
120
paralyzed animal62
Demodex 13,Z2,96,136,153,
paraneoplastic alopecia127
160,183,229
 parastoenth L 4
differentiationof species69
generalized 7156,182
cars 16,69,8,196
intestinal98
puppy86
Notoedres60,69,Z2
see alsofleainfestationsmites
pustular eruption206
Otodectes166985.196
parasiticidal agents 133,144
scabies infection60112
Sarcoptes0112171,7
seborrhea/pyoderma 3570,Z7
mitotane109
flea control80165,230
ventral17i
monoamine oxidase inhibitors Z3
pruritus ani 117
moxidectin 16,133
mucinosiscutaneous94
mucocutaneous tissues
psychogenic disorders 36, 164
pemphigoid
bullous159
mucous membrane &
muscle conduction studies38
pemphigus foliaceus(PF)49107,
strangles 140
mycetomas 42.108
191
pustules 206
mycobacteriaRunyon groupIV
cat180
pyoderma
123
dog 206
antibiotic treatment5ZZZ
Mycobacteriumlepraemurium
terial andyeast
141
mycosis fungoides156
pentoxifylline 38 40.197
culrure 1S
240
Copyrighted material
-241.jpg
Index
pyoderma(continued)
sodium stibogluconate14
ulcer,indolent08
spanielscockrai
220
misdiagnosis190
Uncinaria stenocephala1
mucocutaneous87
splenomegaly 14
urinary cortisol:creatinineratio
recurrentZ0
secondary toFAD119
sporotrichosis104
superfic12
urinescald62
springer spaniel176
urticariaS6
superficial spreading4
uveodermatologic syndrome,
pyogranuloma,sterile195
209
canine168
pyrethrins165
staphylococci
pyrethroids165
infections1224,25124
vaccination
pyriproxyfen8Q
toxins and enzymes 24
Pythiuminsidiosm18Z.215
sterile granuloma syndrome96
reactions after67114
rabies vaccination114
vasculitis33
retinoids2,20,156,193
sulfurZZ,162,221
vitamin Acream148
Rhodesianridgebackdog138
seealsolime sulfur
vitamin-Aresponsive skin disease
Runyon group IVbacteria123
sunbathinghistoryof
193
sun damage 48,90.91.209
vitamin E therapy 3840.209
salicylic acidZZ162,221
swimmer's itch194
vitiligo121
vizsla dog214
tail
vomiting35
oval gland hyperplasia205
diagnosis112
scaling/hair loss205
walking dandruff(Cheyletiella)
feline60
sebaceousgland hyperplasia
mite44.68.69.120
Norwegian'227
113
WestHighland whiteterrier12
‘warts'Z5
Schistosoma dermatitis194
tail dock neuroma164
schnauzerdog,comedone
tapeworm117
20,90,221
syndrome43
tar treatments 2729148.221
whitecat61
scrotum129.191
telogen defluxation95
Wood’slamp107,113,179219
sebaceusadenitigranlomau
wounds
214
burns3,91
seborrheaZ0Z7
tetracycline40,57209
car margins176
thromboembolism33
greasy103
thrombovascular necrosis,
“wrinkled’skin94,228
management162
proliferative197
primary 12,20,29,120,162,
thyroid disorders 22,70,S1,103,
xanthomatosis 210
174
thyroid function testing 22
184,186
secondary221
yeast infections1112.5859
tail 113,117,205
thyroid hormones 186
13Z139,146,150,182,206,
seborrheic plaques29
thyroiditis,lymphocytic0
228
selamecin601333
ticarcillin11s
yohimbine Z3
total ear canal ablation（TECA）79
Ziehl-Neelsen stain 123
self-muilaton16,364
toxicity，drug170,189
zinc-responsive skin disease186
Sezary syndrome156
toxins,staphylococcal24
zoonotic diseases 8,16,35.59
shampoos43,113,146162
69,86,104
antibacterial7Z162
zygomycosis 1Z5
antifungal146
antiseborrheic27162
trilostane109
categories27
trimethoprim-sulfa2s
‘tug of war’blister 1
Siamesca8
Sberianskg8
tumors90
basal cell 19
hemangiosarcoma130
keratoacanthoma 2
lipoma28
skin biopsy
mastcellZ12,106,126,134,
identificationof cell types195
154
procedure116
squamous cell carcinoma 48
skin fragility 223
61,209
tylotrich hairs31
tyrosinase deficiency 121
88eneds
Copyrighted material
-242.jpg
This book aims to provide a general overview of dermatology
of the dog and cat in a case-based forrmat. lt contains over 2o0 clinical
cases and self-assessment problems reviewing the most common skin
diseases encountered in clinical practice, plus some more obscure diseases
that a veterinarian will encounter only occasionally or rarely.
The cases appear randomly to reflect real-life practice and vary in complexity. The 
coverage ranges from the more easily treatable to the most difficult and serious
cases.The self-assessment format, featuring questions, top-quality colour
illustrations and detailed answers and explanations, is designed to educate, not just
to test. It will appeal to all those dealing with skin diseases in small animals,
veterinary practitioners and students, veterinary nurses and technicians.
Also in the Self-Assessment Colour Review series:
Brown&Rosenthal,Small Mammals
Forbes &Altman, Avian Medicine
Frye & Williams, Reptiles and Amphibians
Gilson, Small Animal Soft Tissue Surgery
Kirby, Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Lewbart,OrnamentalFish
Lewis, Parker & Bloomberg, Small Animal Orthopaedics 
Mair &Divers,Equine Interna Medicine
May & Mcllwraith, Equine Orthopaedics & Rheumatology
Pycock, Equine Reproduction & Stud Medicine
Sparkes & Caney. Feline Medicine
Tennant,Small Animal Abdominal & MetabolicDisorders
Verstraete, Veterinary Dentistry
Wheeler & Thomas, Small Animal Neurology
760484
-243.jpg