CopyrigttedMaterial
Second Edition
Medical Historyand
Physical Examination in
CompanionAnimals
Editedby
A.Rijnberk
F.J.van Sluijs
Translated by B.E.Belshaw
SAUNDERS
S
anLden
SAUNDERS
F1.SEVIER
 1990, Bohn Stafleu van Loghum - 1st edition
Reprints BSL: 1990, 1991, 1993. 1997. 1999
 1995, Kluwer Academic Publishers - 1st edition
@ 2005. Bohn Stafleu van Loghum - 2nd edition
 2009, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved - 2nd edition
Jo ov saied pue subisaa rubuadog aun y auepioooe ui shub peio jiaun paasse aaey siouine aui
1988.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any mean5, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying. recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without 
Department: phone: (+1) 215 239 3804 (US) or (+44) 1865 843830 (UK): fax: (+44) 1865 853333: e-mail:
healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier website at
http://www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This edition of Anamnese en lichamelijk onderzoek bij gezelschapsdieren/Medical History and Physical
 Examination in Companion Animals & accompanying CD ROM by A. Rijnberk and FJ. van Sluijs is published by
 arrangement with
Bohn Stofleu van Loghum BV. Het Spoor 2. Postbus 246. 3990 GA Houten. The Netherlands.
The translation was undertaken by Elsevier Limited.
ISBN Dutch 2nd edition
978 90 313 4506 9
ISBN English 2nd edition
978-0-7020-2968-4
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congres5
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden
our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment and drug therapy may become necessary or appropriate.
Readers are advised to check the most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the
manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and
duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the practitioner, relying on their own
experience and knowledge of the patient, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for
each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent of the law, neither
the Publisher nor the Editors assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising
out of or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
Neither the Publisher nor the Editors assume any responsibility for any loss or injury and/or damage to
persons or property arising out of or related to any use of the material contained in this book. It is the
Dn 'uaned aun jo abpamouy pue asadxa juapuadapui uo buai jauooeid bupean aun jo Amgisuodsai
determine the best treatment and method of application for the patient.
The Publisher
your source for books,
ELSEVIER
 journals and multimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
libraries in developing countries
www.elsevier.com|www.bookaid.org |www.sabre.ofg
The
ELSEVIER
BOOK AID
Sabre Foundation
 publisher's
International
policy is to use
pa permanufectured
from sustelnable forests
Printed in China
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Contributors
Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Clinical
Animals, Utrecht University. The Netherlands:
Biology, Ghent University, Belgium:
M.H. Boevé
A. De Rick
W.E. van den Brom
L. Van Ham
S.C. Djajadiningrat-Laanen
J. Declercq
A.M. van Dongen
E. Schrauwen
J. de Gier
L. Verhaert
H.A.W. Hazewinkel
Department of Medical Imaging of Domestic
LJ. Hellebrekers
Animals, Ghent University, Belgium:
B.W. Knol
B. Van Rijssen
H.S. Kooistra
J.T. Lumeij
B.P. Meij
H.F. L'Eplattenier
 J.J. van Nes
J.H. Robben
 J. Rothuizen
G.R.Rutteman
A.C. Schaefers-Okkens
M.B.H. Schilder
F.C. Stades
A.A. Stokhof
E. Teske
LF.H. Theyse
A.J. Venker-van Hagen
I. Westerhof
T. Willemse
M.A. Wisselink
Prefaces
Preface to the first edition
Preface to the second edition
The history and the physical examination are the most
The first edition of the book Medical History and Physical
important pillars of clinical work, but a detailed des-
Examination in Companion Animals has clearly filled a
cription of these methods for application to companion
need. Following publication of the Dutch first edition
animals has been lacking thus far. With this book an
in 1990, there have been five additional printings.
attempt has been made to fill the lacuna.
Although the book was originally intended for Dutch-
The approach is based on the methods used in the
speaking regions, it soon became apparent that there
faculties of veterinary medicine of two Dutch-language
 si rg s o un sai u oe 5
universities, at Utrecht in the Netherlands and at Ghent
description of the ‘tools’ of veterinarians for companion
in Belgium, and it illustrates the alliance between these
 animals. This has resulted in the publication of translations
universities. The book follows a line which has become
in German, English, Spanish, and Japanese.
more emphatically delineated in the past decade: an
The authors of the first edition created the philosophy of
undertaking of the examination that is as problem-
the book, which is also the basis for the second edition. This
oriented as possible. The examiner is shown how to
includes not only those who have contributed to the second
proceed from a limited examination to further definition
edition as well, but also those who for a variety of reasons
of the problems presented by the owner, and is asked to
have not: H.W. de Vries {editor), B.E. Belshaw, W.J.
make choices in order to increase efficiency. Directing
 Biewenga, J.E. Gajentan, R.P. Happe, H. Hoogenkamp,
the examination in this way makes it possible to use the
D.E. Mattheeuws, F.J. Meutstege, PG. van Ooijen, R.A.
 available time principally for problem solving.
A. van Oosterom, J. De Schepper, R.J. Slappendel, and G.
The description of methods in various cha pters is ba sed
C. van der Weijden. We are also grateful to Sylvie
on this selective approach. At the end of many chapters
Daminet of Ghent University for reviewing Chapter 11.
there is a form which facilitates rapid orientation in the
We remain grateful for the work of A.R. Janssen, graphic
relevant examination. Some of the forms are the fruit of
designer, Utrecht. Many of the illustrations he made for the
many years of use. Others have been developed only
first edition continue to shine in the second edition. The
recently and have not been tested extensively in practice
forms, which were initially designed by R.N. van Blokland
 and hence they will be subject to changes.
and adapted by Yvonne W.E.A. Pollak, are no longer to be
The editors gratefully acknowledge the contributions
found in the book but rather on the DVD as pdf files.
of the authors of the individual chapters and their
All of the chapters in this new edition have been revised
willingness to allow adaptation of their contributions to
 and a completely new chapter on reptiles has been added.
the general organization of the book. Although already
In addition, two chapters have been divided and the
mentioned on the copyright page, E.M. Klaasen-van
resulting parts have been expanded. Color photographs 
Slobbe, BA {editorial assistant), Bert Janssen (drawings),
by J. Fama and the DVD compiled by M.J.A. Mudde
and R.N. van Blokland, DVM (forms), deserve a special
have helped to modernize the book. We hope readers
word of thanks for their dedicated and expert
will find that these additions make it enjoyable to read
contributions. We hope that this book will find its way
 as well as an effective companion to learning.
to those who can use it and will contribute to the quality
As for the previous edition we hope that this book will 
of veterinary care of companion animals.
find its way to its intended users, thereby contributing
Spring 1990
to the improvement of the quality of veterinary care of
A. Rijnberk and H.W. de Vries
companion animals.
Autumn 2004
A. Rijnberk and F.J. van Sluijs
VlI
Translator's preface
Translation of the first edition
Translation of the second edition
Visitors from veterinary faculties in other countries have
As for the first edition, the translated texts of the second
expressed admiration for the way in which Utrecht
edition were reviewed and corrected by one or more of
students undertake the physical examination of patients.
the authors of each chapter. Ineke Westerhof kindly
What the students are taught is contained in this book.
 provided the initial translation of Chapter 30. Translation
Though taking part in the teaching, I myself am also
of the audio portions of the DVD, to which Carla
impressed week after week by its results: the way in
Rijnberk contributed, was verified by the authors of
which students working in the clinic are able to perform
the scripts and brought to life by the voice of Ed
physical examinations, by their often remarkably secure
Schaefers.
knowledge of what to do and how to do it.
Autumn 2008
They are taught how to do this, about a dozen students
B.E. Belshaw, A. Rijnberk, and F.J. van Sluijs
at a time, during nine afternoon laboratories. Using the
 methods described in this book, a teacher first explains
and then demonstrates all aspects of the examination
being considered that day. Then the students work in
pairs, each pair with an animal (dog, cat, bird, small
 mammal), to practice what they have been shown. The
teacher observes,
correcting
 technique, explaining,
demonstrating again and again.
The translation of this book into English was begun
because of the interest of visitors from another faculty
examination for their own use and to be able to teach it
to their students. The translation was encouraged by the
what the book teaches and how it does so.
The translation of each cha pter has been reviewed and
 corrected by its author or authors. In this way we have
tried to convey as accurately as possible what each
author intends, in an English that we hope will also
welcome those for whom it is a second language.
Spring 1994
B.E. Belshaw
vili
01
Introduction
A. Rijnberk
The history and physical examination are the methods
created. From this theory the most *hazardous' possible
by which a veterinarian in the exercise of his or her
proposals are derived by deduction and are tested by
profession first handles a problem that is presented by
observation and experimentation. If the results agree
the owner of an animal. The information thus obtained
with the predictions then the theory is provisionally
is the main determinant of the approach to the
accepted as the best approximation of the objective
problem and it is also the main guide for further
truth. If the results do not agree with the predictions
clinical management. This is not just the experience-
then the theory is not good (= challenged and found
based opinion of clinicians. It has also
been
false) and it must be discarded. Then once again the
documented in a recent observational study in human
problem must be defined and a new theory must be
medicine. In 26 of 100 patients a thorough physical
developed. Figure 1.1 is a schematic representation of
examination by an attending physician resulted in
this process.
important changes in diagnosis and treatment.1
 Specific applications of biochemical and biophysical
The central question in science is thus not how the
probable truth can best be found but how untruth can
principles have considerably enlarged the possibilities
best be revealed and eliminated. It is a process of the
for laboratory diagnostics and diagnostic imaging.
Nevertheless, the history and physical examination
survival of the strongest theory. The surviving theory
will
at
that
particular moment 
remain the most important guides for further
most
closely
examination and for monitoring treatment. The yield
approximate the truth. This is then ‘to the best of our
knowledge', which for practical purposes is—for the
of screening laboratory examinations is small
in
time being—taken to be the truth. The theories should
comparison  with  selective  laboratory  é
examinations
be formulated in as clear a manner as possible, in
based on indications derived from the history and
order that they can be exposed in the most
physical examination.
unambiguous way to refutation (falsification). In this
 In this book methods applicable to companion animals
manner one can indicate which experiment delivers
are described in such a way that they may also be
such a result that the theory must be discarded. In this
taught to students. Veterinary education is generally
way we come at the same time to the border between
considered to be training in a scientific profession.3
science and nonscience: a theory is scientific if it is
The extent to which this can be considered to be
falsifiable. It is thus not scientific to bring additional
science may be questioned but before answering this
we should first consider what science is understood to
theory would thereby take on the character of an
mea n.
unchallengeable certainty of belief ('religion').
It is especially through the work of the science
Following Popper, others such as Kuhn, with his
philosopher Popper4,5 that a clear distinction has been
paradigm theory, have considerably extended the range
made between science and nonscience (pseudoscience,
of thought over what is scientific and what is not.
myth, and metaphysics). The critical rationalism of
Kuhn
has
amongother things shownt
that
Popper is a rational problem-solving method? which
developments in science over the long term are not
essentially comes down to the following method of
purely rational but are influenced by external factors of
proceeding: A problem is recognized. For the purpose
a social,
economic, cultural, political, or religious
of explaining this problem, a theory (hypothesis) is
nature. Somewhat later Lakatos again placed theory
Chapter 1:
INTRODUCTION
Problem
Theory T1
No falsification
 T1 provisionally
accepted
Prediction/test
Falsification
T1 rejected
New problem
Creation
New theory T2
Etc.
Fig. 1.1
formation or theory choice in the center, with science as
theory but the manner in which the central theories
a rational activity defended against irrational elements
follow each other by mutual comparison against the
of
Kuhn's
paradigm  theory.7
The
so-called
background of newly obtained factual material.
sophisticated or refined falsifiability of Lakatos can be
The refined falsifia bility appears to form a good basis
seen as an extension of Popper's rational procedure for
for the methodology of making clinical decisions. In
theory elimination.
Chapter 3 we will return to this. However, even now it
Popper's naive falsifiability knows only one way,
should be noted that not all diagnoses grow out of a
the elimination of what is weak. The sophisticated
pure deductive manner of reasoning.8 There is often
falsifiability, in contrast, knows only
elimination in
some degree of pattern recognition, based on
combination with the acceptance of an alternative.
knowledge and experience.? As a result of this, ideas
According to sophisticated falsifiability, a scientific theory
will again be generated and will then be tested.10
T1 is only abandoned if its place is taken by another
At first sight it is not very likely that the description of
theory T2 which has the following three characteristics:
1 Tz has more empirical content than Ti; the new
methods for physical examination contains elements
which deserve to be called scientific. There is at yet no
theory predicts new facts, facts that according to
mention of problem solving, yet small excursions are
T1 are improbable or even prohibited; 
made to clinical problems.
2 T2 explains the previous success of T1; all of the
This book itself deserves to be studied in a scientific
unrefuta ble content of T is taken up in T2;
manner.
The
carefully
prepared
material 
3 a part of the additional content of T will be
and
ig no, uo paseq ain suoo l yum suawaiens
confirmed by the results of experiments.
knowledge', on that which at present is taken to be the
Another characteristic of Lakatos’ refined falsifia bility is
truth because it is the least uncertain foundation at out
the simultaneous generation of different alternative
disposal. In principle, however, all statements are to be
theories. For a certain period differing theories can
considered
highly
suitable
for falsification.
This
sometimes exist side by side. The decision concerning
approach is especially important in the present case
elimination or acceptance cannot always be made
because much of what is presented here rests on the
immediately. Between the proposing of a theory and
foundation transmited by clinicians without having
the finding of new facts can take some time. As a
     s  m
scientific measure, Lakatos does not use the separate
years may take place.
Introduction
The content of this book is offered as a ‘tool’ that is
approach to physical examination in which one can
necessary in order to resolve problems which owners of work in a strongly problem-oriented way. The tool can
companion animals present to veterinarians. In order to  be used in an efficient manner in order to further define
make the best possible use of the available time in the  the presented problems, after which attention can be
scientific solving of these problems, we have chosen an
concentrated on the scientific solution of these problems.
References
 1 Reilly BM. Physical examination in the care of medical patients: an
7 Lakatos l. Wetenschapsfilosofie en wetenschapsgeschiedenis. De
observational study. Lancet 2003: 362:1100-1105.
controverse tussen Popper en Kuhn. Meppel: Boom: 1974. (Original
2 Dzankic SD. Pastor C. Gonzalez C. et al. The prevalence and 
title: Falsification and methodology of scientific research
 predictive value of abnormal preoperative laboratory tests in elderly
programmes. In: Lakatos I. Musgrave A. eds. Criticism and the
 surgical patients. Anesth Analg 2001: 93:301-308.
growth of knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press:
 3 Rapportage Werkgroep Ontwikkelingsplan Diergeneeskunde. 112th
1970.)
 meeting. Veterinary Faculty Council. Utrecht University. 16 Oct. 1980.
 8 Ridderikhoff J. Problem-solving in general practice. Theor Med 1993:
14:343-363.
5 Popper KR. The logic of scientifc discovery. London: Hutchinson:
9 McCormick JS. Diagnosis: the need for demmystification. Lancet 1986:
1980. (Original title: Logik der Forschung: first published in Vienna in
2:1434.
1934.1
10 Karhausen LR. Diagnosis: the need for demystification. Lancet 1987:
 6 Koningsveld H. Het verschijnsel wetenschap. Meppel: Boom: 1980.
1:387.
02
The rationale for this approach
A. Rijnberk and F.J. van Sluijs
2.3 The title
Chapter contents
The title of the book was chosen to more closely indicate
2.1 The intended readers 4
        n  
past, such as 'clinical diagnosis' or 'clinical examination',
2.2 The animal species 4
terms that actually only indicate that the topic is
2.3 The title 4
diagnosis or examination in a clinical setting. This can,
2.4 Why history and physical examination? 4
however, include other forms of examination such as
2.5 Setup of the examination 5
laboratory examination or radiographic examination.
2.6 Guides 6
2.4 Why history and physical examination?
This book is based on the assumption that the
veterinarian is concerned with the taking of the history
2.1 The intended readers
and the performance of the physical examination for
the following two reasons:
This book is intended for students in veterinary medicine
1  in order to determine the background of a problem
and for veterinarians whose interests lie in the direction
that the owner of the animal has observed. With
of the diseases of companion animals. It is attuned to the
this background (diagnosis) the owner's
professional profile of the veterinarian for companion
expectations of the veterinarian can be met,
animals. This profile is further defined as first-line
namely, that the veterinarian obtains insight into
veterinary medicine in a practice in which one or more
the nature and the severity of the disorder and if
veterinarians are chiefly involved  in treatment of
possible prescribes a treatment;
companion animals.' Hence the description of the
 2 in order to adequately meet the requirements of a
methods of examination in this book are confined to
specific request by the owner such as for a
the methods which a veterinarian—principally involved
vaccination, a health certificate, or examination
with companion animals—is expected to use. Methods
for the possible presence of breed-related
which belong to the practice of companion animal
abnormalities.
 medicine on a specialist level are mentioned briefly in
this book only to indicate what possibilities exist for
Although this would appear to be sufficient, an
further diagnostic studies by specialists.
important reservation is still included. With the
approach described under 1 the veterinarian does not
2.2 The animal species
presume to detect abnormalities at a time when they
still have not led to any indication of symptoms which
The book is in the first place directed to the history and
can be observed by the owner. For such a purpose,
physical examination of the dog and cat. In general the
periodic health examinations are more suitable than an
methods for the dog and cat are also applicable to
examination that is initiated for a specific reason.
other species. The species-specific aspects of the history
The examination is thus strongly directed by the
and physical examination of birds, small mammals,
owner's reason for seeking veterinary consultation.
and reptiles are dealt with in separate chapters.
Moreover, with the following approach an attempt is
Setup of the examination
made to only perform examinations which have a
described as an essential basis without the explanation
sufficiently large chance of success relevant to the
that this examination can differ according to the
problem presented by the owner.
information obtained from the history and the first
observation. Some authors also do not favor a slightly
2.5 Setup of the examination
more selective approach and are of the opinion that the
veterinarian should develop a routine for adequate
When one turns to books about physical examination of
 aa s  s   jo ux
humanor
animal patients, one observes that most
remarked that “an experienced clinician can easily
authors lay strong emphasis on a thorough and
examine an animal thoroughly in less that ten
complete examination, which must serve as the basis
 minutes* and *a complete physical examination should
for further management.? In practice, however,
a
not require more than 5 to 8 minutes'.7 It should be
complete  physical  examination is seldom or  never
clear that this approach leads to an examination that is
carried out. Always on the basis of the history and the
not careful or, conforming to the usual practice, that it
first observations the examination is limited to that
finally results in limitation of the examination. The
part that will probably lead most quickly to a further
misunderstanding seems to have arisen with the term
definition of the problem.3
'routine
physical examination", which is  
also
Thus many choices are made to increase the efficiency
commonly used in medical education. Routine physical
of the examination. With increased experience the
examination does not exist. The physical examination
choices can be made more specific, which usually leads
to a very efficient series of procedures. This method of
Since 197i, in the Utrecht Faculty of Veterinary
working does not, however, lend itself to teaching,
Medicine's teaching of physical examination there is a
which is a reason why a search has been made for
point at which, after the general examination, a choice
models for a more selective approach to the physical
can be made to limit further examination to one or
examination. There do not appear to be suitable
only a few organ systems.9
We have continued to
models, although occasionally a start has been made.4
adhere to this idea. In combination with the problem-
Even in the literature on the
problem-oriented
oriented approach this has led to a setup for the
approach to the patient, the physical examination is
examination such as shown in Figure 2.1.
Owner's statement
merqency
Management (Ch. 23)
Signalment, history
and general impression
Problem formulation 
Specific examination
 Focusing probem
formulation
General examination
Focusing problem
formulation
Specific examination
Focusing probem
Formulation
Fig. 2.1 Scheme for the setup of the history and physical examination.
Chapter 2:
THE RATIONALE FOR THIS APPROACH
With this approach two important questions must be
The examination may lead to a proposal for surgical
answered:
intervention or to further examination for which
anesthesia is necessary. For this a preanesthetic
1 Does the examination concern an emergency?
examination should be performed, as described in
If the impression exists that there is an organ-
Chapter 26.
threatening or life-threatening situation, then the
au h ot apeuu snu si iduane ue waiss sil ui
 examination should proceed completely as described in
examination in such a way that the available time is used
Chapter 23. If there is not an emergency situation,
as much as possible for the solving of problems for
then—if it is the first encounter with the patient—some
which the owner has presented the patient. An effort is
initial information from the owner and the signalment
made to obtain the best diagnostic return by a limited
of the patient are recorded (Chapter S). Following this
examination that is performed well. Preference must be
the history is taken (Chapter 6) and then a general
  ,   s n 
impression (Chapter 7) of the patient is recorded.
which usually comes down to searching the patient for
2 Is the problem formulation so well completed by the
gross abnormalities.
history and general impression that the further specific
This approach is open to discussion. It can be said that
Examination can (following guidelines) be carried out?
limitation of the examination is not justified because the
This question will be answered affirmatively if a specific
choices are not based on appropriate information. For
request by the owner is involved: for example, a
the compilers of this book this idea played a role in
vaccination or an examination for a health certificate
deciding upon the content of the chapter on the General
(Chapter 27). It will also usually be the case when there
Examination (Chapter 8). Consideration was given to the
 are localized signs or abnormalities, such as changes
inclusion
of
other components
ofthephysical
involving the ears and eyes, lameness, or superficial
examination in order that as many organ systems as
lesions and swellings. In other cases the problem
possible be examined. The examination has, however,
formulation can sometimes be completed at this stage
remained restricted to the content given in Chapter
such that a specific examination can be carried out,
8becauset
the proposed additions (e.g-, abdominal
whether according to a specific *guideline' or not.
palpation)
are
not
appropriate
to
screening
 If, after the history and general impression, one or
examination, which should be an examination requiring
more problems cannot be clearly formulated and/or
little time but having great sensitivity. If well performed,
there are signs of a general illness,
then the
these additions would instead require much time which is
examination is extended with a general examination
 usually not adequately provided for or which is obtained
(Chapter 8). With this general examination an attempt
 at the cost of other parts of the general exa mination.
is made to detect abnormalities which were not
a m kq u uiss l, a u e
2.6 Guides
 problem formulation can be sharpened.
Depending on the formulated problems a choice is
As shown in Figure 2.1, this approach may lead to
then made for examination of one or more, or parts of,
'specific examinations'. It will not be necessary in each
organ systems (Chapter 9 and subsequent chapters).
patient to carry out a specific examination point by
In figure 2.1 it is clear that the setup of the
point. In the approach to many problems a certain
examination is largely determined by the problems. In 
consensus has developed. The resulting guides are
this context, a problem is understood to mean
usually presented as texts or as flow charts {algorithms).
everything that must be examined and/or treated.10 with
 In Chapter 3 under the heading of Diagnostic process
this design, problems are already formulated at an early
(§ 3.2) this topic will be discussed in more detail. This
stage and as more information becomes available they
approach, which has been described as protocol
can be more sharply defined. The recording of findings
medicine, tries to give the veterinarian a guide to
(notation) is considered in Cha pter 5.
follow in diagnosis and/or treatment. In addition the
Sometimes there will be a problem for which a
‘guides’ could serve as the basis for intercollegial
'guideline” is available {see § 2.6), so that a specific
testing. Here it should be added with emphasis that
examination can be carried out according to such a
such
guideline. In this examination new problems can come to
literature,
theoretical
considerations, and clinical
light and can be added to the problem list and thereafter
experience; they have not been tested systematically.
can be pursued following a guideline or not. It will be 
In consensus discussions, ‘to the best of
our
clear that in cases in which the problem formulation is
leui sadwi siut pue apins aut se pasn si aapamouy
already possible after the general impression, the specific
modifications will often be needed in the future. In
examination can sometimes include elements that also
recent years there has been a strong effort to rely as
occur in the general examination.
much as possible on scientific evidence in the making
Guides
of decisions on diagnosis and treatment. For example, in
standardized protocols, heavily based upon information
2002 a new journal appeared in human medicine
concentrating completely on the publication
of
medicine' is discussed briefly at the end of Chapter 3.
References
 1 Nota Globale beroepsprofielen van de dierenarts en kwalitatieve
7 Lorenz MD. The problem-oriented approach. In: Lorenz MD.
 kurrikulumprofielen van eerste en tweede fase (General report on
Cornelius LM. eds. Small animal medical diagnosis. 2nd edn.
professional profiles of the veterinarian and qualitative curriculum
Philadelphia: Lippincott: 1993:1-12.
 profiles of the first and second phase). Faculty of Veterinary
8 Pols J. Wie heeft er aandacht voor de prostaat? (Who cares for the
Medicine. Utrecht University. September 1981.
 prostate?) Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 1989: 133:2521.
2 McCurnin DM. Poffenbarger EM. Small animal physical diagnosis
9 Syllabus Klinische diagnostiek van de huisdieren (Clinical diagnosis
 and clinical procedures. Philadelphia: Saunders: 1991:V.
in domestic animals). Faculty of Veterinary Medicine. Utrecht 
 3 Elstein AS. Shulman LS. Sprafka SA. Medical problem solving. An
University. 1971.
analysis of clinical reasoning. Cambridge. Massachusetts: Harvard 
 10 Van Sluijs FJ. De toepassing van het probleemgerichte medisch
University Press: 1978.
dossier in de diergeneeskunde (Use of the problem-oriented
 4 Kelly WR. Veterinary clinical diagnosis. 2nd edn. London: Bailliere
medical record in veterinary medicine). Tijdschr Diergeneesk 1983:
Tindall: 1974:13.
108:520.
 5 Osborne CA. The transition of quality patient care from an art to
11 Cannon CP. ed. Critical pathways in cardiology. A journal of
 science: the problem oriented concept. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1975: 
evidence-based medicine. Philadelphia: Lippincott. Williams &
11:250.
Wilkins: 2002.
6 Low DG. Osborne CA. Finco DR. The pillars of diagnosis: history and 
 physical examination. In: Ettinger SJ. ed. Textbook of veterinary
internal medicine. diseases of the dog and cat. Chapter 3.
Phila delphia: Saunders: 1975.
03
A few concepts and an
introduction to the diagnostic
process
A. Rijnberk and E. Teske
ourselves in detailed semantics, we can agree that in
Chapter contents
Detween:
3.1 Concepts 8
1 symptoms, which are the changes observed by the
3.11 Symptoms and signs 8
owner, and
3.1.2 Scales of measurement 8
 2 signs, which are abnormal findings of the
3.1.3 Measurement errors 9
veterinarian during the physical examination.
3.1.4 Occurrence and incidence 9
The owner may observe a great many symptoms but
3.1.5 Sensitivity. specificity. and predictive
only a few may cause him to consult the veterinarian.
value 10
The latter are called iatrotropic symptoms (from the
Greek: iatros = physician, tropein = seeking).
3.2 Diagnostic process 13
 Iatrotropic problems are important because they usually
form the problem that—in the eyes of the owner—must be
solved by the veterinarian. The iatrotropic symptoms
will not always be caused by the principal problem of
3.1 Concepts
the patient. Sometimes the most important problem of the
There has been as yet no standardization of the
patient is associated with symptoms which do not yet rise
terminology used in physical examination.
On the
above the iatrotropic threshold.
contrary, the terms for describing observations vary
from textbook to textbook. A few of the clinically
3.1.2 Scales of measurement
important concepts, about which there are occasional
misunderstandings, are discussed below.
 Observation plays a large role in physical examination.
In many cases the observations also have a quantitative
character, so that they can be described as measurements.
3.1.1 Symptoms and signs
In principle this measurement involves comparison with a
quantity of the same kind (standard). If it concerns
In veterinary medicine the terms 'symptoms', *complaints",
length, we make use of an interval scale,” which is based
and ‘signs’ are sometimes used interchangeably. Because
on a standard length and in which the width of each
our patients generally do not complain, the term
interval of the scale {the calibration) indicates how
"complaint' seems out of place in veterinary medicine. In
 accurately measurements can be made with the measuring
human medicine the term ‘symptoms" is used to denote
instrument. If it concerns mass, then we compare with a
the observations and sensations of the patient concerning
standard mass. In physical examination, however, it is not
his or her body and its products. ‘Signs’ comprise the
always adequate to record quantitative information by
observations made by the doctor during physical
means of an interval scale.
examination.' In pediatrics it is not the baby that presents
For example: a nodule or mass could be described
the history, but usually the parent. Similarly, in veterinary
by its size and consistency. The size can be given by
medicine it is the owner or handler who presents the
measuring it as carefully as possible (depending on its
(hetero)anamnesis. Consequently, and without losing
accessibility) in three dimensions in the metric system.
Concepts
The consistency can be described by comparison with
into (1) accidental (chance) and (2) systematic mistakes.
the consistency of some object or material. Hence it
As an example, a cat has been hospitalized and its body
might be described as having ‘the consistency of
temperature is measured daily. On six successive days
modeling clay'.
the temperature varies between 37.6°C and 37.8°C. On
Such a description is not quantitative. Yet we can
the seventh day the temperature is measured by a
different person, who uses the thermometer correctly
use of an ordinal scale.? A scale for describing
(introducing it far enough) and a temperature of 38.2°C
consistency could be as follows:
is found. Hence there has been a series of measurements
The consistency is reminiscent of (1) water in a thin
with a small variation and thus a fairly great precision (=
plastic sack, (2) putty, {3) soft rubber, (4) hard rubber, or
(S) stone.
the results of these measurements on an interval scale
This example shows at the same time the problem in
have a poor accuracy.
using ordinal scales: the exact definition of the classes.
 The same concepts apply to observations on a nominal 
Such scales are still not commonly used in human
scale. As an example, several observers are asked
or veterinary medicine. In this book an ordinal scale
independently to identify a percussion tone. All of the
is used when it is thought to be appropriate. For example,
observers appear to be in agreement that the tone is a
in § 17.3.2 an ordinal scale is given for grading lameness.
dull
tone. This is precise observation. However,
In addition to an ordinal scale, which gives a
each observer was able to reproduce the result of the
semiquantitative standardization to the ranking of a
other; in other words, there was no inter-observer
particular characteristic, we can also use a nominal
variability. If, however, in reality it was a hollow tone
scale, in which the name also contains recognition.
that had been presented to the observers, their precise
It is applicable, for example, to the tones in percussion:
observations would have been inaccurate. It should also
{1) hollow tone, and (2) dull tone. This is comparable
 be clear that an inaccurate observation on an ordinal or
to a scale for sounds of different musical instruments:
nominal scale usually means a serious error.
{1} piccolo, (2) flute, (3) oboe, and {4) clarinet. The
Inter-observer variability plays a role in everyday
use of such a scale depends on a number of conditions,
clinical work. This was illustrated by a study in which
the most important being that the classification must
6 veterinarians were asked to auscultate the hearts of
be unique so that no observation can be put in more
57 dogs of a breed with a high prevalence of valvular
than one category. This immediately raises problems
 defects. The presence or absence of a leaking valve was
for the findings in physical examination, so the
confirmed by ultrasonography and phonocardiography.
application is limited. The nominal description of
The
observations thus usually consists of no more than the
murmurs detected by the veterinarians ranged from 63
recording of present or absent (a scale with two
to 88 percent. The most experienced examiners had the
categories = a dichotomous scale). Summarizing
in
best results.4
reverse order, the classification and evaluation
of
findings can be recorded by means of a nominal scale,
3.1.4 0ccurrence and incidence
an ordinal scale, and an interval scale. An ordinal scale
can be used to rank nominal observations, so that a
In dogs, vomiting is sometimes due to a gastric
certain characteristic could be given a score (for
carcinoma. In a group of 200 consecutive dogs
example, 4 for consistency). If the differences between
presented for chronic vomiting, examinations eventually
the scores are equal, then an interval scale is obtained.
revealed that 30 had a gastric carcinoma. This amounts
The measurement of symptoms and signs is called
clinimetrics.3
Itis
anapproach
that
200 = 0.15 or 15%. In terms of probability analysis, the
documentation of the course of disease and the effects
 probability (P) (the a priori chance or “advance chance')
Of treatment. Also, when care of the patient is
that any given dog in this population has the disease
transfered or referred to someone else, that person's
(D)—gastric carcinoma—is expressed as P(D) = 0.15.
effectiveness in diagnosis and treatment will benefit
The occurrence of a disorder should be clearly
from data that have been quantified as much as possible.
distinguished from the concept of incidence, which is
defined as the number of new cases of a disease that are
3.1.3 Measurement errors
registered in a population in a given period (e.g., a
year). In a population chronic disorders can be quite
Even more t
than for other pillars of the clinical
prevalent although their incidence is low. On the other
examination, such as laboratory
diagnosis,
the
hand, disorders of short duration such as respiratory
measurements in physical examination have a rather
infections can have a low occurrence in a population
limited accuracy. One can divide measurement errors
but a high incidence.
Chapter 3:
A FEW CONCEPTS AND AN INTRODUCTION TO THE DIAGNOSTIC PROCESS
3.1.5 Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive
 patient selected at random will be ‘vomiting
any
value
blood'. A marginal note should be made by the term
unconditional’ because a condition  in the selection
Of the 200 dogs mentioned above, presented because of
was that the patient vomited. P(D) and P(C) are only
chronic vomiting, 40 had a history of sometimes vomiting
unconditional within the chosen “universe’ (vomiting).
blood. This is a strong indication of the presence of a
In  large  epidemiological  investigations  one 
gastric carcinoma. In order to obtain insight into the
can
more closely
approximate the real1
unconditional
meaning of this characteristic, a Venn diagram is
probabilities, but they can never be fully achieved.
constructed (Fig. 3.1). In this diagram, U represents the
‘universe', that is, the total population of chronically
By conditional probability is meant probability under
vomiting dogs. The group of patients with the disease
the condition of a certain situation. Here for example
(gastric carcinoma) is represented by D. The group of
the
condition ‘vomiting blood’ is brought into
 patients with the nosographic (= distinguishing or disease
question; what then are the probabilities? In addition a
indicating) character of “vomiting blood’ is represented by
distinction is made between diagnostic probabilities
C. Now we can see to what extent we can say something
 and nosological proba bilities.
about D with the help of C.
The nosological probabilities are the proba bilities that
a patient vomits blood or does not, provided that it does
The diagram consists of four subgroups.
or does not have a gastric carcinoma. This probability
1 C n D: the animals that ^vomited blood' and had a
can be represented as P(C/D). A nosological (= inherent
gastric carcinoma. Here the question in the history
in the disease) conditional probability thus concerns
about 'vomiting blood' had a real positive result.
textbook information. In essence it is the frequency with
 2 C n D: the animals which had a “positive history”
which a sign is seen in a given disorder. This information
but were found not to have a gastric carcinoma.
is of little direct importance when the clinician is faced
These are so-called false positives.
with a diagnostic problem in an individual patient.
 3 C n D: patients which did not have a history of
The clinician is then faced with another problem. His
'vomiting blood’ but which did have a gastric
help is sought by a client for an animal that vomits and he
carcinoma: the false negatives.
must then assess the probability that the patient has a
4 C n D: patients which did not have a history of
 gastric carcinoma. The clinician thus has more interest in
"vomiting blood’ and did not have a gastric
the reverse probability P(D/C). This diagnostic probability
carcinoma. The history thus provided a real
represents the probability that a patient has a gastric
negative finding in these cases.
carcinoma if there is evidence of 'vomiting of blood'.
From these groups and subgroups several unconditional
In
Table 3.1 the unconditional and conditional
and conditional probabilities can be calculated (see
probabilities for the previously given case example are
also Table 3.1). The unconditional probability P(D) is
worked out. The most current terminology is given
the probability that a vomiting dog has a gastric
after each of the conditional probabilities.
carcinoma. P(C) is the unconditional probability that
Careful study of the table together with the previously
shown Venn diagram will make much of this clear. Insight
is given into two characteristics of a distinguishing sign or
abnormality, namely, sensitivity and specificity.1.5 The
回
sensitivity
P(C/D) indicates
swhat
percentage
of
200
the patients with the disease are detected by use of a given
diagnostic test. The specificity P(C/D) indicates what
C
D
percentage of patients not having the disease are also
shown to be free of it. In the example shown the
CnD
CrD
CD
character has a reasonable sensitivity (0.83) and also a
(15)
(25]
(5)
fairly good specificity (0.91).
The predictive value of the presence of 'vomiting blood"
is, however, only moderate (0.63). In contrast, the
 predictive value of the absence of 'vomiting blood' is very
CnD
high (0.97). This means that a question in the history
155
about the occurrence of ‘vomiting blood’ has a high
screening value for exclusion of a gastric carcinoma, but
Fig.3.1 Venn diagram forthe illustration ofsubgroups in a population (U)
much less for the diagnosis of a gastric carcinoma.
of vomiting dogs. Circle D = having the disease (gastric carcinoma): circle
In much of the literature about this material only the
aeiu  pue  sjoqus aul poog huio aneeuo aun buey = 
that the disease or character is absent. With the overlapping of the circles
four subgroups are formed (CnD: CnD: CnD: and CnD).
explained above is of only limited clinical importance.
10
Concepts
Table 3.1
unconditional probobitities
occurrence of the disease (prevalence)
=20=
absence of the disease
occurrence of the character
absence of the character
nosologicol conditionol probabitities
 sensitivity of character or test 
D
30
nosological false negative
D
specificty
D
170
70
nosological false positive
D
diognostic conditionat probabitities
pre dictive values of presence of character/positive test result
C
diagnostic false positive
P(D/C)- nD- 15
= 0.97
160
predictive values of absence of character/negative test result
= 0.03
diagnostic false negative
C.
160
*Ecch probubility marked wth an stensk is complementary to the one frectly above, for exmple P(C/D) = 1 — P (C/D).
In addition, there is the possibility of two explanations
 presence of gastric carcinoma. In this example a choice
of the terms false-positive and false-negative. In the
was made for a characteristic symptom in the history,
example, using the nosological approach ‘vomiting blood"
but of course it could also have been a test such as
gives false-positive information in 9% of the patients
examination
n of vomitus for blood pigment
or
without gastric carcinoma, while using the diagnostic
examination of feces for blood pigment or even the
approach gives false-positive information in 37%. Both
hematocrit value in the circulating blood.
percentages are indicated as being false positive, a term
 In the above described direct method for determining
which causes much misunderstanding.
the predictive values of a characteristic symptom or a
For the sake of simplicity the statistic is not shown in
diagnostic test, the results depend on the indication and
the example, but we should not forget that the
thus on the composition of the random sample. If, for
probabilities concern rather small numbers of patients.
example, a choice is made for a group of patients with
Extrapolationofthese observations (the random
vomiting in the history in place of a group in which
sample) to future patients (the population) presupposes
chronic vomiting forms the iatrotropic problem, then
different predictive values would almost certainly be
appropriate tables? we find, for example, that the
found. It is clear that in the direct method a choice can
predictive value of P(D/C) = 2S/40 can vary, with 95%
 always be made for the most relevant group of patients.
confidence, from 0.46 to 0.77.
Sometimes a more conventional approach is taken
 In this figurative example a decision was first taken
and the indirect or nosological method is chosen. First,
about the nosographic characteristic (vomiting) of the
a group of patients with an irrefutable diagnosis is
random sample which could be considered. Then
chosen and then a control group is collected which
consideration was given to the predictive value of the
mostly consists of healthy animals. Both groups are or
occurrence of a character (*vomiting blood') for the
will be examined with a certain test, after which the
11
Chapter 3:
A FEW CONCEPTS AND AN INTRODUCTION TO THE DIAGNOSTIC PROCESS
percentages of positive and negative results in both
highly dependent on the composition of the random
 groups will be calculated. In case of, for example, 90%
sample and thus on the prevalence of the disease P(D).
positive results in the patient group and 95% negative
This is illustrated in Table 3.2 by the results of an
results in the control group, the sensitivity and
imaginary investigation of the usefulness of palpation
specificity can be represented as P(C/D) = 0.90 and P
of the peripheral pulse for detecting an arrhythmia
{C/D) = 0.95, respectively.
(revealed by ECG).
These are nosological probabilities that allow the
From this it is easy to show that the sensitivity of the
clinician to predict how great the chances are of a
method P(C/D) = 90/100 = 0.90 and the specificity
 positive or negative test result in the patient which has
P(C/ D)
80/100 = 0.80. The predictive value of
the disease in question. This information is of little
palpation of the peripheral pulse for the presence of an
importance when one is confronted with a patient in
arrhythmia P(D/C) = 90/110 = 0.82.
which just the opposite is of importance, namely, the
If the composition of the groups was such that the
diagnostic   probabilities   P(D/C):
puB
P(D/C).
By
control group (no arrhythmia) was twice as great, the
studying textbooks the clinician has learned nosological
table would have a different appearance: Table 3.3.
probabilities which in daily practice are turned around
Sensitivity and specificity are, just like the chance of a
into diagnostic probabilities. This (often unconscious)
false-negative result, unchanged (think about this!). In
process of reversal is part of the concept of *clinical
contrast, the predictive value of the abnormal sign for
experience'. This reversal can also proceed in a more
the presence of an arrhythmia is lowered considerably:
exact manner, namely, with the help of Bayes'
P(D/C) = 90/130 = 0.69, while the predictive value of
theorem.* In its most simple form and focused on the
the absence of the character for the_presence of an
present material this can be represented as follows:
arrhythmia is instead increased: P(D/C) = 160/170 =
0.94 in place of 80/90 = 0.89.
P(D)
P(D/C) = P(C/D)
and
These examples clearly show that the nosological
P(C)
probabilities are of little worth if the unconditional
probability that the patient has the disease P(D) is
P(D)
P(D/C) = P(C/D):
unknown. It is also clear that in a large clinic, where
P(C)
many patients in a given category are presented, the
this meaning that a conditional probability can be
predictive value of a test can be high, and that it can be
calculated from the reversed conditional probability
lower in a private practice where this type of patient is
and the two unconditional probabilities. By a few
fairly infrequent. In the latter situation such a test is
algebraic manipulations it can be shown that:
mainly of value in excluding the disorder in question.
P(C) = P(C/D)PD + {1 - P(C/D)}{1 - P(D)},
There is another objection to the indirect nosological
method. This concerns the composition of the groups.
so that in a test for which the sensitivity and specificity
The selected group of patients sometimes contains
are known, the predictive value can be calculated if
s rn n  e  s  
nothing more than the occurrence of the disorder in
may be found earlier than in less severe cases. The
the population is known. As has already been noted
control group is no more realistic if healthy animals
for the direct method, the predictive value of the test is
are chosen for it. It may also be that the diagnostic test
Table 3.2
polpation
arrhythmia
no arrhythmia
toto!
 abnormal 
20
110
 not abnormal
10
80
6
total
100
100
200
Table 3.3
polpotion
arrhythmia
no arrhythmia
toto!
 abnormal
06
40
130
 not abnormal
10
160
170
total
100
200
300
12
*Thamas Bayes (1702-1761). Presbyterian ninister in England. His writings concerned rmathemnatical and religious topics.
Diagnostic process
has a rather invasive character (e.g., a kidney biopsy),
   a n   s 
clinician thinks: inflammation, benign tumor,
or
animals. Such a control group is unnecessary if one
malignant tumor. Yet the age of the patient, its gender,
 isi e m u 'oa so ia ae s
 and several features of the swelling could cause the
performed on the basis of a specific indication.
clinician to estimate the probability of these three
Nevertheless, the nosological approach must still be
diagnoses as 0.65, 0.30, and 0.05, respectively. The
used sometimes, especially in the first investigation in a
clinician
thus made 
an integrated estimation of
new area. In diseases that are very infrequent, it may
three complex diagnostic probabilities (= P(D/C)). The
not even be possible to use the direct method.
au sueaa ui Aem na e u som isiood
biopsy. He makes use of the archives or his own memory
The above is also intended to improve the critical reading
to decide how closely the histologic picture approximates
of articles in veterinary and medical journals, in which,
each of the differential diagnoses under consideration
especially when new methods are presented, only
(= P(C/D). Then the a priori probability (or opinion) of
       
explained above how these can be turned around into
 probabilities of the pathologist (Table 3.4). Thus the
diagnostic probabilities and it has been shown that the 
original
opinion is adapted("weighed") by the
direct method for determining the predictive value of a
contribution of the pathologist and the results are the a
diagnostic method usually deserves preference.
The
posteriori probabilities. The surprising thing in this,
calculation appears to be somewhat complicated. Also,
as the example has shown, is that the end result is
the information necessary for the calculation of these
objective probabilities is often not or not yet available.
souep aut iyauaq Aeans ueo yum yeodde ue si i
Yet this is not essential. It is more important that the
clinician acquires insight into the background of certain
process.
results. It should be obvious that in a situation in which
many individuals do not have the disorder, it must be
3.2 Diagnostic process
anticipated that relatively many false-positive results will
The diagnostic decision process rests on the following
be obtained. If on the other hand a large number of
patients have the disease, a negative test result will be less
three pillars:'
1
 Pattern recognition, in which the clinician, with
reliable and the number of false-negative results will
increase. From this it follows that the type of test can
knowledge from textbooks, recognizes the clinical
differ according to the conditions. In the latter case {a
picture of known diseases. So, for example, canine
 distemper can be recognized on the basis of the
university clinic) a test with great sensitivity will be
presence of a group of characteristic symptoms.
satisfactory. In the first case (a veterinary practice) the
greatest need will be for a test with high specificity, a
2
Causal approach, in which logical thinking and
knowledge of pathophysiology are of central
rapid screening test with a great ability to exclude. Thus
importance. The cause of edema can, for example,
far attention has only been given to the diagnostic
be found by an analysis on the basis of knowledge
importance of a single nosographic sign, but this is an all
of the pathophysiology of this abnormality.
too simple representation of the clinical decision process.
3 Probabilistic diagnosis, in which the diagnosis is
Almost always there must be a decision on the basis of
based on estimation of probabilities. This 'Bayes
various nosographic characteristics, a process in which
diagnosis' has been described above.
Bayes’ theorem is applied unconsciously in a subjective
way and a conclusion is made. After this more
Often the diagnosis is made by an interaction of these
information may become available (e.g-, radiographic
three pillars, in which the following sequence of steps12
findings or the histopathology of a biopsy), which also
{also see Chapter 2) is followed:
contains some uncertainty and must be integrated with
assembly of the findings, leading to
problem formulation
Table 3.4
P(ctinician)
P (pothotogist)
Product
P (o posteriori) %
%
%
(Product x 100/Z)
inflammation
65
325
25
 benign tumnor
30
20
600
 malignant tumor
5
75
375
29
∑ = 1300
Chapter 3:
A FEW CONCEPTS AND AN INTRODUCTION TO THE DIAGNOSTIC PROCESS
making {insofar as possible in a pathophysiologic
way) a list of possible causes of the problem
predicted and is then tested. For example, for the
thinning of the list, a process in which against the
problem of polyuria, one can theoretically consider,
background of the clinical manifestations of the
among other things, osmotic diuresis due to renal
 problem the probability (P(D/C) of a given cause
insufficiency or diabetes mellitus. In that case it can be
is considered. The causes with a very small
predicted that either isosthenuria (urine SG of 1.010)
probability are excluded or temporarily removed
or glucosuria is present, and both of these possibilities
from consideration (parked).
can then be tested.
forming a diagnostic plan in order to choose
Another difference from the situation described in
among the remaining differential diagnoses. This
Chapter 1 is that usually various problems are distilled
from the findings. Furthermore, after the diagnostic
possibilities, yet in the sequence in which the plan
decision another step (relating back to the problem)
is developed many other factors (including the
is
introduced,
which can lead to new problem
level of development of the veterinary practice and
formulation.
financial limitations) play a role.
This gives a picture of the complicated character of
deciding whether all of the signs in the patient can
the problem-solving method with which the clinician
be explained by the final diagnosis. If they cannot,
must work. As explained above, the quality of the
a new problem is formulated and the above
diagnostic procedure can in principle be improved by
 process is repeated.
making use of probability calculations.U
Usually,
however, the necessary probabilities are not known.
In essence this is the problem-solving method, briefly
In the entire procedure there are also often small
described in Chapter 1. Translated to the clinical decision
intermediate decisions to be made. All of this means
process, the scheme given in Chapter 1 (Fig. 1.1) can be
that sometimes the(
diagnosis might seem to be
expanded into the scheme shown in Figure 3.2.
reached by a vague brainstorm rather than via logical
 A great difference between this approach and the scheme
reasoning.
given in Chapter 1 is the presentation of various theories
Until recently the clinician also scarcely had the
which could explain the problem and which usually will
means to express the thought process, which has been
be tested at the same time. However, for each possible
l   aa sisd  sis
thought patterns
in the form of chemical
and
mathematical formulas, while the clinician usually tries
latrotropic problem
and findings
to set down the rationality of the thought process in a
written description. With the stimulus provided by the
Gathering and selection
computer a change has come about in recent years. Not
New problem formulation 
uede kq nq nasi anduo au jo asn aq yonu os
Problem
of notations necesstating use of the computer, the
Creation
clinician can now specify the reasoning process. For this
purpose use is made of so-called algorithms, systematic
Pathophysiologic lst
of possible causes
representations of a series of steps that must be carried
out and/or decisions that must be taken in order to
Falsiation 
Deduction
Rejected causes
solve a problem. In order to give an idea of this, such a
flow chart for the problem of mammary tumor in the
Prediction /
dog is presented (Fig. 3.3). These guides are intended to
further investigation
Nb falsification
help the clinician in the formation of a diagnostic plan,
sisouBea
formulation has taken place. With the outlined
procedure and the guides the approach to the patient is
Problem
strongly heuristic. This heuristic support seems
to
alequately
explained?
such as have come forth from scientific research. A few
results of research into the psychology （
of clinical
Yes
Therapy
 In contrast to what students have long been taught
is the right approach, the clinician already begins 
Fig. 3.2 Clinical decision process shown schematically.
forming a hypothesis at a very early stage.
Diagnostic process
Canine mammary tumor
o
Resectable?
ammation
Yes
Antimicrobial therapy
Regional
Lung
Yes
lymphadenopathy
metastases
Yes
Yes
No
Regional
metastasis?
 Surgical therapy
Nonsurgical therapy
Yes
Fig. 3.3 Algorithm for mammary tumor in the dog.
The capability of the clinician is to a very great
 The number of hypotheses that a clinician
 degree dependent on knowledge and experience.
considers simultaneously is usually small, seldom
more than five. In this limited scope of thinking,
In addition to knowledge there must above all be
broad experience with related problems in order to
the following phenomena could still occur:
 determine which symptoms and signs are of
● The hypotheses could be somewhat vaguely
importance to the diagnostic process. The meaning
formulated in an attempt to also include
of experience in the solution of complicated
inconsistent findings.
● Some findings could be set aside in order to
 problems was already shown in the 1960s by the
classical research of De Groot.15 His research on
avoid having to form new hypotheses.
chess players showed that grand masters do not
● Great importance will be attached to some
findings to further substantiate the hypothesis
differ from less capable players in their ability to
think far ahead but in their memory. The quality
that is being considered.
 of chess playing appears above all to depend on
 There is a strong inclination to allow information
the long-term ability to remember chess board
n sisoa ai hodns ih ut iou saop u
predominate nevertheless, instead of creating a new
patterns.
 In seriously ill patients physicians are inclined to
hypothesis. This appears to rest on a need of the
 present a prognosis that is too optimistic.16 This
human intellect to look at disagreeable problems in
 attitude has not been studied in veterinary
a way that makes them seem less complicated.
 There is a fairly great variation in capability
medicine, but since the threshold for euthanasia is
somewhat lower than in human medicine, the
among clinicians, depending on the nature of the
outcome of such a study might be different.
problem. One way of describing the capacities of a
clinician is in terms of capability profiles with
The procedure which has been outlined here for problem
specific competencies for certain problems in
solving via guides is no panacea for all clinical questions.
certain situations.
It is intended as a guideline with—against the
Chapter 3:
A FEW CONCEPTS AND AN INTRODUCTION TO THE DIAGNOSTIC PROCESS
background of the above—the following supporting
discussed. The algorithms are at first glance usually
possibilities:
attractive; they seem to offer a very rational approach
 The approach to the physical examination and the
to the problems. Yet as already mentioned in the
procedure for making diagnostic decisions give
previous chapter, they are for the time being at best the
opportunity for early forming of hypotheses.
fruit of consensus discussions, i.e., discussions among
The algorithms (guides) provide a large number of
clinicians with expertise in the field concerned. In
alternatives, which limits the danger of a too
recent years there has been a strong movement towards
narrow range of thinking.
basing the diagnostic decision-making process 
uo
 A clinician with a somewhat less developed
scientific evidence.
This evidence-based medicine
capability for a given problem can fall back on a
represents the integration of  the best scientific
clear guideline.
information and clinical expertise with the preferences,
It is appropriate to conclude this chapter with a few
concerns, and expectations of the patient fin human
remarks about the algorithms that have just been
References
1 Wulff HR. Rational diagnosis and treatment. An introduction to
10 Schwartz WB. Wolfe HJ. Pauker SG. Pathology and probabilities.
 clinical decision-making. 2nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific
A new approach to interpreting and reporting biopsies. New Engl J
Publications: 1981.
Med 1981: 305:917.
 2 Stevens S5. On the theory of scales of measurement. Science 1946:
11 Vandenbroucke JT. De regel van Bayes. Hart Bulletin 1980: 11:77.
103:677.
12 Eddy DM. Clanton CH. The art of diagnosis. Solving the clinico-
 3 Feinstein AR. An additional basic science for clinical medicine. IV.
 pathological exercise. New Engl J Med 1982: 306:1263.
The development of clinimetrics. Ann Intern Med 1983: 99:843.
13 Feinstein AR. An analysis of diagnostic reasoning.Ill. The 
4 Pedersen HD. Haggstrom J. Falk T. et al. Auscultation in mild mitral
monstruction of clinical algorithms. Yale J Biol Med 1974: 47:5.
regurgitation in dogs: observer variation, effect of physical
 14 Elstein AS. Schulman LS. Sprafka SA. Medical problem solving. An
 maneuvers. and agreement with color Doppler echocardiography
analysis of clinical reasoning. Cambridge. Massachusets: Harvard
 and phonocardiography. J Vet Intern Med 1999: 13:56.
University Press. 1978.
 5 Galen RS. Bambino SR. Beyond normality: the predictive value and
 15 De Groot AD. Perception and memory versus thought. In:
 efficiency of medical diagnosis. New York: Wiley: 1975.
 pue pa easau ios wa a  unia
6 Bulpitt CJ. Confidence intervals. Lancet 1987: 1:494.
New York Wiley: 1966.
 7 Diem K. Lentner C. Wissenschaftliche Tabellen. Documenta Geigy 7.
16 Christakis NA. Lamont EB. Extent and determinants of error in
 Stuttgart: Georg Thieme: 1975.
 doctor's prognoses in terminally ill patients: prospective cohort 
 8 Diamond GA. Forrester JS. Analysis of probability as an aid in the
study. Br Med J 2000: 320:469.
66l pa  lhug man aseasip Aae-euoo jo sisoueip leu
 17 Sackett DL. Straus SE. Richardson W. et al. Evidence-based
300:1350
medicine. 2nd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Linvingstone: 2000.
9 Sackett DL. Haynes RB. Tugwell P. Clinical epidemiology. A basic
18 Cockcroft PD. Holmes MA. Handbook of evidence-based veterinary
science for clinical medicine. Boston/Toronto: Little. Brown: 1985.
medicine. Oxford: Blackwell: 2003.
04
Methods and instruments
A. Rijnberk and W.E. van den Brom
distance, the sense of hearing is used primarily to
Chapter contents
observe sounds occurring in the thoracic cavity. This
auscultation can be accomplished by pressing one's ear
4.1 Methods 17
against the animal's body, but it is almost always done
4.11 Inspection 17
by use of an instrument that transmits the sound to the
4.1.2 Palpation 18 
ear of the examiner. Instruments are also sometimes used
4.1.3 Percussion 18
in inspection and palpation. Body temperature is not
4.1.4 Auscultation 20
        
Sometimes we evoke responses that require visual or
4.2 Instruments and diagnostic materials 22
auditory evaluation, such as the patellar reflex or the
Percussion hommer ond plessimeter 22
tone that is produced by tapping over a body cavity
Reflex hammer 22
(percussion).
 Phonendoscope 23
What follows is a discussion of the methods and a
Thermometer 24
description of the instruments and other materials used
in these examinations.
Techniques of arterial blood pressure
measurement 25
4.1 Methods
4.1.1 Inspection
Physical
examination
depends
our
sensory
Inspection can be either general or local. The general
perceptions and sometimes our perception is increased
inspection is a visual evaluation of the entire animal or
by the use of instruments. In this chapter some basic
of large parts of it (see Chapter 7). Inspection should
information is given about the methods used in these
 always be carried out in good illumination.
sensory observations.
In several of the following chapters local inspection
In principle the senses of taste, smell, hearing, touch,
is also mentioned. Sometimes the method for doing this
and sight can be used. The time in which taste played a
is described, such as by opening the animal's mouth. In
role (the sweet taste of diabetic urine) lies far in the past.
01 ssaooe uiiqo ot pasn si asun ue sase iauo
The sense of smell has not acquired a permanent place in
the part of the body to be examined, such as forceps to
the physical examination. Only in examination of the
lift the hair in order to examine the skin (§ 8.3.4).
skin or the mouth may a special odor be noted which
For local inspection it is also sometimes necessary to
can aid in recognition of a specific illness.
use a focal light source, usually a small penlight. Some
At present the physical examination is performed
cavities or passages are inspected with the aid of an
primarily with the aid of the senses of sight, touch, and
instrument especially designed for the purpose, such as
hearing. The use of the sense of sight is called inspection,
an otoscope or vaginoscope.
by which shape, color, and movement can be observed.
Through its partly transparent structures the eye
The sense of touch can obtain information about the
lends itself to internal inspection with instruments such
shape, consistency, and temperature of the object being
as the slit lamp (§ 19.4.9). Its slit-shaped light beam
examined. The use of touch is called palpation. Except
makes as it were a slice through the eye so that
for perception of sounds that are recognizable at a
optically dense parts or surfaces are illuminated by
17
Chapter 4:
METHODS AND INSTRUMENTS
reflection or scattering in the light beam ( Tyndall effect).
seol ui asue ue aui asneoa pue kiddns aaiau
The deeper parts of the eye can be inspected with an
 in which they cause no pressure on other structures.
ophthalmoscope, the accessibility being increased by
However, tumors that lead to destruction of bone
dilating the pupil.
or grow into nerves can cause much pain.
Inflammatory processes are also usually very painful
4.1.2 Palpation
because of the acute swelling of innervated tissue.
Moveability. The movea bility of a mass is examined
Palpation is used in many ways and in many places. It
in order to determine whether it is attached to
involves utilizing the sense of touch as well as possible
adjacent structures such as bone or skin. In case of
and this requires touching carefully. If palpation is
doubt with regard to the skin, a small fold of skin
done with too much pressure, the tips of the fingers
over the mass can be lifted up and the ease with
lose their sensitivity and also part of the structures to
which this can be done can be compared with that
be palpated (e.g., in the abdomen) may be pushed
for skin in the area around the mass.
away by the palpating hand.
Borders and surface. An indistinctly circumscribed
In addition to pure sensory pressure there are other
mass could be an infiltrating malignant tumor.
ways to extend observations by using additional
Benign tumors are usually clearly circumscribed.
manipulations. One of these is what is called the
Apart from whether or not a mass has a regular
undulation test, in which the palpating hand is placed
shape or is clearly circumscri bed, it can be useful to
as a detector on the lateral surface of the abdomen in
record whether the surface is irregular or smooth.
order to detect the presence or absence of transmission
 Color and temperature. In an acute inflammation
of vibrations produced on the opposite side (§ 10.2.3
the overlying skin is often red and warm because
and 11.2.3).
of the increased blood flow. If the swelling is
 If a mass is palpated, it can be described by its size,
associated with leakage of blood from the vessels,
shape, consistency, painfulness, and moveability in
its color can vary from red to bluish-purple and
relation to its surroundings. Sometimes the mass is partly
yellow, depending on the amount of reduced
visible, so that inspection can also contribute to the
hemoglobin and the presence of breakdown
description. Since the description of a mass by inspection
products of hemoglobin. Depositions of melanin
and palpation is not dealt with in subsequent chapters,
can be the cause of a brown-black color.
we describe it here. These are the aspects that are of most
Related masses. Sometimes the presence of other
importance in the characterization of a mass.
masses contributes to the identification, because
 Location. The localization of the mass should be
some neoplasms tend to occur in multiple sites
described as exactly as possible. It is often possible
and sometimes because the presence of multiple
to indicate its anatomical origin.
 masses indicates involvement of regional lymph
 Size. The size of a mass should be given in three
nodes.
dimensions in metric units, subtracting the
contribution of overlying structures as well as
It is worth mentioning here that the results of inspection
and palpation are greatly dependent upon the time
possible. Sometimes the measurements must be
estimated, but in many cases the mass is so located
and attention given to them. This is true for all
that a ruler or tape measure can be used. Descri bing
examinations. It was shown in a study among
the size by comparison with other objects such as an
physicians who were tested for their ability to palpate
leui pamous shnsau aui ,lapow auoos e un ssew e
egg or an orange or a pea is too inexact.
 Shape. Many masses have a characteristic shape.
the frequency of detection was positively correlated
with the time spent on palpation.
Sometimes the mass is the result of the diffuse
enlargement of an organ and the original shape is
retained. In other cases the shape of the mass is in
4.1.3 Percussion
no way related to that of the organ from which it
 arose. It is very useful to record the size and shape
Strictly
y speaking, percussion only means tapping.
of a mass {with dimensions!) in a sketch so that
 Sometimes a specific area is percussed to localize pain
subsequent changes, as the result of treatment or
($ 17.6). In general, however, the term percussion is
otherwise, can be compared objectively.
intended to mean acoustic percussion.
Corsistency. The consistency of a mass can vary
In percussion an attempt is made to set tissue into
from soft and fluctuating to rock-hard and it can
motion in order to create sound waves. These are
be recorded by use of the ordinal scale mentioned
longitudinal
vibrations corresponding
todensity
in Chapter 3.
fluctuations in the medium. There is a pressure wave
●Painfulness. Palpation of tumors does not usually
corresponding to the changes in density, because where
elicit pain. This is because tumors seldom have a
the medium becomes more dense, the pressure
Methods
increases. The intensity of the sound generated by
tapping is greatest for the frequencies corresponding to
the natural vibration frequency of the object, i.e., its
resonance. This occurs, for example, during percussion
of the thorax, in which a great variation in sound
al shop arel Aueau ul paienaus sl saruanbay
Tuming point
maximum amplitude is observed at a frequency of
about 200 Hz, which corresponds to the natural
vibration frequency of the thorax in one of the many
possible forms of vibration. In small dogs 
the
 si uoissad kq paierau aui aui jo uanba
than 2o0 Hz. Hence there is a selective amplification
by resonance and the frequency selection depends upon
several of the properties of the thorax. In general the
resonance frequency of an object is determined by its
geometric properties (shape and size) and by physical
properties of the material (stiffness and density). The
smaller and more rigid the object, the higher the
frequency. During percussion of an organ, each
component, such as the wall and the contents (which
could be gas), can in principle resonate independently.
In addition, a damping effect can be exerted on the
resonance by both the contents of the organ
Left middle finger 
Right middle finger
(depending on the gas content, for example) and the
 Fig. 4.1 Finger-finger percussion by a right-handed person.
surrounding tissues.H
Hence therecan be
great
variations in the percussion sound.
The method was introduced by the Viennese physician
giving a single tap and then waiting to hear and
Leopold Auenbrugger in 1761. He tapped with the finger
evaluate the resonance sound before giving the next
directly on the thorax, which we now call direct
tap. A tap that is too heavy leads to a long resonance
percussion and which does not produce a very clear
and a tap that is too light does not penetrate
percussion tone. It is said that he borrowed his method
adequately. The strength of the tap giving optimal
of percussion from the method his father, an innkeeper,
results depends on the thickness of the thoracic wall
used to determine the level of wine in wine casks.
and must be determined for each individual. In some
 Piorry ma de important improvements in the method in
cases it will be clear that a percussion hammer and
1827.3 He tapped not with the finger directly on the
 plessimeter must be used for good results.
thorax but on an ivory plate which he called a
For accurate definition of the borders of two areas
plessimeter. This gave a clearer percussion tone and thus
with differing resonances, it is often necessary to go
the percussion became much more accurate. During the
back and forth a few times at the level where the
19th century there was a great deal of experimentation
border is presumed to be. Acoustic percussion does not
with plessimeters and percussion hammers. In small
penetrate beyond 7cm into the thorax,4 and hence
animals the indirect method of finger-finger percussion is
deeper lesions will not be revealed by this method. In
 generally used, although in large dogs clearer percussion
addition, consolidated lesions (tumor or fluid) must be
tones can be created by use of a percussion hammer and
Sunduep aonpoud ot apio ui laiaueip ui wuo s iseal 1e
that can be detected.
percussion by striking with the middle finger of the right
In percussion of the trunk (thorax and abdomen),
hand on the middle phalanx (close to its articulation
three main percussion sounds can be distinguished:
with phalanx IIl) of the left hand {Fig. 4.1). The left
1
Sonorous percussion tone. This is the fairly low,
hand rests against the animal so that the middle finger
 strongly resonant tone that is heard by percussion
remains held against the skin with moderate pressure.
of gas-containing lung tissue.
The pressure that is applied with the middle finger must
2 Damped percussion tone. This can be heard over
be constant, since a change in the pressure leads to a
any part of the body that does not contain gas,
change in the percussion tone.
such as muscles or liver. It is a short (cut-off)
The right hand is used to generate the percussion
sound of low intensity.
tone. The middle finger is bent to make a half-circle
 3 Tympanic percussion tone. This tone contains
starting at the wrist (Fig. 4.1). All taps should be the
more sound and is a little higher than the sonorous 
    s  
percussion tone. A good example of this tone is
Chapter 4:
METHODS AND INSTRUMENTS
that from the gas-filled stomach. It occurs in
Re >1000. Narrowing of the tube or abruptly
smaller cavities (stomach, intestines) than does the
changing the direction of flow readily leads to
sonorous percussion tone and is therefore higher in
   e   
pitch. In addition to the size of the cavity, the
quotient.
tension of the wall (hence its stiffness) probably
The above remarks apply to the flow of both
 plays a role in formation of the tone.
fluid (circulation) and gas (respiration). The
 hemodynamic processes in the heart and the
4.1.4 Auscultation
respiratory processes in the upper airways are
especially subject to turbulence and hence are
 q poq an u pau aq u spo
sources of sound.
fluctuations in gas pressure or by tissue vibrations.
 2 Bronchi can become so narrowed that the opposite
They will only be heard if the frequencies are in the
audible range. Usually a sound consists of a
walls almost make contact and so begin to vibrate.
combination of vibrations with different frequencies.
 These pathologic sounds (peeps) have more to do
When there is no special underlying relation among
with the Venturi effect, which concerns narrowing
the frequencies, the sound is described as noise. This
in flow tubes (Fig. 4.2). According to the law of
kind of sound also has no periodic character. A sound
conservation of energy, when there are no
frictional effects the sum of the internal energy
that does is described as having a certain pitch. The
(the pressure, P) and the kinetic energy (V2pv²) has
height of the pitch is determined by the lowest
frequency of the associated vibration (the basic pitch).
the same total value and is thus a constant (H).
The tone color (timbre) is associated with the higher
Before the point of narrowing, H1 = P1 + V2pv12
frequencies (the so-called upper tones or higher
and in the narrowed segment, Hz = P2 + V2pv2
harmonic tones in the frequency spectrum). The
It is presumed that there is no loss of energy via
intensity is proportional to the square of the
internal friction and thus H1 = H2, but in the
narrowed segment, v2 > v1, and hence V2pv2² >
 amplitudes of the related vibrations.
 a aq a u sssd sn al no
V2pv1². Hence H = Hz only if P2 < P1. This
means that when a segment of a bronchus (or a
sounds can be generated and heard (auscultated), we
blood vessel) is narrowed, the decrease in pressure
will discuss four in detail.
can cause it to become narrowed even more or
 1  In the displacement of gas (respiration) and fluid
even occluded. When there is occlusion the Venturi
(circulation), two types of flow can occur:
effect ceases, the passageway is restored, and then
a laminar flotw: The particles move in the
the Venturi effect can recur. These recurring self-
direction of the flow but not all at the same
perpetuating pressure changes are accompanied by
velocity. The flow of fluid through a tube can
rapid vibrations of the tissue and are a means by
be described as consisting of layers of different
which musical sounds can occur in the airways
velocity, increasing toward the center.
(Chapter 9). The pitch of the sound is determined
b turbulent flouw: If the velocity exceeds a certain
by the properties of the material, as is the case for
limit, orderly flow ceases. The particles move
a vibrating reed in the mouthpiece of many wind
across or against the direction of flow. In this
instruments.
turbulence there is transfer of energy via
 3 When air is forced out of the lungs during
collisions, resulting in short-term changes in
pressure. Thus tissue can be caused to vibrate
respiration, the velocity of the flow increases
with a great many frequencies so that sound is
because the total cross-section of the bronchial
flow decreases from the periphery toward the
 generated with the characteristics of noise.
In addition to the velocity (v) of the flow, the
center. The term V2pv^ in the law of conservation
occurrence of turbulence is also determined by
of energy thus increases at the expense of the
pressure P. Hence there is an increasing loss of
the viscosity {n) and the density {p) of the
material. Moreover, vortices do not develop
easily in a tube having a small radius (r). The
 proba bility of turbulence is contained in the
Reynolds formula (Re):
vpr
P1
V1
P3
V3
Re
In a cylindrical tube with a smooth inner
surface, rotational (vortical) flow occurs when
Fig. 4.2 Narrowing in a tube illustrating the Venturi effect.
20
Methods
pressure, which at high flow velocities can be
relation between the arriving intensity (Io) and the
magnified by the additional loss of energy
reflected {echo) intensity {I,) is:
resulting from internal friction. At certain places,
It
(Z-Z2)2
even without the presence of a morphologic
, in which Z = pv
abnormality (as in the Venturi effect), P can
I
(Z+Z2)
au A p si snyuoq aui ieui mol os aoa
This product Z of density (p) and sound velocity (v) is
surrounding tissue pressure. At that moment the
called the acoustic impedance. If the impedance is very
value of v becomes zero, the pressure shoots up
 and the bronchus opens again. Completely
similar in both media, as in the case of a lung infiltrate
and the thoracic wall, little sound is reflected {I/l。 is
analogous to the Venturi effect, this process can
small) and the majority of the sound is transmitted.
recur and become a source of sound.
At the interface between air-containing lung tissue
4 As soon as the separation between two gas-filled
and the thoracic wall, however, a large part of the
 spaces with different pressures is removed, the
sound is reflected back against the pleural surface. (For
 pressure is equalized. This occurs so quickly that
air p = 1.05 kgm-3 and v = 340 ms-1 and for water
the total mass of gas can resonate and even the
p = 1000 kgm-3 and v = 1480 ms-'). Incidentally, it is
walls can resonate. The frequency of the
the occurrence of differences in acoustic impedance
resonation depends on the dimensions of the
that allows us to make use of ultrasonography.
spaces. If the walls are highly absorbent, the effect
In spite of the above factors influencing the transmission of
of explosive redistribution of gas can be of such
sound, enough of the sounds in the thorax and abdomen
short duration (a few milliseconds) that the pitch
reach the body wall to allow important information to be
of the sound is above the range of hearing. Under
obtained by auscultation. Initially {at the beginning of the
certain circumstances the examiner can hear this
19th century) the ear was pressed against the body for
explosive pressure equalization as a kind of ^click',
this purpose. Laennec first described indirect auscultation
without being able to ascertain its pitch. This
in 1819. He called his instrument, which consisted of
mechanism occurs in the lungs when an air passage
a simple wooden tube, the stethoscope. This word is
that has been closed by lowering of the pressure on
derived from the Greek ‘stethos’ (chest). Since not only
its walls is suddenly opened by sufficient pressure
the
chest  is  auscultated,  we  prefer the
term
during inspiration or expiration. Equalization of
phonendoscope (the Greek ‘phonein' means sounding),
pressure then occurs in the bronchioli. This is
discussed further in Chapter 9.
which is commonly used in veterinary medicine in the
Netherlands. Laennec made his discovery at a moment of
The extent to which these sounds and possibly sounds
embarrassment, when the age and gender of the patient
did not permit him to place his ear directly against the
from other sources can be noticed externally depends
not only on the intensity of the source but on at least
chest. He has described this as follows:
two other factors:
Je fus consulte, en 1816, pour une jeune personne qui
1 Reduction in the intensity I of the sound during
presentait des symptomes generaux de maladie du
cceur,et chez laquelle l'application de la mainet la
passage through tissue, as a result of loss of energy.
percussion donnaient peuderesultataraison de
In many cases this reduction has an exponential
behavior according to Beer's law, which is familiar
l'embonpoint. L'age et le sexe de la malade
m'interdisant l'expece d'examen dont je viens de
in radiation physics: I = Ige-αx, where x is the
distance traveled in tissue and α is the
parier,jevinsamerappeler un phenomened'acoustique
characteristic absorption coefficient for the tissue.
fort connu: si l'on appliquel'oreilleal'extremited'une
The value of α is higher for solid than for gas-
poutre,on entend tres distinctement uncoupd'epingie
donne a l'autrebout.f'imaginaiquel'on pouvait peut-
containing tissues. Furthermore, α is strongly
dependent on the frequency, higher frequencies
etre tirer parti,dans le cas dont il s'agissait,de cette
being more strongly reduced. Thus the lung
propriete des corps.je pris un cahier de papier, i’en
formai unrouleau fortement serre dont j'appliguaiune
behaves as an acoustic filter that greatly restricts
extremite sur la region precordiale,et posant l'oreille a
the transmission of frequencies above about
 200 Hz. In addition to the loss of intensity there is
l'autre bout, je fus aussi surpris que satisfait d’entendre
les battements du cceur d'une manierebeaucoup plus
also, due to the frequency-dependency of α, a loss
netteet plus distincte queje ne lavaisjamais faitpar
of timbre during its passage through the tissue.
2 Reflection of sound waves. When sound waves
l'application immediate del'oreille.
tra veling through a medium encounter another
Following the introduction of indirect auscultation by
medium with other acoustic properties, part of
Laennec, many attempts were made to improve the
their energy is reflected from the interface. The
instrument as well as to give it another name.6 The
21
Chapter 4:
METHODS AND INSTRUMENTS
 o      
which the hammer should be held is shown in
listening piece
were   called   phonendoscope
or
Figure 4.9. The quick, circular movement of the head of
'resonating stethoscope'. Studies of the optimal length
the hammer depends on two turning points: the wrist
 and diameter of the connections between the listening
and the place where the thumb and middle finger hold
piece and the ear pieces led to the biauricular
instrument introduced by Littman in 1961, which will
be discussed further below. The monaural stethoscope
o        s
to listen to the heart sounds of the fetus.
4.2 Instruments and diagnostic materials
The instruments and diagnostic materials which a
veterinarian needs for the routine physical examination
of companion animals are shown in Figures 4.3 to 4.8.
A few specifications of some of the instruments and a
few directions for their use are given here.
Percussion hommer ond plessimeter
To perform percussion with instruments it is necessary
Fig. 4.4 Instruments for visualizing underlying structures: scissors for
to have both a hammer with a rubber head and a
removing hair. forceps with offset blades for lifting hair. and Von Graefe
 fixation forceps for inspecting the eyelids and conjunctivae.
it can be held. The hammer is held loosely between the
thumb and forefinger. Percussion is performed by
loosely swinging the hammer against the plessimeter,
which is pressed firmly against the body wall. Holding
the hammer too stiffly and swinging from the wrist or
elbow prevents a good rebound by the hammer and
this distorts the resonance.
Reffex hommer
The Taylor reflex hammer is preferred because of its
size, weight, and shape. The shape of the rubber head
is triangular. The base of the triangle is used to test the
 patellar reflex and the tip is used for the muscle reflexes.
Effective use of the reflex hammer requires
Fig. 4.5 Measuring instruments: measuring tape. vernier caliper. string
administering a short, abrupt tap on the tendon or
of calibrated ovoids for estimating volumes. mercury thermometer. and
muscle. Learning this skill requires practice. The way in
digital thermometer utilizing a thermistor.
A
Fig. 4.3 Aids for inspection.
A Local ilumination: penlight. slit lamp. and flashlight.
 B Local illumination + optics: otoscope. ophthalmoscope. and vaginoscope.
22
Instruments and diagnostic materials
A
B
Fig. 4.6 Instruments for palpation. percussion. and auscultation:
A Wide-jawed forceps (for testing pain perceptionl. percussion hammer. plessimeter. and reflex hammer.
 B Littmann phonendoscope and electronic phonendoscope that allows amplification and selection of sound frequencies.
Fig. 4.7 Instruments for collecting material for examination: curette for
 mollecting skin material. eye curette. and a small brush for collecting 
Fig. 4.8 Diagnostic aids for ophthalmologic examination: Schirmer tear
cells for cytological examination from the cornea and conjunctiva
test. fluorescein-impregnated paper strips. local anesthetic. and short-
[cytobrush).
acting mydriatic.
the handle. The movement is begun by giving the handle a
disk-shaped listening piece or cup is usually covered
 push with the forefinger in the direction of the palm.
with a plastic diaphragm. This increases the possibility
of hearing high-pitched sounds, because 
：thelow
Phonendoscope
frequencies are filtered out.
In choosing a phonendoscope, attention should be
The ear pieces should be large enough to fit well and
given to two properties:
completely
occlude
the
external
ear
canals.
 Phonendoscopes whose two tubes are connected by a
 good transmission of sounds to the ear
flexible metal brace often close off the external ear
 no distortion of sound and no additional sound or
canal better than instruments with loose tubes. The
noise
Fig. 4.9 How to hold the refex hammer.
23
Chapter 4:
METHODS AND INSTRUMENTS
 In practice these two properties are not well related. The
of such measuring instruments is related to the specific
better that sound is transmitted, the more noise will be
properties of each. For the mercury thermometer the
      
heat capacity and thermal resistance of the glass wall
powered microphones that are available for use as a
of the mercury reservoir play a large role. The slowness
phonendoscope. In such an instrument the sensitivity
is often characterized by means of the indication time:
can be greatly increased, but the result is that much
the time necessary to indicate 95% of the difference
more noise is also heard. The Littman phonendoscope 
between the initial and final values when there is an
provides
sa good compromise between
the
two
abrupt change of signal (e.g., for the thermometer, a
properties mentioned above. This instrument has a thin
jump from
20°C to around 38C)(Fig.
.4.10).
disk-shaped cup with a plastic diaphragm and a smaller
Disregarding the indication time, which is to say
and  slightly cone-shaped open cup
forselective
reading the temperature too quickly, thus gives an
auscultation.
There
aré
now
battery-powered
incorrect value. For a mercury thermometer in good
phonendoscopes that not only amplify but also allow
contact with its surroundings an indication time of 10
the user to select the range of sound frequencies.
to 20 seconds is expected. If the contact between the
This enables better evaluation cardiac sounds, which are
mercury reservoir and the heat source is poor, as result
of low-frequency, by suppressing high-frequency noise.
of the presence of a poor heat conductor such as air or
Probably
more important thanthe
type
of
because the reservoir itself cools the local area around
phonendoscope is continuing practice with the same
it, then the indication time may be much longer. One
phonendoscope in order to learn  to selectively
must realize that after 95% of a change from 20°C
recognize the sounds that are of importance in the
there is still an error of 1°C in the temperature to be
diagnostic
process.
Those
beginning
to
learn
measured, which is not acceptable for measurements of
001 ueun 1auien ynw oon 1eau ot puan uoueosnn
body
y temperature for clinical purposes. Reading the
Am a  o a ia i a a "
thermometer after doubling the indication time reduces
through the auscultated sounds and thus to disregard
the underestimation to less than 0.1°C. Hence a
the sounds that are of no diagnostic importance. Here
mercury thermometer should not be read too quickly:
are a few guidelines for use of the phonendoscope.
reading after not less than one minute is a good rule of
 The cup should be placed firmly and flatly against
thumb.
the body wall. If contact is inadequate, a soft
Increa singly
measurements with
the
mercury
sighing or rustling is heard, just as when a sea shell
      
is held to the ear. A similar sound may occur as a
means of transducer techniques (transducer: converter).
 result of poor fitting of the ear plugs.
The variable, in this case the temperature, is converted
 The sound that is produced by moving the cup
into
electrical
"uais panseaw klsee pue 1
over hair can strongly resemble the short crackling
Temperature-dependent resistors (called thermistors)
sound (nonmusical rhonchi) that can come from
are used: from the resistance value, with appropriate
the lungs under pathologic conditions (see Chapter
calibration, the temperature can be obtained. Such
thermometers usually have a shorter indication time
when the phonendoscope cup is pressed more
than conventional mercury thermometers (less than five
firmly. If necessary, the hair over the area to be
seconds) and have a digital readout.
 auscultated can be moistened.
Both types of thermometer are introduced rectally
 Sounds from muscles, tendons, and joints can also
($ 8.3.3), for rectal temperature is generally regarded as 
lead to confusion. A nervous animal with tense
a good measure of central body temperature. Because 
and trem bling muscles can produce an interrupted,
this procedure can be unpleasant, for the patient as
damped sound from its muscles. This will be heard
well as for the examiner, in human medicine
 especially during auscultation over the thorax at
the level of the trapezius, serratus dorsalis, and
 latissimus dorsi muscles. Sometimes it is necessary
T
to wait until the animal is more relaxed.
40
(°℃)
5%
Thermometer
20
The measuring tape and the thermometer are the only
instruments in this overview with which quantitative
measurements can be made. The thermometer is an
important example of a large class of instruments
Q
20
40 T(s}→
having the common characteristic that some time is
needed to obtain the correct indication. The slowness
 Fig. 4.10 Illustration of the indication time of a thermometer.
24
Instruments and diagnostic materials
Auscultation. A phonendoscope is placed over the
or in the axilla. In these locations the temperature is 0.5
artery just distal to the cuff. Initially, when the cuff
and
11.5°C,
respectively, lower than the rectal
pressure is high, there are no sounds. When the cuff
temperature.8
pressure is lowered to the level of the systolic pressure,
Another option is the ear thermometer, which has been
a sound is heard that is synchronous with the heart
tested in dogs as well as in humans. Its use rests on the 
beats. It is the result of turbulence associated with the
detection of infrared radiation (warmth) from blood
resumption of blood flow, as the Reynolds number is
vessels behind the ear drum. In human medicine some
exceeded. (see § 4.1.4). As the cuff pressure is lowered
regard this as a good alternative to rectal measurement.
further, the sound becomes continuous and then it
However, it has been demonstrated recently that there is
stops abruptly when the diastolic blood pressure is
only a moderate correlation between the two (r=0.77)
reached.7 The sounds heard with this technique are
and in patients with fever the lower temperature
called Korotkoff soundsf and this is the method
registered  by  an ear  thermometer 
can
lead 
to
commonly used for noninvasive measurement of blood
pressure in adult humans. In babies this auscultatory
In dogs the use of an ear thermometer is further
measurement  poses  problems7  and  in  companion
hampered by the morphology of the ear canal (Chapter
animals the Korotkoff sounds cannot be heard clearly
20). Because the ear canal is partly vertical, it is
 enough for blood pressure measurement.14
difficult to point the thermometer toward the ear
Oscillometry. With lowering of the cuff pressure, the
drum. The results of comparisons between ear and
reentry of blood also causes pulsating movements of the
rectal temperature measurements in dogs are similar to
arterial wall. These small oscillations are transmitted
through the tissues to the surface, where they can be
anotherwitha
clearly negative conclusion.12
A
detected by sensors in the cuff. The cuff pressure at
comparative study at the Utrecht University Clinic for
which the oscillations begin to increase is interpreted
Companion Animals also revealed that measurements
as
the systolic pressure.
The amplitude
of
the
with an ear thermometer were not consistent enough to
oscillations increases to a maximum which corresponds
justify routine use.
to the mean arterial pressure. Then there is a decline to
a constant level which corresponds to the diastolic
Technigues of orteriol blood pressure
pressure. The main problem with this method is the
measurement
The above-mentioned use of transducers {also called
the end of the oscillation patterns. Oscillometric
sensors) to measure physiological phenomena
has
measurements give lower values than direct {invasive)
expanded enormously, in part due to advancements in
measurements of
blood pressure  in  hypertensive
miniaturization  and digital signal processing.
.Two
       
important examples are in the field of noninvasive
 hypotension. 14
measurement of arterial blood pressure, which will be
Doppler effect. The resumption of blood flow can
discussed in this section.
also be detected by means of the Doppler effect.t This
For noninvasive measurement of arterial blood
phenomenon is the change in observed frequency of a
pressure, an inflatable elastic cuff is wrapped around a
signal source when the distance between the source
body part (limb or tail) and is then inflated until the
and the observer changes. This change in frequency is
pressure completely occludes the artery.* The pressure
proportional to the speed of the movement. The effect
is then gradually reduced by deflating the cuff and at
can be observed in the change in pitch of a passing
the moment when it passes below the systolic pressure,
siren or a passing train. Qualitatively this phenomenon
the
 vessel reopens and flow resumes. Continued
can easily be understood. If a source is emitting 100
lowering of the cuff pressure allows the artery to open
zh oot u aq si suos iad sasnd
further until, at the diastolic pressure, the flow is
the time between the first and the last pulse observed
 completely unhampered again.
by a stationary person will also be one second.
The physical changes occurring when blood reenters
However, if the observer moves away from the source
the artery and then when its flow is completely
between the first and the last pulse, the last pulses will
unhampered allow measurement of the systolic and
not
reacht
the observer until after one second.
then the diastolic pressure, by the following methods:
Consequently, the number of pulses reaching the
Wje Jaddn a4 punoue paed sem yn aul adoad u! asn ot (e6l-c98l po-eNd auodps uepisAud uenel a4 Aq 968lu! panpou sem aldpund s!l +
 and inflated until the pulse could na longer be palpated.13
s (o6l78l noypooy smalabas !elon uepisAyd Aeu ueissny ayn 6inqsanad s u Auapesg Ae leuadu aun e uopeuasad e buunp 'so6l u +
described this auscultatory measurernent of blood pressure!3
t The Austrian physicist Christian Jahann Doppler (1803-1853) discovered the effect named after hinm on the basis af the change in color af the light of moving
stars. A star moving toward the earth looks more blue. while one moving away from the earth looks more red. In 1842 Doppler found that sinilar changes of 
25
wave length occur with mmoving sound.
Chapter 4:
METHODS AND INSTRUMENTS
observer during just one second will be less than 100 and
The frequency difference is a very small fraction of
     l   ae 
the source frequency. In order to obtain a usable
 For blood pressure measurements using the Doppler
{audible) signal, the source frequency needs to be
effect, a source emitting sound pulses is placed on the
sufficiently high, i.e., in MHz range. This ultrasound
skin distal to the cuff. The sound waves will be
can be induced by using materials that exhibit the
reflected by several tissues, including blood cells
 piezoelectric effect. Introduction of an electric current
(mainly erythrocytes). The acoustic impedance (see
causes the dimensions of the material to change, by
§ 4.1.4) of erythrocytes is different from that
of
compression and decompression. An alternating current 
plasma. The movement of the erythrocytes induces the 
induces an alternating effect, thus vibration of the
Doppler effect. The sound frequency reflected by the
surface of the material. The phenomenon also occurs
at very high frequencies. This is an example of a
source. A sensor detects the shift in sound frequency.
transducer
converting an electrical signal into a
Electronic comparison of the original and the reflected
mechanical signal. The piezoelectric effect also occurs
frequency provides a measure of the rate of flow in the
in reverse: placed under mechanical pressure, the
vessel. Doppler systems make use of ultrasound foften
material generates an electric current, which can be
about 8 MHz). The frequency difference can be made
detected. In this way the transducer acts as a sensor.
audible and can also be visualized on a monitor.
The results of both the oscillometry and the Doppler
As soon as the occluded vessel opens and the
aai aui se yons shie iuixa oi aasus ane uiss
erythrocytes begin to move again, a signal is generated.
of cuff and the rate of deflation. The commonly
This identifies the systolic pressure, often more
accepted guideline for the width of the cuff is 40-60%
accurately than by oscillometry. However, in contrast
of the circumference of the body part. Wider cuffs can
to this positive aspect, diastolic and mean pressures
result in low values and narrower cuffs can result in
cannot be measured well in Doppler systems.
values that are too high.14
References
1 Fletcher SW. OMalley MS. Bunce LA. Physicians abilities to detect
9 Jakobsson J. Nilsson A. Carlsson L Core temperature measured in
lumps in silicone breast models. J Am Med Assoc 1985: 253:2224.
the auricular canal: comparison between four different tympanic
2 Auenbrugger L. Neue Erfundung. mittels der Anschlagens an den
thermometers. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1992: 36:819-824.
 Brustkorb. als eines Zeichens. verborgene Brustkankheiten zu
10 Cretel E. Sibai A Taupin P. et al. Etude comparative de la
entdecken (1761). Aus dem Original ubersetzt und eingeleitet von V.
temperature corporelle par mesure rectale et tympanique. Rev Méd
 Fossel. Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth Verlag: 1912.
Interne 1999: 20:981-984.
 3 Piorry PA. De la percussion mediate et des signes obtenus a laide
11 Gonzalez AM. Mann FA. Preziosi DE. et al. Measurement of body
de ce nouveau moyen dexploration. dans les maladies des organes
temperature by use of auricular thermometers versus rectal
 thoraciques et abdominaux. Paris: Claude & Baillieres: 1828.
thermometers in dogs with otitis externa. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 4 Rosenberger G. Clinical examination of cattle. Berlin: Paul Parey:
2002: 221:378-380.
1979.
12 Huang HP. Shih HM. Use of infrared thermometry and effect of otitis
 5 Laennec RTH. De lauscultation mediate ou traite du diagnostic des
externa on external ear canal temperature in dogs. J Am Vet Med
 maladies des poumons et du coeur. fonde principalement sur ce
Assoc 1998: 213:76-79.
nouveau moyen dexploration. Paris: Brosson & Chaude: 1819
13 Beyer T. Apeldoorn CGL. Woordenboek van medische eponiemen
6 Bishop PJ. Evolution of the stethoscope. J Roy Soc Med 1980:
(Dictionary of medical eponyms). 2nd edn. Houten/Diegem: Bohn 
73:448.
Stafleu Van Loghum: 1998.
7 Jordan F. Algemeen lichamelijk onderzoek. 8th edn. Utrecht:
14 Erhardt W. Henke J. Carr A. Techniques. In: Egner B. Carr A. Brown
Bijleveld: 1976:56-59.
S. eds. Essential facts of blood pressure in dogs and cats.
 8 Bickley LS. Szilagyi PG. Bates guide to physical examination and
Babenhausen (D): Beate Egner Vet Verlag: 2003:34-59.
history taking. 8th edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:
2003:81-82
05
Medical records
F.J. van Sluijs and J.J. van Nes
increased greatly. The frequent use of replacement
Chapter contents
veterinarians on weekends and during vacations, the
increasing number of group practices, the trend toward
5.1 Introduction 27
formation of larger group practices with internal
 5.2 Function of medical records 27
specialization, and the coming into vogue of referral
clinics and veterinary hospitals have greatly increased
 5.3 Determining the content of medical records 28
the number of veterinarians that can be involved in the
 5.4 Setting up a medical record system 29
treatment of one patient. Hence the accurate transferal
5.4.1 Clarity 29
of patient information has become an urgent necessity.
5.4.2 Completeness 30
Good patient care is impossible without good medical
5.4.3 Accessibility of the record 30
records. The design, application, and supervision of the
5.4.4 Computerized medical registration 31
system should be proportional to the level of patient
care. Conversely, the quality of the record keeping
5.4.5 Efort and costs 31
generally reflects the level of veterinary practice.
 5.5 The problem-oriented medical record
Especially in veterinary hospitals, the keeping of
system 33
records must meet high standards.
The need for good medical record keeping is well
recognized in our profession. This is apparent in the
minimal  requirements  and   guidelines  (
concerning
5.1 Introduction
 medical records in veterinary practices as formulated
by the Royal Netherlands Veterinary Association and
In every practice there should be an administrative
the Federation of Veterinarians in Europe.1.2
system for collection of information about the patient
In this chapter the requirements that a system of
and the owner, organized in such a way that this
medical records must satisfy will be explained.
information is at the disposal of the veterinarianfs) and
Particular attention will be given, by use of examples, to
others who have a justified interest.
the problem-oriented medical record devised by Weed.2
The era in which the administration of a practice only
concerned financial information, while the medical
5.2 Function of medical records
information about the patient depended on the
memory of the veterinarian and the owner, is long past.
The most important functions of medical records are:
The necessity for good medical registration has become
1 memory: They serve the veterinarian caring for the
quite clear in the past decades. The arsenal
of
patient, concerning earlier observations,
diagnostic and therapeutic possibilities and the number
 diagnoses, and treatments.
of specific diagnoses have increased considerably, and
2 communication: They benefit associates in the
the average lifetime of our patients has also increased.
practice, part-time replacements, transfer of the
The memory capacity of the human intellect is no
practice, and referral of patients.
longer sufficient to retain the relevant information
3 keeping order: The record system can provide an
about all patients in one practice. The necessity for
overview of relevant information, which aids
professional communication about patients has also
efficient and accurate work.
27
Chapter 5:
MEDICAL RECORDS
4guidance: A medical record system based on
13 explanation given to the owner
 protocols can aid working efficiency and improve the
141
referral (to whom and why)
completeness of records, for example by using printed
15
financial consequences of what has been done
forms for the collection of information. Protocols
Most of these subjects are self-explanatory or are
 play an increasing role in disciplinary jurisdiction.*
5 documentation: The need for documentation may
explained in more detail in this or later chapters. Only
points 1 and 2 require some explanation here.
involve referral of patients, questions of purchase,
insurance claims, and legal prosecution.
1. Personal information about the owner. This should
include not only the name and address but also
Information from the medical record can also be used
telephone numbers where the owner can be reached
for the benefit of such financial aspects as the printing
during the day as well as in the evening. Thus the
of bills and giving estimates.
owner can be contacted as soon as possible if urgent
In university clinics medical registration also has an
situations arise concerning the patient {e.g., as a result
important function in support of teaching and research.
of the receipt of laboratory reports or in acute
 problems occurring in hospitalized patients).
5.3 Determining the content
2. Identification of the patient. This consists of the
name of the patient and the signalment (characteristics
of medical records
such as breed, gender [including whether or not neutered],
The extent of a medical record system will be partly
date of birth, color and type of coat, drawings, anatomical
determined by economic factors and is thus dependent
abnormalities, scars, tattoo, and pedigree number).
on the size of the practice, the type of practice, and the
Occasionally it happens that the date of birth is unknown
Si idui se iseal i paue si aoeid au kem
and the owners or handler can provide no helpful
the interest of the veterinarian(s) who must supervise
information to determine it. The veterinarian must then
and use the system and the determination to achieve
make an estimate of the age of the patient (see § 11.2.1)}.
 good patient care and a good level of practice.
Increasing numbers of dogs and cats are provided
A simple card system, hand-written and entirely
with an identification chip (transponder) implanted
according to individual insight, gives the users great
between the shoulder blades. The unique bar code can
freedom with regard to the information that they will
be read out with a detector, enabling the owner to be
record. Its maintenance costs little time and the storage
identified
through
the
 European pet
network
of the information is the ultimate in compactness. Such
(EUROPETNET).f The patients of many veterinary
a system also excels in incompleteness and lack of
clinics and practices for companion animals are also
functiona lity.
 given unique registration numbers.
A medical record system that adequately fulfils all of
In the patient record the patient identification
the functions mentioned in the preceding section should
information serves the following purposes:
contain the following information:
 1  Making the patient recogniza ble. Mixing up
1  personal information about the owner
 patients is one of the worst mistakes that can occur
 2 identification of the patient
in human or veterinary medicine. Mistaken identity
 3 information concerning vaccinations, treatments
is a real danger with small animals, especially
for parasites, and health certificates
hospitalized patients, which in beha vior and
 4 information about previous diseases and
outward appearance can strongly resemble each
treatments, including the nature of the disease
other and cannot make their own identity known.
and the date
Careful recording of the identification information
5 the reason for consultation: the iatrotropic
reduces this risk. The chance of mixing up patients
problem (see § 3.1.1)
Or of not being a ble to find patients that have gotten
6  the history relevant to this consultation
away can also be reduced by using a collar with
 7 results of physical examination
identification information. Accurate identification
8 results of other examinations (radiology,
is also needed for health certificates, vaccination
laboratory, histopathology, etc.)
certificates, and legal procedures in which
9 conclusions or diagnoses
companion animals are involved.
10 diagnostic and therapeutic substances, with
The recogniza bility of a patient based on the
method of administration, dose, and date
presence of a unique mark or characteristic is ideal.
11  surgical and anesthesia records
Since these are rare, recognizability usually rests
12 autopsy report, if applicable
upon a combination of less specific characteristics.
* This concerns not only compliance with existing pratocols but also whether pratocols are available where needed.4
↑ EUROPETNET is a group of national and local associations throughout Europe which register owner information about pets that have been uniquely identified
28
by means of a transponder (www.europetnet.com). Every year Europetnet helps to return thousands of lost animals to their owners throughout Europe. The
'salpunoo pateioosse aui ui saipoq buaisiias aul uo uoesojui sapioid atisqam
Setting up a medical record system
The chance of erroneous identification is reduced
Forms, both printed and on screen, are an aid to
as the number of such characteristics increases.
readability, especially if they make use of multiple-choice
Usually a rather small amount of information
questions which can be ans wered by marking appropriate
provides adequate identification (e.g., five-year-old
boxes. The amount of handwriting is thereby reduced to
Doberman, male, called Bobby). There are
a minimum. This type of form also makes it easier to
conceivable situations, however, in which the
retrieve information because each part of the information
addition of something like has a scar from a
has a fixed place in the form. This place can be chosen
laparotomy incision' would be very welcome. The
consciously when the form is designed. A good layout
signalment should thus in the first place give as
contributes to readability and also makes possible the
unique a description as possible.
easy recognition of information with a ‘signal’ function
 Tattoo numbers are naturally unique and should
by, for example, arranging this in a separate column (see
always be recorded. Unfortunately, they are
§ 6.2 Notation, and the associated form on the DVD).
sometimes unreada ble, especially in older animals.
 In general it is true that the greater the use of printed
Implanted transponders are accessible lifelong and
forms the greater the clarity of the records. There are
this, in combination with the possibility of
limits, however, because this does not hold for patients 
retrieval through the internet, makes them a real
for which there is little information.
improvement.
If information is to be retrieved easily it must be
2 The identification of samples from the patient.
documented
uniformly and
organized
logically.
Blood, urine, or fecal samples, tissue aspirates, etc.,
Uniformity in recording information can be improved
 are usually identified with the owner's last name.
by employing lists of terms from which to choose at
When the name is a common one, this easily leads 
relevant places in the record. Choosing from a list
to mistakes. Adding the name of the animal or the
avoids typing errors and inconsistencies in terminology.
breed reduces the chance of a mistake considerably.
These advantages are particularly important when data
Adding the unique patient record number is the
(e.g, signalment, problems, or diagnoses) are retrieved,
best guarantee against mixing up of samples.
either by hand or electronically.
However, use of the record number alone, or some
Medical information can in principle be organized in
other number, can also easily lead to mistakes
three ways: chronological, source oriented, or problem
because numbers can easily be misread or copied
oriented.
.In a strict chronological organization the
incorrectly. The chance of such mistakes increases
information is only sorted according to the date of entry.
with the number of digits in the number.
This method does not offer much clarity because the
Mixing up of samples can have serious
location of the information in the record is
not
consequences for the patient. It is one of the most
predictable. In a strictly source-oriented retrieval the
frequently occurring mistakes in hospitals and
information is sorted according to origin fe.g-, diagnostic
laboratories.
imaging, clinical chemistry, histology). This leads to the
 3 Diagnosis. The signalment of the patient can play
occurrence in the record of independent packages of
an important role in the process of reaching the
information  within  which a chronological order is
diagnosis, i.e., in the conditional probabilities
followed. With this method the information is usually
($ 3.1.5). Many examples can be given of diseases
quite easy to retrieve but the motivation for gathering it,
that can be considered unlikely or can even be
the underlying relationships, and the thereby associated
excluded from consideration on the basis of age,
conclusions can be difficult to reconstruct in a large
breed, or gender.
 package of information.
 Some of these problems can be prevented somewhat
5.4 Setting up a medical record system
by using forms of different colors for （
different
information and always arranging these in the same
The following aspects are important in the setup of a
order in the record. This improves clarity. The use of
medical record system:
forms of different formats is generally inadvisable.
 clarity of organization of the record
Rapidly-changing  information 
that
is collected
 completeness of the record
regularly and often should be recorded on flow sheets
accessibility of the record
(Fig. 5.1). Graphic presentation makes it considerably
 effort required and costs 
easier to follow the course of an abnormality. Curves
representing variables ploted against time, such as
5.4.1 Clarity
pulse rate, temperature, respiration, or blood urea, are
familiar examples of this.
Clarity is essential for functioning of a medical record
Making a list in which all of the problems of the
system. Clarity requires both good readability and a
patient are given ina compact way
and
in
logical order in the recording of the information.
chronological order provides an integrated overview of
29
Chapter 5:
MEDICAL RECORDS
Clinical progress
Date
2Apr
3 Apr
4 Apr
Time
0800
1630
0800
1700
0800
1630
Appetite
一
一
+
++
remarks
Vomiting
+
一
-
-
一
remarks
foam
Feces
一
一
+
+
remarks
 strains
thin
Drinking
80 ml
50 ml
75 ml
90 ml
20 ml
remarks
Urination
+
+
+
+
+
+
remarks
red
red
red
Pulse
120
100
112
120
80
96
Respiration
24
26
22
32
30
[panting
Temperature
39.8
39.9
38.7
38.4
Mucosae
pale
pale
pink
pink
pink
CRT
？
？
<1
<1
<1
Fig. 5.1 Example of notation on a progress sheet.
the clinical status of the patient and prevents relevant
New information must always be added to the record as
information from being overlooked. The composition
soon as possible. Direct recording of examination and
of such a ^problem list’ will be described in more detail
treatment information must be considered a routine part
later in this chapter. It constitutes an essential
of each visit or consultation and may only be postponed
component of the problem-oriented medical record, but
under exceptional circumsta nces.
it can also be valuable in the source-oriented or
The  completeness of the  information depends
chronological record.
naturally on the completeness of the examination itself.
In the problem-oriented record the information is
This can be helped by working within an established
sorted according to the problem to which it is related.
routine. The use of forms (on paper or on screen) for
Information from various sources
{e-g-，
diagnostic
the history, examination, and treatment facilitates
imaging, laboratory) is always transferred from 
the
         
original report to a daily progress sheet on which it is
used as the template for a report. It is even possible
recorded under the problem for which it was obtained.
to work up different problems on one form. If after
The original report is（
discarded
PaPP 10
a
completing a given part of the examination another
supplement to the record folder. This method allows
problem must be taken up, that point of decision can
easy retrieval of information,
provided
that
the
be indicated on the form by referring to a continuation
 problem for which it was acquired is known.
aws aul ul pnu aq iou kew 1o kew ym sed
form {for an example see the form for Chapter 23 on
system,going
backtotherecord
to
look
for
the DVD).
information provides at the same time insight into the
thoughts that have led to the conclusions or plans.
5.4.3 Accessibility of the record
Figure 5.4 shows an example.
Records must always be readily available and thus a
5.4.2 Completeness
good storage system is the first requirement. This can
consist of a card box or a system of hanging folders
A medical record can only function well if it contains all of
        
the available relevant information and it is worked up.
numerical order. If storage is in numerical order, the
30
Setting up a medical record system
Incorectly placed
100
500
1000
Incorrectly placed
Fig. 5.2 Use of color codes for a filing system. Example of the use of three colors and two 'alleles' per color. suitable for the filing of 3000 records.
Incorrectly placed records are immediately noticeable or in any case can be located in a group of 100 sequential numbers.
chance of erroneous placement can be reduced by
Additional advantages over the paper record system
placing on the spine of each record a color-coded label
include partly automated compilation of discharge
letters,
access to the internet, and inclusion of
(Fig. 5.2).
digitalized pictures. Improved access to clinical data is
Records should always remain in their places in the
also beneficial to educationand  the computerized
 storage system or remain with the patient when the
record allows thought processes during examination
patient is being treated.
1.They should never drift
 and treatment to be analyzed.7
through the practice and should certainly never leave it.
A few examples of electronic medical registration,
which was begun in 2003 in the Utrecht University
Clinic for Companion Animals (Vetware Utrecht), are
5.4.4 Computerized medical registration
given in Figs 5.3-5.6. These show computer screens for
the example of an examination of the ear. The
use of a computer system and a program for medical
registration form takes up the largest part of the
registration.  Computerized  medical   records
have
screen. The column on the left is the toolbar containing
lou aue kaul rspiooau 1aded 1aao saseiueape juehodu
the action buttons. One button calls up the problem
misplaced or lost, they facilitate retrieval of data, and
list. Another, “Invoerverrichtingen' (actions), calls up
they allow the data to be consulted on any computer
the billing form. At the top of each form are given the
connected to the system. Almost all hospitals for
identification of the owner, the patient, the referring
companion animals now use computer programs for
veterinarian, and the veterinarian in charge.
finances and billing and these programs usually provide
the option of simple forms for medical registration.
5.4.5 Effort and costs
    
records. For more options one may choose a program
The amount of work invested in the development and
designed for human patients or a custom-made
maintenance of amedicalrecordsystemmustin
 program. However, both are very expensive and much
principle be economically accountable. The ‘profit of
attention must be given to restructuring the database
keeping medical records is difficult to express
in
and designing the forms. In any case, the paperless
aul ul passadxa Aauo si ll asneoaq suan Ainiauou
practice for companion animals has been introduced
quality of the patient care. Although quality is a
 and will surely be developed further.&
readily understood term, its value in economic terms
 In some veterinary clinics, medical registration is now 
cannot be determined unambiguously. Furthermore, it
completely computerized. Although the change 
ehas
fluctuates with the economic situation.
u pasn susas iaao Suen Aq apeu uaq iensn
Good medical records can save time in the practice.
human medicine,7 much programming is needed to
There is, however, an optimal relation between the
make such a system suita ble for veterinary medicine. In
time invested and the time gained thereby. The
addition, users must go through a learning curve.
recording of too little information raises the risk that
When these difficulties have been overcome, the main
 many procedures will be repeatedly or needlessly or
advantages appear to be that the record is always
even incorrectly carried out. If a great deal of
retrievable(!) and is (almost always) complete.
information is recorded, it will be unavoidable that
31
Chapter 5:
MEDICAL RECORDS
FikeE
11.7.200417:40:07
Hend Diemenerhond 00
3Ymannslijk
doof?
Patient
口
Geboortedstum:
6.7.2001
gewicht 34.0 lkg
Verwizenel dierenats
Arial
Po.dARijnberk
amboaknr
NL1232345
95 LL Beoschen Duin
Atsluiten anmuler
Algemeen
W His.onie
& Printer
Dhir.drs. G. ter Haar
Datum/ Tijid
13:08
.J.yan Nes
Disciplne
Anammese
Invoer Verichting
mnese afgenc
nieu
controe
Omschying hocftorobet
Probleemljst
DeiinlmSchkopstanenorn
Recep:
Ishe disr slgeheel ek
ja
Onee
_eeffjdoij ontstaan oorprobleer
Tipar
Probleem plotse ng of geleideljk begonnen:
Pltseling
Neemt het probleem toe:
Oja
n8
Aanleiding bekend
nee
Ishet disrin buitrlnd geweest
re
O onbekend
Schoonmaken door eigenaar
e
 nee
5tartoorNF
6] .Eudora-[n]
Veorbe
E
D...
口12:40
Fig. 5.3 The content of the form changes according to the choices made. When ja (yes) is given in reply to the question does the animal have a
 general (systemic) illness. a field for free text appears. Clicking on nieuw (new) produces a list of questions for the first consultation. Clicking on
controle (follow-up) opens a different package of information and questions.
ReEd
3Ymarneljk
Qoronderzoek GD
doof?
Eigenaar
Patient
口口
0301234567 /0612345678/
slachtmanne
6.7.2001
gevicht 34.0 kg
FKU
Verwijzend dierenarts
Gebootedatum
Arial
prof. dr.A Rirberk
Slamboek nrNL1232345
Alaermeen
Q Historie Pninen
Dhrds G terHlat
P1/reg
240
1308
J.J. vanNes
Discipline
Akoordpslaan
Anamese
Invoer Verrchting
nieuw
Algemene anamnese afgenomen var Alber van de Achlerm aam
controle
Probleemljst
dis et interm
24-05-2004:S
500 mgr per 08
Recept
Bijzond
11-07-2004 Hond heeft tev ens huidprobleem
OneeOja
Effect vn de behandeing
verslechtering
 geenvertetering
 geringe verbtering
sterkeverbetering
rng
lede slgehele testland geljk gebeven?
nee
<n uw dier minder goed horen
OnBe
ode v WETWARE
Fig. 5.4 Clicking 'controle (follow-up) produces a summary of the first consultation, with questions about the course of the disease.
some of the information will never be used, for example
possibilities, and the desired quality of patient care
because the patient never comes back.
determine the extent and type of the system to be applied.
Among the systems mentioned in § 5.4.1 the problem-
Of course, the choice between a paper record and a
oriented is the most extensive and la borious and thus the
computerized database also has financial consequences.
 most expensive. The source-oriented system is simpler
Botht
the
hardware and
the software represent
and less expensive but less accessible and less complete.
considerable financial investment and this has to be
The way in which the practice is carried out, the financial
related to the wishes and possibilities of the user.
32
The problem-oriented medical record system
11.7.2004 17:55:09
ingng near het oor
Ruim
doof?
Bufioous
ruimte
Redeljkruin
 (bekledende) huid
icht onregelmstig
chronisch ontstoken
口口
inhoud
trommebles
Arial
Aslatenxsnuleer
 Histore Pninten
Akoordsla
 plaajes
klik hier
klik hie
Probleemlijist
Recept
Toelicting Fors onscokn mnidenorsiwsis 
Fomule
 Star] Gtniap)NFuse(. Eudora-[n]
VETWARE
 Jac Paint  Esk Rinbek2 1755
Fig. 5.5 Digital registration also offers the possibility of sketching in abnormalities in figures provided on the forms (hatched area. in red. on this 
 dagram of the eardruml. Also. files can be imported into the record. such as the digital photograph shown here.
Diagnos
Dor/Otsn
doof?
Otis interma
 s
Opmerkingen:
口
Eijzondereden:Hond heter
Score symptomen: 1.7 04
国
U
Controle afs puraak
Tumor otis media
Trauma otismedia
Atsliten amuleer
Over 4 weke n op poli KNO
Pinna
0 Histore Prnten
CK
oorpslaan
Irvoer Verrichting
Probleemlijst
Recept
 Algemee
Bjzonder
Hond is volgens sigenaar vergevoeligvoor peniciines
Lacaliseion.
StarGn)FusEura-]  wreETWARE
 1ac Paint  Po Eosk Riberk.2.  17:57
jo buipiosau pazipuepueas piay siut ui sasoubeip alqissod 1le jo bojeies leoiyoneialu e yrim nuaw e wouy uasoyo aq ueo 5isouneip aul 9's *i
information makes it possible to use key words to generate reports. For example. the records of all cats with external otitis can be collected.
 showing breed. sex. and age.
 The great disadvantage of the source-oriented system
5.5
 The problem-oriented medical
is that the reconstruction of the history of an illness
record system
usually costs a great deal of time because related pieces
The classical  medical record  is source-oriented.
The
of information, originating from different sources, are
advantage
of
source-oriented
lrecord
isthat
not brought into connection. Because of the lack of a
adding information costs little time. It also allows
systematic approach—the record hardly lends itself to
the veterinarian a great degree of freedom in determining
systematic collection of information—information
is
the format and extent of notes made in the record.
often later found to be missing. In addition, each
33
Chapter 5:
MEDICAL RECORDS
veterinarian must think again about which examination
diagnostic and/or therapeutic scenarios. An extra
is indicated for the patient, which doesn't benefit
 advantage is that the use of standardized terminology
selectivity and judgment. The lack of a systematic
reduces the number of terms without forfeiting the
approach
to
the
collection and recording
of
information leads to loss of uniformity. This can cause
A constant component of a diagnostic scenario is the 
problems  in communication  when the
patientis
basic record for the problem under consideration.
handled by more than one veterinarian. This may also
Herein is indicated the data which need to be collected
be detrimental in cases involving damage claims or
to achieve the next stage of refinement. The basic record
disciplinary jurisdiction, where the quality of the 
may be restricted to physical examination, but it may
 medical record usually plays an important role.4
also include further examinations such as laboratory
Out of dissatisfaction with these shortcomings the
examinations or diagnostic imaging. The extensiveness
American physician  Weed developed an alternative
of the basic record depends on the problem as well as on
record that has since become known as the problem-
 possi bilities and limitations of the practice.
oriented medical record (POMR). The POMR is so
In some cases it is not possible to clearly define
constructed that all recorded information is visibly
a problem from the medical history. In those cases
related to one or more defined problems. The core of the
a general basic record can be used. This contains a
system is thus formed by the ^problem list', on which all
number of aspecific examinations that may reveal data
problems of the patient are listed. In this context the
leading to problem definition. This approach is rarely
needed because almost always the iatrotropic problem
that requires examination or treatment.3 The reason
can be defined in such a way that the appropriate
why the owner comes (the iatrotropic problem) can be
 diagnostic scenario can be chosen.
recorded as a problem just as can an abnormality
 One of the advantages of the POMR is that the user is
discovered in the course of the examination.
compelled at an early stage to formulate the problem as
The definition of the problems is one of the most
simply as possible. This resists the inclination to make a
important steps in the management of the patient
specific
diagnosis prematurely
puB
causes
the
because it determines the choice of diagnostic and
veterinarian to describe the problem at a level at which
therapeutic techniques to be applied. Careless or
it can actually be defined (e.g., “vomiting' in place of
erroneous formulation of the problems introduces the
‘pancreatitis"). On the other hand, the POMR also
risk that medical procedures will be undertaken from
pue swaqond aun 1auason ind on 1asn aun sjadmo
the wrong starting point. In the most unfortunate case
symptoms as logically as possible and to leave aside
this can lead to costly examinations that produce no
irrelevant items. Unnecessary writing and the danger of
useful  information;  radical
treatments
may
be
a too extensive approach are thereby prevented. The
undertaken that do not improve the patient's health or
POMR also helps the veterinarian to recognize at an
even make it worse.
early
ystage whether his own ready knowledge is
 Problem definition begins at an early stage of the
adequate to resolve the problem or whether other
examination.
After the medical history has been
sources must be tapped {journals, books, consultation
obtained, the examiner usually has a clear picture of
with colleagues, the help of a specialist).
the reason for the consultation. This is the iatrotropic
The extended pause in the definition of the problems
problem
(§ 3.1.1), which is always noted on the
costs extra time but the time is well spent. A problem
problem list. As the examination
1progresses, more
that is well defined is already partly resolved. When a
information becomes available and may result in the
problem is badly or even wrongly described, there is a
addition of other problems to the list.
risk of undertaking a series of inappropriate diagnostic
The way problems are defined is important for the
procedures. It is not always easy to correctly define the
accessibility of the record. For example, it is possible
problem from the medical history. As an illustration,
to list every observation as a problem. While this has
 a m  a e  
the advantage that nothing is overlooked, it results in
independent investigator disagreed with 12% of the
problem lists that are too long and complex.
The
problems defined by their physician.10 This example
problem list is made more clear by limiting the number
indicates that it may be useful to discuss the definition
of problems as much as possible. This can be achieved
of the problems with the client, prior to adding it to
by
bringing
separate
observations
together
in
the record.
nosological entities that point the way to diagnostic
The problems placed on the problem list are given
procedures, e.g.,  'polyuria/polydipsia”
or‘fever
of
numbers in sequence that are carried over to the other
unknown origin'. Lists of standardized descriptions
parts of the record to indicate where information will
of frequently occurring problems can facilitate the
be found concerning the given problem (Fig. 5.7). The
compilation of a problem list. In addition,
，these
problem1
list also contains certain dates for each
standard problem definitions can be linked
to
problem. The date on which the owner observed
34
The problem-oriented medical record system
PROBLEM LIST
no
date
PROBLEM
discovered
1
± 15 Feb 02 (a)
25 Feb 02
polydipsia
diabetesmellitus
25 Feb 02
or:
PROBLEM LIST
no
date
PROBLEM
date
discovered
resolved
1
15 Feb 02 (a)
polydipsia →2
25 Feb 02
2
25 Feb 02
diabetes mellitus
Fig. 5.7 Alternatives for seing up a problem list.
the problem can be given first. The letter (a) can be
The progress notes form a continuing report of the
placed after this date to indicate that it is from the
progress being made with diagnosis and therapy for the
anamnesis. The second date is that on which the
problems given in the problem list. The progress notes
veterinarian observed the problem. Finally, the date on
(Fig. 5.8) are written in a fixed format in which they are
which the problem is resolved is also given.
divided into three sections: observations*, assessment,
The term “resolved’ requires some explanation here
and pian.8 On the form for progress notes these three
because in this connection it has a slightly different
sections are indicated by the letters O, A, and P, placed in
meaning than in general use. In the POMR a problem
the margin after the date on which the notations are
is considered to be resolved when it has been worked
made and the number of the problem to which they refer.
out to a diagnosis. This can mean that the problem
The clarity of the record is generally increased if the
ceases to exist, but that is not necessary. It does mean
problem is also indicated by name and not only by num ber.
that a prognosis can be given and that the
most
The section ‘observations’ includes all information
 appropriate therapy can be started.
collected on the given date in connection with the given
The progression from a problem to a diagnosis is
problem. The section ‘assessment' gives the conclusions 
indicated in the problem list by a horizontal arrow. The
which the veterinarian has dra wn from these observations
problem is placed at the left of the arrow and the
with regard to the severity and presumptive cause (to the
diagnosis is eventually placed at the right. When nothing
extent that this has not yet been clarified) of the observed
has been written at the right of the arrow,
the
abnormalities.
At this stage hypotheses which could
implication is that the problem has not yet been resolved.
vations are also created (see § 3.2).
The problem list fills a double function in the record:
The section
nan
consists of three separate parts:
 It provides at a glance an overview of all of the
{Pa) the diagnostic plan
problems of the patient and the degree to which
(P,) the treatment plan
each diagnosis has been worked out.
(P;) the informing of the owner
It indicates via the problem numbers the places in
the record where information concerning the
The diagnostic plan indicates (1) what examinations(s)
problem is to be found.
will be made to test the hypotheses proposed under A,
and (2) when the examination(s) will be performed.
In order for the latter to be possible, results or findings
The therapeutic plan indicates the treatment that will
which are collected in the examination must
be
be started and how long it will last. The informing of
the owner consists of an explanation of the diagnostic
means that the findings for each problem can be
and therapeutic plans, including when the specified
summarized. For this purpose, all of the relevant 
 plans must be accomplished and why.
information added to the record is placed on a form
At the
first
texaminationthe
observations are
for progress notes.
recorded in the data base and the assessment consists 
* In the original design of Weed. a distinctian was made between subjective and objective observations. Subjective observations are made by the patient.
objective observations by the physician and nurses. In veterinary medicine one can only guess at what the patient experiences in its illness. so a
35
 comparable distinction is not applicable.
Chapter 5:
MEDICAL RECORDS
PROGRESS NOTES
date
no
26 Feb 02
2
(diabetes mellitus)
Drinks about 70 ml water/kg/day
Glucosuria, urine SG = 1.035
Blood glucose (15.30) = 11 mmol/l
A
Diabetes still inadequately regulated.
P
d Repeat blood glucose on 29 Feb 02
↑Increase insulin from 13 to 15 units. Send home.
Appointment made with owner for 29 Feb 02, printed
 instructions with treatment scheme provided.
Fig. 5.8 Example of the recording of progress notes.
in the first place of the summarization of abnormal
described previously can be of considerable use here. It
observations into one or a few problems, which are
is indispensable in the POMR because findings are
noted on the problem list. Theories about the cause of
always collected which are not clearly related to a
these problems
{differential
diagnosis) should
2
single problem (e.g., body weight).
written under a heading “assessment' on the progress
The therapeutic plans can be symptomatic or specific.
record. Arguments for and against can be added to
Informing of the owner can include a request for
each differential diagnosis.
permission to carry out a certain treatment.
The diagnostic plans consist of two kinds of program:
 Carrying out the above method fully results in a great
diagnostic programs and monitoring programs. The
deal of writing, part of which may be superfluous. A
 diagnostic programs are aimed at testing the differential
very extensive list of problems can occur, to each of
diagnoses. They follow diagnostic scenarios, insofar as
which the OAP procedure must be applied and written
these are available.
up (Fig. 5.9). It is therefore advisable in making the
 The monitoring programs allow abnormal values to
problem
1list to combine observations into clinical
 be followed and are mainly determined by the severity
syndromes as much as possible, so that there is little or
of the abnormalities. The form for progress notes
no overlap of the diagnostic programs.
PROBLEM LIST
no
date
PROBLEM
discovered
2 Dec 01 (a)
vomiting
5 Dec 01
1
6
2
4 Dec 01
poor turgor
4 Dec 01
10
4 Dec 01
3
4 Dec 01
 prolonged capillary refill time
10
4 Dec 01
 high hematocrit 
4 Dec 01
4
10
5 Dec 01
5
5 Dec 01
hyperproteinemia
5 Dec 01
5 Dec 01
6
hyponatremia
事
1
5 Dec 01
7
5 Dec 01
hypokalemia
1and8
5 Dec 01
8
5 Dec 01
metabolic acidosis
1 and 7
9
5 Dec 01
ileus
10
5 Dec 01
hypotonic dehydration
5 Dec 01
1, 6 and 9
Fig. 5.9 Example of a problem list.
36
The problem-oriented medical record system
Poor turgor, a prolonged CRT, an increased Ht, and
according to the above examples, can become
hyperproteinemia all indicate dehydration, so that the
extremely long, especially if the patient has many
progress notes on problems 2, 3, 4, and 5 will be
problems and a long life. The problem list will soon
almost identical. In addition, the pH and the potassium
become less useful in providing an overview. This can
level in the blood influence each other, so the progress 
be resolved by rewriting the list from time to time. For
notes on problems 7 and 8 will also partly overlap.
example, all problems in the existing problem list
Such duplications can be avoided by combining these
could, once they belong to the past, be condensed as in
observations (Figs 5.10 and 5.11).
Figure 5.12.
It can be seen that condensing a number of
If problem lists are to be revised occasionally, the
observations into a few problems becomes easier in
proportion to the growth of insight into the clinical
reference  to problem  numbers may cause mistakes
when the numbering changes. Therefore it is better to
situation. What information is relevant and what is
mention the problem each time (see Figure 5.9).
not is also not immediately clear. Some authors thus
advise setting the problem list aside in the first phase of
One of the disadvantages of the POMR is that it
the examination and filling it in only at a later stage.
limits the user's freedom to decide upon the nature and
extent of the notes. This is a consequence of the use of
The problem always remains in the record of the
 printed forms as well as being inherent in the method.
 patient and is reviewed at each succeeding examination
Mau jo uouippe aul Aq papuedxa st 11 Kiessaoau j! 'pue
Freedom
remains
 nevertheless
in
an
essential
component of the notes: the assessment.
problems. It is clear that a problem list, composed
PROBLEM LIST
no
date
PROBLEM
discovered
1
2 Dec 01 (a)
vomiting
5 Dec 01
ileus
2
5 Dec 01
hypotonic dehydration
5 Dec 01
1
3
5 Dec 01
hypokalemic metabolic acidosis
5 Dec 01
Fig. 5.10 Condensation of the problem list in Figure 5.9.
PROBLEM LIST
no
date
PROBLEM
discovered
1
5 Dec 01
ileus
(vomiting, hypotonic dehydration, hypokalemic alkalosis)
Fig. 5.11 Problem list in Figure 5.9 reduced to one problem.
PROBLEM LIST
no
date
PROBLEM
discovered
5 Dec 01
ileus
6 Dec 01
+ intestinal resection
2
5 Jul 02
wound on tail
"5ll aun ot pappe 5! wagoud mau e pue pazewwns 5! walgoud ismy aul abeis jaiel e ie ll's aunby u! asll wagoud aul zi's di
37
Chapter 5:
MEDICAL RECORDS
In small animal practice, teaching and research do not
record keeping is set up on a system other than the
often play a role and the value of a medical record is
POMR, the selective addition of some elements from the
mainly determined by its quality in the area of the
POMR is still worthwhile. As an example, the filling in
recording of  information
and the communication
of a problem list makes the reconstruction of the medical
between clinicians. Although the POMR is better in both
history easier for the veterinarian handling the patient
respects than the traditional record, the laboriousness of
as  well as for colleagues, and so professional
its use on a large scale is an obstacle. Yet even when
communication is improved.
References
1 Kwaliteitsrichtlijinen voor Dierenartsenpraktijken. Utrecht: Koninklijke
7 Hornof WJ. Brentson PR. Balance DW. Development of a complete
 Nederlandse Maatschappij voor Diergeneeskunde: 1996. (Quality
electronic medical record in an academic institution. J Am Vet Med 
guidelines for veterinary practices. Utrecht: Royal Netherlands 
Assoc 2001: 218:1171-1175.
Veterinary Association: 1996.]
8 van Sluijs FJ. De toepassing van het probleemgerichte medisch
2 Code of good veterinary practice. Brussels: Federation of
dossier in de diergeneeskunde. (The application of the problem-
Veterinarians in Europe: 2002.
oriented medical record in veterinary medicine.) Tijdschr
 3 Weed LL. Medical records. medical education. and patient care.
Diergeneesk 1983: 108:520-525.
Chicago: Yearbook Medical Publishers: 1971
9 Brown SH. Miller RA. Camp NH. et al. Empirical derivation of an
 4 van der Helm JJ. Specialist en assistent-geneeskundige:
electronic clinically useful problem statement system. Ann Intern 
 tuchtrechtelijke verdeling van verantwoordelijkheden. (Specialists
Med 1999: 131:117-126
 and assistant physicians: disciplinary division of responsibilities. Ned
10 Lauteschlager M. Brouwer HJ. Mohrs J. et al. The patient record as
Tijdschr Geneeskd 2001: 145:1416-1419.
a source to improve the medical record. Fam Pract 2002: 19:167-171.
 5 Ho LM. McGhee SM. Hedley Al. et al. The application of 
11 Osborne CA. The problem oriented medical system. Improved
 computerized problem-oriented medical record system and its
knowledge. wisdom and understanding of patient care. Vet Clin
impact on patient care. Int J Med Inf 1999: 55:47-59.
North Amm 1983: 13:745-790.
6 McCurdy HD. The paperless practice. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001:
218:1776-1777.
Supplements on the DVD
For most of the chapters of this book there is a form on the
waiting room or even at home if the referring
 DVD. The purpose of these forms is to aid in recording as
veterinarian provides the form. In the left column are
completely as possi ble the relevant medical findings in the
the
answers
which require the attention of the
history and physical examination. In general, the forms
veterinarian.
are divided as follows:
The forms of various specialties begin with an
a dditional history.
identification, name, address, etc.
history, including the iatrotropic problem
physical examination
formulation of the problem(s)
Physicot examination
Beside each component of the physical examination a
a uey asaui uaai ae supuy aissod po iaqunu
History
checked off on the form.
On the general history form the owner can answer a
 The following is an example from the form for the
number of questions in advance, for example in the
"General examination'.
Bespiratory movements
type
O costo-abdominalO costal
O abdominal
O pendulating
Fig. 5.13
Supplements on the DVD
In other cases, such as in the following example from
the form *Behavior', there is a place for the addition of a
not yet specified possibility or finding.
Anxiety
for sounds
O thunder
O fireworks
O trafficnoi
Fig. 5.14
On some forms, such as “Nervous system’ or
number as in the case of the reflexes: 0 = absent, 1 =
'Locomotor system', there are columns with boxes in
present, 2 = exaggerated, 3 = clonus.
which the findings can be filled in, for example with a
Postural reactions
knuckling-over
hopping test
Fig. 5.15
The column at the far right of the forms provides the
possibility for indicating 'no abnormalities". There is a
carried out but that no abnormalities were found. An
small circle which can be marked for each line or each
example is shown below from the form *Skin, hair and
group of related findings. Marking this circle indicates
nails'.
Coat
Opoorly covering
O dry_ O excessive loose hair O broken hair
C
O thin coat
O alopecia
Oexcreta of parasites Oectoparasites
Fig. 5.16
On a few forms certain findings can be sketched in on
a drawing provided for this purpose, an example of
which is shown here.
Fig. 5.17
39
06
The history
A. Rijnberk
gather information about the functioning of part or all
Chapter contents
of an organ system. Both the history and the physical
examination are used for this purpose, which
6.1 History 40
emphasizes how much they are interwoven, most
6.1.1 Introduction 40
certainly with regard to the individual organ system.
6.1.2 The approach to the client and the patient 40
6.1.3 The interview 41
6.1.2 The approach to the client
6.1.4 Program for the history 42
and the patient
6.2 Notation 43
In order to achieve our objective as well as possible, we
6.3 Procedure 43
must create the right conditions for a good interview.
Very often the first few minutes of the meeting between
the veterinarian and the client shape the nature of their
future contacts. First, greet the client quietly (not in a
hurry!) and with interest. At the first examination you
6.1 History
are making your first acquaintance with each other.
Although social habits are changing, it is desirable in
6.1.1 Introduction
these professional contacts to greet clients with Good
The medical history is obtained by an interview with the
morning,
“Good afternoon, Miss (or
owner or handler of the patient. The objective of the
Mrs.)...'and not to be on first-name terms. Children
interview is not only to obtain specific information
and adolescents can be addressed less formally by their
about the reason for the visit {the iatrotropic problem)
first names. When the pronunciation of the name poses
but also more general information about 
the
a problem, one should not hesitate to ask for the
functioning of the patient, about the conditions in
correct pronunciation.'(
Careful pronunciation and
which it lives, and about its past medical history.
spelling of the name {including the use of initials, if
There is usually close contact between a companion
 applicable) is highly appreciated by many people.
 animal and its owner, so the history can often provide
 Nonverbal communication plays an important role in
much information that is valuable in formulating the
initial contacts. To greet the client, stand up, take a few
problem. In the problem-oriented approach, questions
 as e  ia ro s u sas
often quickly proceed to a specific problem. However,
A handshake is a form of nonverbal communication
the information required for this purpose is not 
withareassuring
effect, especially when it is
discussed in this chapter but rather in later chapters
aui kem sun ui uoissaidxa Aiua e Aq paueduoe
on the organ systems. This is because of its connections 
veterinarian conveys the impression that the patient is
with the anatomy, pathophysiology, and techniques of
being received with fresh interest and energy.2
examination, which are taken up in those chapters.
The first contact should be maintained for a few
This may at first seem a slightly illogical way of
 minutes. Also at subsequent examinations the meeting
discussing the history, but it happens now and then
that something found by physical examination raises
interrupted by, for example, reading the patient's
new questions. Then it again becomes necessary to
record, which is something that should if at all possible
0
History
have taken place in advance. Good contact requires a
time there were severe skin problems. We began
quiet setting. The conversation should not be disturbed
treatment then. How has it gone since then?" The client
by noise, by others walking in and out, or by a
 must have the opportunity to answer the first question
repeatedly ringing telephone. The client should not
without interruption, for he or she may have gone
have the impression that your time and attention are
through quite an experience and may need to let that
under press ure.
out. One client will want to explain in detail, another
By offering the client a chair and also sitting down
may not. It can be useful to repeat an important remark
yourself, you create the opening for a good interview.
which the client has made and to follow by asking for
You and the client then face each other at eye level
more details. For example:
and in general you should look at the client while he
Client: ^...especially painful when she tries to stand
or she is speaking. However, the subject of your
up."
conversation may sometimes be such a burden for the
Veterinarian: *When she stands up? Just how does she
client that eye contact should be avoided. Also, while
do that?"
you are talking, continuous eye contact can be
By repeating part of what the client has said, you
worrying for the client.
al ie pe Pies uaaq s iem ui isn no mou
There are two styles of carrying on a consultation: (1)
same time can give direction to the interview. When
the directing style, in which the veterinarian leads the
the client has come to the end of the first part of the
conversation, and (2) the sharing style, in which the
story, you should sum this up in a few words and ask
client largely determines the course of the conversation.
  s e m s  ae 
In general practice in human medicine, the handling of
should explain to the client how the examination is
small problems was found to be more satisfying to the
going to proceed (completion of the history, physical
patient when the physician used a directive approach,
examination, and possible additional examinations).
while in long consultations there was no difference in
The interview then continues according to the plan
patient satisfaction between the two styles.3
As
described below. In completing this plan the client is
discussed in § 6.1.3, one needs to find a balance
given somewhat less free rein than in the discussion of
between the two styles of consultation.
the iatrotropic problem. The following guidelines are
It is not necessary to immediately seek contact with
followed:
the patient. It is better to let the animal become a little
 1  Ask questions that are open-ended as well as
more familiar with the surroundings. This gives you
 questions that can only be answered with yes or no
the opportunity to evaluate your general impression of
(closed questions). Since the reply to an open
the patient (Chapter 7). It is certainly appropriate to
question has something of story-telling in it, it
    u    a 
reveals useful information about the relation
positive remark about the patient's appearance or
between the client and the animal, in addition to
behavior. Interest may also be shown by a question
factual information about the animal. Sometimes
like: “Did the cat appear comfortable in the waiting
we discover that the client describes everything in
room?’ In many cases the patient makes some
the worst terms (aggravation), which may reflect a
exploratory approach to the veterinarian while the
wish to make a decision about euthanasia.
Another client may minimize or deny problems
make contact with the patient, verbally and manually.
{dissimulation), because of anxiety about the
ans o aau aul io uuu e yo Aissod
It is often helpful to begin with open questions and
6.1.3 The interview
then to gradually change over to closed questions.
For example:
"How are things going for him at home?*
the problem?" or "What can I do for you?". We do not
"How many animals have you at home??
ask “What is the complaint?", because animals cannot
"Is there a cat at home?*
make complaints (§ 3.1.1). The client needs to have a
If only closed questions are asked, important
chance to tell the story without interruption. Contrary
information may remain unspoken.
to what might be assumed, these first statements do
 aaeq auipaw uewnq ul saipnis suol isel Aensn iou
2 Avoid asking different questions at the time, such as:
shown that 70% of patients take less than two minutes
*Do you want a litter from the dog or are you
to describe the problem and 9s% take less than 5
considering spa ying?
minutes.4
 Such questions can suggest that there are no
If this is a follow-up examination for which an
other possibilities. In addition, they make it
appointment was given, its continuity with the previous
difficult for the client to adequately express his
examination should be shown. For example: *The last
or her meaning or intentions.
Chapter 6:
THE HISTORY
 3 Do not bombard' the client with questions, such as:
3 Living conditions
"What have you observed about the dog's
- animal husbandry aspects
eating, drinking, and defecation?
exposure to harmful agents/materials
4 Past history
4 Avoid questions with an accusatory character,
- illnesses, medications, vaccinations
such as:
- family history.
'Are you certain that the dog has really received
the medicine?
Point 1. As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter,
the first question should be "What is the problem?" or
5  Try to bring an over-talkative client back to the
"What is the reason for coming? Once the problem has
 point with an interruption, such as:
been described, questions are asked about its duration
*Pardon me, Mr...., I understand that you have
and progres, whether treatment has been given, and
had a lot of trouble trying to prevent Astrid from
what the present situation is. At the same time, it is
vomiting, but I would now like to hear a little
important to know what the client has observed
more about how the vomiting occurs', or “Since I
personally and what has only been observed by others
have not seen your cat before the illness, you could
( family members or neighbors).
help me a great deal by describing what is now
different from before.
Point 2. The maintenance of homeostasis includes food
The difficulty here is of course that a choice
intake, drinking, respiration, urination, and defecation.
must be made between the advantage of shortening
Hence questions must be asked about:
excessive information and the possible disadvantage
 food and water intake, problems in swallowing,
that certain useful information will be missed.
vomiting
 shortness of breath, panting, abnormal respiratory
 6 In case of an external interruption (e.g., the
sounds, coughing
 telephone) always try to remember two rules:
 changes in urination or in the urine
apologize for this interruption
 changes in defecation or in the feces
do not forget what you were discussing when
you were interrupted, so that you can
In the interaction with people and other animals, the
immediately continue. For example:
following could play a role or come to attention: activity,
"You had just told me that you first found the
locomotion, reproductive function (and consequences),
swelling in the mammary gland 4 weeks ago.'
response to visual and auditory stimuli, appearance, and
behavior. Thus questions must be asked about:
7 Avoid categorical answers about the cause of the
changes in the amount of sleeping, interests,
problem. At this stage of the history it is often
reactions to stimuli
uosanb e 0t 1amsue ou 1o sak e aaig ot alqissodu!
how the animal walks: easy, painful, lame, strong,
such as 'Doctor, do you think that it is cancer?"
well-coordinated
Such a question clearly reveals concern and
female animal:
sometimes this can be handled with a question in
regular estrus/estrus prevention
return, such as:
time and character of last estrus
"Why do you think that it could be cancer?
pregnancies
This kind of question in reply acknowledges the
 male animal:
client's concern. When the client has replied, you
interest in females
can explain why it is not possible at this stage to
castration
give an answer.
vision and hearing
Several of the above suggestions come (
downto
changes in appearance: body proportions, coat,
elementary politeness or courtesy. They may be regarded
various parts of the body such as head, feet, ears,
as excessive but are meant to emphasize the importance
eyes
of maintaining a feeling of discussion in the interview
 changes in habits, unusual actions (fainting,
and not letting it turn into an interrogation.
convulsions, scratching)
Point 3. Questions about living conditions concern how
the animal is kept by the client (how long and for what
6.1.4 Program for the history
purpose) and how the animal is housed (in the home,
kennel, outdoors). Questions are also asked to
1  The iatrotropic problem or problems.
determine the type and amount of exercise, the amount
2 General information about the animal:
of contact with other animals, and whether the animal
maintenance of homeostasis
u  oi  o     a 5
interactions with people and animals
endemic here).
42
Procedure
Questions about the animal's food are mainly
      s  
concerned with the composition of the food. It should
The completeness of the history is of the greatest
be made clear how much use is made of industrially-
importance  because, among other reasons,
an
prepared food and what is given in addition,
important question can arise during analysis of the
particularly vitamin and calcium preparations. If an
findings or during treatment based on the findings,
industrially-prepared food is not used, the nature and
when the client is no longer available.
amounts of the ingredients of the menu should be
This problem can largely be avoided by the use of
defined.
printed forms that can be filled in by the client while
The possibility of intoxication can be examined by
waiting before the examination. By use of the form
asking about the use of toxic materials in the animal's
shown on the DVD, it is possible to quickly sift
surroundings (e.g., against parasites or rodents). Can the
aaq s ieun w aui ie au y isu an yno
animal go outside without observation or supervision?
filled in by the client will clearly indicate which points
Point 4. One asks whether the animal has had any
need to be examined by additional questions. With this
form time is saved and a great degree of completeness
 previous illness and whether this has led to veterinary
treatment. If so, the date of the illness and the name of
is achieved.
the veterinarian should also be obtained. It should then
On the form entitled History 1, Point 2 is worked out in
be determined whether the animal has had any previous
detail. These questions about the functioning of the
surgery. The relevant information about vaccination
animal
l provide a picture of the situation at the
can be summarized by asking whether a dog has been
moment. The questions arising from Points 3 and 4 are
vaccinated in the preceding 12　months
sagainst
combined on the History 2 form. It is sometimes
 distemper, infectious hepatitis, leptospirosis, and parvo-
necessary in a later stage of the examination to return
enteritis, and whether a cat has been vaccinated against
to these more fixed aspects of the animal's history. At a
feline viral enteritis/panleukopenia and feline infectious
follow-up examination, the History 1 form (Point 2) is
respiratory disease. Any current or recent medications
sufficient, together with the question of whether there
should be noted, with the dose and frequency if possible.
have been any changes under Points 3 and 4.
 Sometimes the color and form of a tablet or markings on
a capsule allow a medication to be identified. Treatment
for prevention of estrus should also be noted, as well as
6.3Procedure
the administration of such home remedies as aspirin.
When the forms are used, the history proceeds as
For the family history, the client is asked whether
follows. After the greeting in the examination room,
anything is known about illnesses in littermates or
 the iatrotropic problem is discussed with the client as
other close relatives of the patient. Finally, the client is
asked for any relevant information about the health or
described above. The information about the iatrotropic
problem is recorded by the veterinarian on History
illness of offspring of the patient, or other animals or
form 3. Then the veterinarian reviews the forms that
people in regular contact with the patient.
Au sse ue iamo an kq u P uaaq aau
6.2 Notation
additional questions that are needed about items that
have been checked in the first or third columns. This
While the above questions are being discussed with the
additional information is also noted on the History
client, notes must be made. A history that is not
form 3.
References
 1 Bickley LS. Szilagyi PG. Bates guide to physical examination and
 3 Savage S. Armstrong D. Effect of a general practitioner's consulting
history taking. 8th edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:
stye on patient's satisfaction: a controlled study. Br Med J 1990:
2003:21-57
301:968-970.
2 Wagener DJTh. Het vraaggesprek met de patient met kanker
4 Blau JN. Time to let the patient speak. Br Med J 1989: 298:39.
(Discussion with the patient with cancer). Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd
1995: 139:85-89.
43
07
General impression
A. Rijnberk
interest in the surroundings. Depending on the severity
Chapter contents
and the nature of the illness, this may be replaced by
sopor (sleepiness), stupor (only aroused by strong
7.1 0bjective 44
stimuli), or coma (cannot be aroused).
7.2 The meaning of 'general impression' 44
7.2.1 Level of consciousness 44
7.2.2 Behavior
7.2.2 Behavior 44
Most of our patients are calm and cooperative, but
7.2.3 Posture 44
sometimes in the examination room an animal is
7.2.4 Locomotion 44
nervous and tense, and occasionally there is
7.25 Body shape 45
pronounced anxiety and restlessness. In rare cases this
7.2.6 Nutritional condition 45
leads to defiance in the form of biting or scratching.
7.27 Coat 45
Restraint may be required (§ 24.2).
7.2.8 Abnormal sounds 45
7.2.9 Abnormalities that stand out 45
pathologic behavior can occur in such forms as self-
mutilation, compulsive actions (head-pressing, walking
7.3 Technique 45
in a circle), convulsions, or aggression.
7.4 Notation 46
7.2.3 Posture
Sometimes malaise is so great that the patient can no
7.1 0bjective
longer stand but must be carried into the room. In very
severe conditions it remains lying on its side and in less
severe conditions it lies on its sternum. Because of
listening to the patient from a slight distance. The
problems in the rear limbs the animal may only adopt
objective is to collect in a reasonably short time
a sitting position. When an animal is standing, it may
information that—in combination with the history-
allows one to decide how to proceed, that is, to decide
not be adequately extended or may be overextended.
whether the problem is defined sufficiently for specific
The position of the spinal column can be abnormal
examinations to be undertaken (Fig. 2.1).
(arched or sagging back or stiffly extended neck).
7.2 The meaning of ^general impression'
7.2.4 Locomotion
The general impression includes a number of readily
observed signs of general illness.
An abnormal posture is often accompanied by abnormal
locomotion. Usually the defects in posture become more
7.2.1 Level of consciousness
obvious when the animal begins to move. Some animals
assume a normal posture at rest but when they move
A healthy animal in the examination room of the
there is an abnormal use of one or more extremities as
veterinarian is alert and usually shows an obvious
 a result of lack of strength, disturbed coordination, or
Technique
mechanical limitation with or without pain. For the
7.2.8 Abnormal sounds
present we are interested in an overall impression of
At the usual distances in the examination room, no
locomotion. In the examination of the locomotor
system (Chapter 17), locomotion is examined in more
sounds are heard from an animal at rest. The loud
detail.
respiratory sounds in some of the brachycephalic
breeds reflect deficiencies of these breeds. Eructation
 and flatulence do not occur often in healthy carnivores,
7.2.5 Body shape
and flatulence is more often detected by odor than by
sound. Under pathologic conditions respiratory or
Because of the great variations in body shape among
different breeds, especially in the dog, evaluation of
intestinal sounds may be so loud that they are heard at
body shape must always take the breed into account.
some distance from the animal. Disorders of the joints
This causes some special problems in crossings of two
can cause snapping sounds during walking.
breeds of markedly different body shape. The crossing
of a fox terrier with an achondroplastic breed such as
7.2.9 Abnormalities that stand out
a dachshund produces an animal that resembles a fox
These include such things as a thickened pinna, swelling
terrier but has disproportionately short legs. Other
parts of the body can also be out of proportion.
 of one of the legs, or pumping respiration.
Sometimes the abdomen seems too large or the head
too massive. An alteration in the relation between
7.3 Technique
muscles and skeleton can also occur.
 Body weight is usually measured before the examination
begins, at the instruction of the receptionist.
7.2.6 Nutritional condition
As was explained in the previous chapter, the general
The nutritional condition can range from obesity to
impression can be recorded in the course of the
extreme emaciation (cachexia). Most of the patients
interview, for the patient is often busy investigating the
we see fall between these extremes. To evaluate the
room, and this gives a 
 good  opportunity  for
course of some illnesses or kinds of therapy, it is also
observation of consciousness, behavior, posture, and
desirable
tomeasurebody
weight
accurately.
locomotion. Sometimes the length of the coat prevents
Fat accumulates chiefly on the trunk and sometimes
a good visual evaluation of the nutritional condition
there is an extra accumulation bilaterally in the lumbar
and it is necessary to palpate along the spine. This is
area. After marked loss of weight the ribs and
usually easiest as an extension of the first contact in
the vertebral processes can become clearly visible. The
 greeting the patient.
eyes can be sunken because of the loss of retrobulbar
 The observations for the general impression must not
fat and as a result the nictitating membrane can
 disturb the progress of the interview and if necessary
protrude.
should be delayed until after the interview. If the
The animal's nutritional condition can be described
animal is brought in a box or carrier, it is best to ask
on a scale midway between a nominal and an ordinal
the owner not to remove the animal until after the
scale (see § 3.1.2): cachectic, skinny, slim, optimal,
interview. The locomotion of some cats cannot be
overweight, and obese.' Overweight and obesity are 
adequately assessed because, once they are removed
associated with health risks. Compared with cats
 from the carrier, they remain where they are placed on
of optimal weight, overweight cats are 2.9 times
the table and refuse to move.
 a n    a 
of
If the general impression is delayed until after the
        s
history has been taken, it will form the first step in the
develop diabetes mellitus than are cats of optimal
examination. The examination is in principle always
weight.
 performed on a table. Small mammals and birds are
us ually
placedonthe
table
byt
theowner
7.2.7 Coat
spontaneously. Also medium-sized dogs are usually
placed on the table so that they can be observed at eye
We are concerned here with the coat as a whole. It can
level. Very large dogs such as the Great Dane and St.
become dull and dry when the animal's general
 Bernard are difficult to place on a table and difficult to
 a    od s 
persuade to stand up on a table, so are better
hair loss, a change in the color of the coat, and finally
examined standing on the floor.
to localized or generalized alopecia with pigmentation
If the general examination is followed by
of the skin.
        
45
Chapter 7:
GENERAL IMPRESSION
be necessary to place even very large dogs on the table,
this form a nominal scale is provided for each
lying on the side or sternum.
component of the general impression and space is
7.4 Notation
provided for remarks. The form also contains a section
in which the problems can be recorded and on the
 The findings of the general impression are noted on a
basis of which a decision is made about the nature of
form, an example of which is given on the DVD. On
further examination.
Reference
 1 Scarlett JM. Donoghue S. Associations between body condition and
disease in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998: 212:1725-1731.
08
General examination
A Rijnberk and A.A. Stokhof
Chapter contents
Exominotion of the mucous membrones 56
Color 56
8.1 0bjective 47
Copilory refilltime 56
Moisture 56
8.2 Handling of the patient 48
Hemorrhages 56
8.3 The concept of 'general examination' 48
8.3.1 Respiratory movements 48
Lesions 57
Technique 57
Introduction 48
Depth 49
8.3.6 Lymph nodes 57
Introduction 57
Type 49
Rhythm 50
Locolizotion ond droinoge oreos 58
Examination 60
Frequency 50
Technique 50
Size 60
8.3.2 Pulse 50
Shope 60
Consistency 60
Introduction 50
Uniformity 51
Painfuiness 60
Amplitude 52
Adhesions 60
Technique 60
Form 52
8.3.7 Other notable findings 62
Rhythm 52
Missing pulses 52
8.4 Notation 62
Frequency 52
Symmetry 53
Technique 53
8.3.3 Body temperature 53
Introduction 53
8.1 0bjective
Technique 54
Reference votues 54
The general examination is a visual and manual
examination to collect, in a reasonably short time,
8.3.4 Coat and skin 54
information that—in combination with the signalment,
Introduction 54
history, and general impression—can guide the problem
Coot 54
formulation and give direction to further examination.
Exomination of the coot 55
The symptoms and signs that are recorded will be
The skin 55
translated into problems and on the basis of these
Exominotion of the skin 55
the subsequent examination can be directed to the
8.3.5 Mucous membranes 56
os wsas usho ue jo hd io wshs uo anedode
Introduction 56
that the problems can be better defined and, hopefully,
resolved.
47
Chapter 8:
GENERAL EXAMINATION
8.2 Handling of the patient
experienced assistant (see Chapter 24). Inadequate
restraint, such as by the owner, is very undesirable, for
While the physical examination is being performed, the
it can lead to suddenly increasing resistance by the cat,
 animal should be as free as possible from restlessness,
tension, inconvenience, and pain, not only for humane
to the cat itself.
reasons but also because restlessness and tension can
greatly hinder the examination. As already noted in
8.3 The concept of 'general examination'
Chapters 6 and 7, the patient should first be allowed
to become acquainted with the unfamiliar surroundings
The general examination includes examination of:
of the examination room to help it to relax. A dog that
1respiratory movements
stands pulling on its leash can be showing that it wants
2 pulse
explore the room and should be given the
3 body temperature
to
opportunity to do so. Observation of this spontaneous
4 coat and skin
action can reveal useful information (Chapter 6) and
 5 mucous membranes
sometimes also provide just the right starting point for
 6  peripheral lymph nodes
a relaxed discussion with the client.
 7 other nota ble abnormalities
A cat should usually be left in its box or carrier while
By proceeding in this order, we avoid disturbing the
the history is being taken. When the examination is
respiratory movements and pulse by other parts of the
started, the client should be asked to take the animal
out of the box or carrier. This is not always necessary,
examination.
for sometimes if the door of the carrier is opened the
8.3.1 Respiratory movements
cat comes out of its own curiosity. Once the cat appears
in the doorway of the carrier, the other end can be tilted
Introduction
up carefully so that the cat spontaneously steps onto
The respiratory movements are of great importance for
the table. The carrier should then be removed from
two homeostatic functions:
the table,for otherwise if the cat finds the examination
 Respiration. By this we mean the sum of all chemical
unpleasant it may escape to the safety of the carrier and
will not so easily let itself be taken out again.
and physical processes that maintain and regulate
oxidative metabolism in the cells. In this sequence of
Large dogs are most easily examined if allowed to
events (ventilation, diffusion, transport, and tissue
remain standing on the floor. Sometimes it is necessary
respiration), the respiratory movements bring about
to place them on the table for orthopedic examination
ventilation of the lungs. The movements are regulated
of the extremities (Chapter 17). Small dogs can usually
by respiratory centers which receive impulses from
s du ! inq xaumo aui Aq aei au uodn pad a
peripheral
and central chemoreceptors 
and from
required to lift the animal onto the table, the owner
 mechanoreceptors in the lungs and thoracic wall.
should be the one by the animal's head. The owner is
Thermoregulation'. When their body temperature
then asked to remain standing by the table to hold the
rises, dogs and cats increase the loss of heat by
animal during the examination. This usually reassures
increasing the frequency of respiratory movements. By
the animal and has a calming effect.
meansof
this superficial respiratory movement
Some owners encourage the dog to jump onto the
(panting, thermal polypnea), the inspired air in the
au uam ai aun woy dul ot 1o asi Aq ai
upper airways is 100% saturated with moisture. The
0n ae ae sop auos ynoua pausuy s uouexa
heat for vaporization is drawn from the mucous
do so without any problem, this should always be
membranes of the nose, mouth, and throat. Although
discouraged because the risk of an injury, however small,
this has also been called ventilation of the dead space, it
is quite unnecessary.
still results in a slight respiratory alkalosis, from which
If cats are approached in a relaxed way and are held
we can conclude that the alveolar ventilation is also
loosely, they often allow considerable manipulation
slightly increased.
without difficulty. Most cats can also be distracted from
The respiratory movements are also under the
unpleasant aspects of the examination by continuous
influence of behavior. Fright can lead to sudden apnea,
au puuaq suus pue suqnu snooia kuey pue
 and tension can be associated with nervous panting. In
ears. This only succeeds, however, if the owner or
something as complex as barking, the respiratory
assistant does it with full attention to its purpose of
muscles come into action with great precision, so that
distracting the cat. It is unusual that the physical
a sound of the desired volume and tone is produced.
examination cannot be performed with this approach.
If, with gentle persistence, the intended examination
The object of the examination of respiratory movements 
cannot be performed at all or not with the necessary
is to obtain an impression of the functioning of
thoroughness, t
the cat must be restrained by an
respiration. Disturbances in one or more of the
48
The concept of 'general examination'
processes of respiration can be reflected in abnormal
with a sound (nasal stridor). In dogs with severe
respiratory
movements.
Unfortunately,
this
dyspnea the cheeks may puff out and some dyspneic
cats breathe with the mouth open.
movements arising from behavior (sniffing, barking)
ort
thermoregulation (panting). The observation(
of
Type
respiratory movements consists of evaluating their
 Inspiration occurs partly because the respiratory muscles
depth, type, rhythm, and frequency.
(chiefly the internal and external intercostal muscles)
pull the ribs forward, laterally, and ventrally (costal
Depth
respiration). The lateral and dorsoventral dimensions of
the thorax thereby become greater, so that the volume
When the need for gas exchange increases, ventilation is
increases. Inspiration is also the result of contraction of
first increased by deeper respiratory movements. Even
the diaphragm. The diaphragm becomes flattened and as
under resting conditions deeper breaths are also
sometimes seen, in the form of a sigh. This single deep
a result the volume of the thorax also increases and
the circumference of the abdomen becomes greater.
respiratory movement prevents collapse or atelectasis
This has been given the incorrect name of ‘abdominal
by release of sufactants.
respiration. In the dog and the cat both the respiratory
If the respiratory movements are deepened to the
 muscles and the diaphragm play an important part in the
extent  that they give t
the impression of forced
respiratory movements and this combined action is
movements, or if the movements are clearly difficult,
called costoa bdominal respiration (Fig. 8.1).
then we speak of dyspnea. If the difficulty arises chiefly
during exercise, we speak of dyspnea of exertion.
When the function of the diaphragm is lost (e.g, l
by
During dyspnea, auxiliary respiratory muscles come
rupture), inspiration is no longer accompanied by
into function in addition to the usual respiratory
bulging
of
the abdomen. On the contrary, the
muscles. The most important of these are the scalenus
abdominal
circumference
now usually
decreases
and the sternocephalicus muscles and the muscles of
during inspiration, resulting in a so-called pendulous
the nasal alae (wings of the nose). The first two pull
respiration.2(
Occasionally in severe dyspnea there is
the ribs and sternum forward and thereby assist the
marked costal respiration and so little air is drawn in
normal respiratory muscles. The respiratory action of
that the diaphragm does not stretch fat enough and
the nasal alae consists of small inspiratory widening of
thereby a pendulous respiration also occurs. Such
the nasal opening. In some brachycephalic breeds the
forced inspirations can also be called pseudopendulous.
nasal alae cannot move; in these animals the nasal
When there is loss of elasticity of the lungs, there may
paudskp si aiaui ieul moeu os aq uaaa Aew aessed
be slight abdominal pressure exerted on the diaphragm
- Inspiration
Expiration
also shown.
49
Chapter 8:
GENERAL EXAMINATION
at the end of expiration. This is called an abdominal
Frequency
type of respiration. During forced expiration the
The following frequencies apply to healthy adult animals:
       
dog 10-30/min
bronchi are narrowed, which only adds to the
cat
 20-40/min
respiratory distress.
The variation is especially wide in the dog. In this
Although inspiration is active, resulting 
from
 species there is considerable variation in body size and
contraction of muscles, expiration is passive. The
therefore in the frequency of respiratory movements;
thoracic wall, diaphragm, and lungs return to a resting
the frequency is generally lower in the larger breeds
state at the end of inspiration. Loss of elasticity of the
than in the smaller ones.
lungs and loss of flexibility of the thorax result in
slow and incomplete expiration. This is sometimes
An increase in the frequency (tacbypnea) is a less
assisted by the abdominal pressure mentioned above,
efficient way of increasing ventilation than increasing
by which the diaphragm is displaced forward.
In
the depth of respiration, because in the former the
such an expiratory dyspnea the relation between the
percent dead space remains unaltered. In general there
duration of inspiration and expiration is also changed
is first a deepening of respiration and then only in
(normally 1:1.3).*
severe disorders is the frequency also increased. In
Narrowing in the respiratory passages cranial to the
well-trained animals at rest there can be a very low
thoracic inlet is associated with inspiratory dyspnea.
respiratory frequency (bradypnea).
This is manifested by a marked costal type of
respiration and
auxiliary
Technique
often
by
respiratory
movements as well, sometimes including retraction of
 Small and medium-sized animals are given a little time to
the lips {labial respiration). The air must be sucked in
become familiar with the table surface on which they are
 e    e  
placed and larger patients, which remain on the floor,
difference in pressure between the inside and outside of
will also have become familiar with their surroundings.
the large respiratory passages. The walls can be drawn
This state of relative rest can be used for observation of
 s rm   pm 
the respiratory movements from a slight distance and
narrowing worse. Also, parts of the thoracic wall that
without touching the patient.
offer less resistance will be drawn inward, especially in
 By observing the animal from the side and from above
the thoracic inlet. The caudal ribs can also lag slightly
it is possible to see quite well both the thoracic and the
behind during the strong outward movement of the
 abdominal respiratory displacements. During inspiration
thorax and this can be quite noticeable in young
notice is taken of the lateral movement of the thorax and
animals with a soft thoracic wall.
the bulging of the abdomen. During expiration notice is
 Patients that have undergone severe trauma, such as
taken of the falling in of the ribs and the decrease in
being struck by a car, can exhibit a special type of
abdominal circumference. When an animal is standing
breathing as a result of two adjacent ribs being
on the examination table, the ventral excursions can be
  sh s ss oi isl re u i
observed by viewing from a lower position (e.g., by the
so-called flail chest (see § 23.2.3), in which the
examiner sitting at the desk).
movement of the fractured segment is opposite to that
 In addition, attention is given to:
of the rest of the thoracic wall, i.e., it moves inward
the duration of inspiration and expiration
with inspiration and outward with expiration.
 the regularity of respiratory movements
the depth of respiratory movements
the type of respiration
Rhythm
abdominal pressure at the end of expiration
Sometimes the respiratory movements alternate for
use of auxiliary respiratory muscles
shorter or longer periods with apnea. This is called
Finally, the number of respirations per minute is
periodic respiration and it is only seen in patients with
low arterial PCO2 caused by hyperventilation.
determined by counting the inspirations during at least
The slight decrease in arterial PO2 and the increase in
half a minute.
PCO2 during the apnea stimulate the respiratory center,
 so that respiration is resumed, which leads again to
8.3.2 Pulse
reduction in PCO2, etc.
Hyperventilation
sedation,
Introduction
can
occur
during
depending on the drugs used. This leads to periodic
The term ^pulse’ is taken from the Latin pulsis, meaning
respiration in which the periods of apnea alternate
stroke.
with
periods
of
repeatedly
identical
 respiratory
 In a healthy animal each heartbeat delivers a quantity
movements {isovolemic periodic respiration).
of blood to the arterial system. This gives rise to the
50
+ These are approxinate values, in which respiratory pauses are nat taken into consideration
The concept of 'general examination'
pulse wave. The speed with which the wave is
Uniformity
transmitted is dependent on the elasticity of the arterial
If the amplitude of each pulsation is the same as the
walls and is independent of the rate of flow of
next, we speak of an equal puise. In arrhythmias the
the blood. The rate of flow of the blood is about
volume per stroke can vary markedly and consequently
0.5 m/s while the pulse wave advances at 4 or 5 m/s.
an unequal puise is found (Fig. 8.3). During arrhythmia
The palpable pulsation is the front of a pressure wave
the heart contracts at moments when there is little
and not the movement of the blood itself.
filling of the ventricles. Hence little blood is ejected
The form of the pulse wave is chiefly determined
and only a very weak pulse or no pulse is palpated
o aun ouy padund poo yo aunoa an Aq
 peripherally.
per heartbeat, the speed of this ejection, and the
compliance of the arteries. As the wave advances to
A pulse of this type should not be confused with a
the periphery, it changes in form (Fig. 8.2).
sometimes also physiologically occurring variation in
the amplitude of the pulse. This is the so-called
The purpose of palpating a peripheral artery is to obtain
paradoxical pulse, in which the amplitude decreases
 an impression of the arterial pressure wave and thereby
during inspiration and increases during expiration. This
the function of the arterial component of the systemic
phenomenon is observed only with great variations in
(in contrast to pulmonary) circulation. In dogs and cats
the intrathoracic pressure, such as occur during deep
the femoral artery is used for this purpose. Other
respirations. This variation in systolic blood pressure
arteries (coccygeal, abdominal aorta, anterior tibial)
 during breathing is caused by the negative intrathoracic
are sometimes accessible to palpation, but the various
 pressure during inspiration. This allows more blood to
characteristics of the pulse are not as easily evaluated
Hal aui sauoeau sal snui pue sjassaa suni aut ui ialo
by use of these arteries.
heart, so the stroke volume decreases (Fig. 8.4). These
The examination of the pulse wave consists of
small variations in pulse amplitude are rarely detected
evaluating the following characteristics: uniformity,
by the palpating fingers. The small amplitude of the
rhythm, amplitude, missing pulses, form, frequency,
fluctuations is also a consequence of the fact that
and symmetry.
a
20
20
re
15
X
0.5
[[s]
0.5
T(s)
Fig. 8.3 (From top) the time in seconds. 1 mV reference pulse followed
by ECG lead ll. and pressure variation in the descending aorta. in a
dog with atrial fibrillation. This is an example of an irregular and
unequal pulse
20
10
Fig. 8.2 The blood ejected during systole causes a sudden rise
in pressure in the ascending aorta. The closure of the aortic valve
Expiration
results in an incisure in the pressure curve. The pressure is
transported along the aorta to the periphery and is then reflected. The
Inspiration
reflected pressure wave is superimposed on the wave moving toward
the periphery. This causes an increase in systolic pressure.
Fig. 8.4 Blood pressure recording. showing that the intra-arterial
disappearance of the incisure. and a lower diastolic pressure in the
I5 aul uogeidsui bunp ueu uoneidxa buunp aubiu s! aunssaud
femoral artery. The difference between the peak systolic pressure and 
unit of pressure is the pascal (IN/m? = Pa). (1 mm Hg = 133 Pa =
the end-diastolic pressure is the pulse pressure.
0.133 kPa).
Chapter 8:
GENERAL EXAMINATION
20
puisus magnus and a weak pulse is a puisus parvus or
even a puisus filiformus (thready pulse).
Form
Small changes in the configuration of the pulse wave
are not recognized by the palpating fingers. Only
when there are marked changes in the outflow from the
left ventricle (stenosis or insufficiency of the aortic valve)
is the pulse wave so changed in form that the difference
10
is noted in palpation. When the outflow is slowed by
Insufficiency leads to a narrow pulse (puisus celer).
Time (s)
Rhythm
Fig. 8.5 Aternating pulse. Blood pressure recording showing an
alternating decrease in the systolic pressure and to a lesser degree
In the dog the heart action exhibits sinus arrhythmia
in the dia stolic pressure.
under the infuence
ofrespiration{respiratory
arrhythmia). During inspiration the vagal tonus is
the negative intrathoracic pressure during inspiration {=
reduced, leading to increased frequency of discharge in
negative pressure in the central venous system) also
the sinus node, while during expiration the opposite
increases the blood flow to the right heart. This partly
occurs. In animals with a low respiratory rate as well
compensates for the reduced filling of the left ventricle
as a low heart frequency, the respiratory arrhythmia
 and limits the decrease in arterial blood pressure.
can be quite pronounced, even misleading the less
experienced to think it is a pathologic rhythm. This
A different situation arises when filling of the heart is
 misunderstanding occurs chiefly because in adult dogs 
continuously low. A well-known example of this is
 during expiration, the slowing of the heart action in
pericardial effusion, which compromises cardiac filling.4
the respiratory pauses can be quite abrupt.6 Careful
The above-mentioned compensation mechanism is less
observation of  the respiratory  movements during
effective and the decrease in systolic blood pressure
palpation of the pulse usually resolves the question.
during inspiration is much greater. The respiratory
Respiratory arrhythmia cannot usually be detected with
variation in pulse amplitude may become palpable. In
pulse frequencies higher than 120/min. It is also usually
humans the predictive value (see § 3.1.5) of a pulsus
a bsent during panting.
paradoxus for the presence of pericardial overfilling
(cardiac tamponade) is 0.81-0.97.5
A special form of the unequal pulse is the alterrating
Missing putses
 puise, in which there are alternating clearly palpable and
Very little blood is ejected during heart contractions
barely palpa ble pulse waves (Fig. 8.5). This is interpreted
which occur very soon after the previous contraction,
 as an indication of insufficiency of the left ventricle and
for the time for diastolic filling is very short. This occurs 
is seen, for example, in hypovolemia, but there is not a
in arrhythmias and may result in so-called frustrated
good explanation for it. What is known is that in
contractions, in which no pulse wave is generated. This
these cases the end-diastolic pressure varies with the
can be confirmed by simultaneously palpating a
same regularity as the height of the pulse wave.
peripheral artery and the ictus in the left Sth intercostal
space. At frequencies >100/min this method is not very
Amplitude
reliable for determining whether each contraction leads
After the pulse is found to be regular, the size of the
to a pulse wave. In such cases the pulse frequency is first
Aq paunoo st Auanbay ueay aui uaui pue paunoo
pulse wave (amplitude or pulse volume) is determined.
auscultation. If the latter is higher than the pulse, there
It is difficult to say anything about amplitude when the
pulse is unequal. The amplitude of the pulse wave can
 are missing pulses (pulse deficit).
increase or decrease with changes in the stroke volume
or peripheral resistance. A low peripheral resistance
Frequency
and therefore a strong pulsation of the palpated artery
The following values are for adult animals:
Occurs with anxiety, fever, and lowered viscosity of the
dog 60-120/min
blood due to anemia. One must also remember that
cat 120-180/min
what is palpated with the fingers is also determined by
It is possible to count accurately up to a frequency
the surrounding structures. The pulsations feel very
of about 200/min. Hence counting errors can occur
weak in an obese animal. A strong pulse is called a
(    a   e 
52
The concept of 'general examination'
and a rapid pulse (puisus frequens). In the cat this
is frequently the case under normal conditions. A
frequency lower than the lower limit of the reference
range is called pulsus rarus. The above reference values
cover rather wide ranges. This is a consequence of
stress rather than a variation due to breed differences.
Two independent studies have shown that pulse
frequency is not correlated with body weight.*
The stress of the visit to a veterinary clinic can
increase the animal's pulse frequency considerably.
In the above-mentioned studies, the pulse rates of
healthy dogs were significantly higher when measured
Not this way
This way
in the clinic by the veterinarian than when measured
at home by the owner. In some dogs the pulse
Fig. 8.6 The femoral arteries are palpated by softly pressing with the
frequency at home was below 60/min. In
tense
volar surface of the fingertips and not the ends of the fingers and
nails. Not only is the latter unpleasant for the animal but the pulse wave
dogs the pulse frequency in the clinic may be above
 can certainly not be evaluated in this manner.
140/min. For cats it has been shown that the
frequency at home under resting conditions varies from
80 to 160 beats/min, while in the clinic (during
only be possible to record the heart frequency by
electrocardiography)_frequencies between 142 and 222
palpation of the ictus (also difficult in obese animals)
beats/min are found.7
or by auscultation.
The studies mentioned above concerning pulse
 frequency revealed that determining pulse characteristics
Symmetry
is highly dependent upon experience. This is especially
Under normal conditions the pulses in the left and right
true for detecting inequality. Inexperienced examiners
femoralarteries have the same characteristics.
often miss an unequal pulse and thereby an arrhythmia.
Asymmetry is only to be expected as a result of
Their results improve greatly when they take the time to
differences at or distal to the aortic bifurcation.
check all pulse characteristics carefully.
A thrill is an abnormality that can sometimes be
detected by palpation of an artery. It is not a
8.3.3 Body temperature
characteristic of the pulse wave and its origin lies in
 o      
introduction
artery by the palpating fingers disturbs the normal
In the healthy animal the body temperature is
laminar stream and causes turbulence. This can only
be observed when the blood has a low viscosity,
production and heat loss. Heat is a continuous product
as occurs in anemia. The constant of Reynolds is
of metabolism and it can also increase with muscle
exceeded ($ 4.1.4).
activity (including shivering and increased respiratory
activity!), and as a result of increased metabolic
Technique
activity, e.g, under the influence of thyroid hormones
and catecholamines.
The examiner takes a position behind the animal and
Heat loss occurs via radiation, conduction (via air and
brings the hands from the side around the front of the
contact with objects), and evaporation. These processes
thighs and uses the fingertips to locate the femoral
can be promoted by vasodilatation in the skin,
artery high on the medial side of the thigh (Fig. 8.6).
Then, one by one, attention is given to quality
polypnea, changing body position to increase surface
(equality, amplitude, and form), rhythm, missing
area, and seeking cool places. In the cat the care of the
coat may also play a role via evaporation of saliva
spread over the coat. Heat can be retained by
is counted during at least 15 seconds.
vasoconstriction in the skin, by the raising of the hair by
By working in this sequence and not first counting the
the piloerector muscles, by seeking warm places, and
pulse frequency, we avoid concentrating our attention
by reducing the body surface area via changes in position.
on the frequency and thereby giving too little attention
Regulation occurs via  central  and  peripheral
to the other characteristics. Sometimes this important
thermoreceptors that transmit information to the
information about the arterial component of the
thermoregulation center in the hypothalamus.8 This
circulation cannot be obtained because no pulses can
center is probably also responsible for the daily
be felt at all. This occurs sometimes with very obese
variation in temperature which has been shown in the
animals and above all with heavier cats. In these it will
dog and other species: at about six in the morning the
53
* Apprenticeship at Utrecht University Clinic for Companion Anirmals by Annelies Pernat and Annemmiek van Dijk.
Chapter 8:
GENERAL EXAMINATION
temperature is at its lowest (37.7-38.3°C) and at three
entrance of chemical, physical, and microbiologic
in the afternoon it is at its highest (38.1-39.1°C).9
agents. In addition, the skin with its rich circulation
 o   o   
plays an important role in thermoregulation, while the
 associated with physical activity.10
rich sensory innervation provides contact with the
In many diseases there is a change in body
surroundings. In the dog and cat the hair contributes
temperature which is the result of pyrogens raising
to these functions of the skin.
the set point of the thermoregulation center to a higher 
000
which rectal temperature is used, can therefore provide 
In the dog the hair is thick on the back and on both sides
an important signal for the first recognition of a
of the trunk. In contrast, the inner surfaces of the
disorder. In conditions associated with abnormal
pinnae, the groin, and the ventral surface of the tail are 
body temperature, repeated measurements are also
mostly without hair. In the cat the entire trunk is
informative about the course of the disease.
thickly haired. The growth of hair in the dog and cat
goes through cycles (Fig. 8.7), in which the anagen
Technigue
(growth period) and telogen (rest period) are the most
laay e sueid Aq panseau sl aneaduan Apo
important. During anagen the hair is formed by cell
thermometer (§ 4.2) in the rectum. The tail (if not
division in the matrix surrounding the papilla of the
 docked) is grasped quietly but firmly near the base and
hair follicle deep in the dermis. In the transition phase
raised. Grasping the tail near the base restrains the
s ay at ue dn ssnd  a (uae)
 animal to some extent. After the thermometer has been
shortened by up to one-third. The resting hair formed
shaken well and lubricant has been applied to it, it is
in this way is pushed out shortly thereafter by newly
introduced with a soft, turning motion. In the cat there
formed hair. In the dog and the cat the growth of hair
is almost always a definite resistance about one
is asynchronous and in a mosaic pattern, so that hairs
centimeter cranial to the anus. This is caused by a
lying close together can be in different phases. This
contraction which usually relaxes if the soft turning
       
 motion is continued for half a minute without pressure.
{length of the photophase and scotophase). The
Increasing the pressure causes a great deal of pain to
increase in length of the photophase in the spring leads
the cat. For a good measurement of the central body
temperature the thermometer must be introduced at
shed throughout the year is related to replacement of a
least 2 cm. The mercury thermometer must remain in
seasonal
variation
byé
exposure  to  artificial  light.
place for at least 1 minute, while a digital thermometer
awos si auaui Xoueusaudopnasd pue Koueusaud Suuna
only requires 5-10 seconds (§ 4.2).
synchronization in the hair growth and few hairs pass
The introduction of the thermometer also provides a
into the telogen phase. The change in the hormonal
good opportunity (without using extra time) to observe
status at parturition then results in the shedding of
the tonus of the tail, cleanliness of the perineum (feces,
much hair at one time.
 parasites), status of the anus (open, closed), anal reflex,
rectal tonus, and possible resistance in the rectum.
After removing the thermometer the adhering feces
should be noted (color, consistency, presence of blood).
Reference volues
dog 38.0-39.0°C
cat 38.5-39.0°C
The excitement and manipulations in a clinical
examination can easily elevate the temperature by
0.5-1.0°C, which makes interpretation difficult. When
a more reliable measurement is needed, the owner can
be requested to measure the animal's rectal temperature
at home, twice daily, for a few days.
Anagen
Catagen
Telogen
8.3.4 Coat and skin
Fig. 8.7 Hair growth cycle. The part of the follicle that is a direct
extension of the epidermis is called the outer root sheath. The inner
Introduction
 root sheath (black) keratinizes and fakes off on the top of the hair canal
at the height of the mouth of the sebaceous gland. In the underlying 
The skin protects the organism against loss of water,
thicker part of the hair follicle. the bulb. is the space for the mesodermal
electrolytes, and macromolecules, as well as against the
papilla. rich in blood vessels.
The concept of 'general examination'
Roughly speaking, three types of coat can be
the latter there are also blood vessels, sweat glands,
distinguished,12 in which the coat of the German
sebaceous glands, and hair follicles. In the dermis there is
shepherd (and the wolf) is considered 'normal'. In this
a rich adrenergic motor innervation of the blood vessels,
type of coat there are not only primary (guard) hairs
the erector pili muscles, and the myoepithelium around
but many secondary hairs (undercoat). The second type
the apocrine sweat glands. The sensory innervation is not
of coat, the short-hair type, consists primarily of short
restricted to the dermis; in the epidermis there are also
primary hairs with few secondary hairs {boxer and
 sensory nerve endings via which cold, mechanical
short-haired dachshund). The third type is the long-
influences, pain, temperature differences, and pruritus
haired coat, which can be subdivided into a fine-haired
are detected. The skin is thickest dorsally and thinner
long coat (English cocker spaniel) and a wooly coat
ventrally, especially in the axilla and groin.
(poodles). These coats consist primarily of secondary
    s n  u  
hairs. In cats by far the greatest part of the coat
connective tissue with fat. The amount of fat varies from
consists of secondary hairs.
 dog to dog and from place to place on the body. The dog
Hair is almost completely protein (keratin).
A
has no subcutaneous fat on the distal extremities but
deficiency in hair development occurs quickly i
in
well-fed animals usually have subcutaneous fat on the
disease. The anagen is shorter and hence a greater
trunk.
percentage of hairs move into telogen. These telogen
Skin changes can be the result of primary skin disease
hairs are less strongly anchored in the skin, so that
or part of a systemic disease. For purposes of the general
in disease the coat becomes thinner. Diseases can also
examination, the examination of the skin is limited to
lead to an abnormal hair structure, which can result
detecting abnormalities that can help in formulating
 in a dull appearance and sometimes some loss of pigment.
the problem and choosing further examinations. With
or without skin lesions, the examination of the skin
Exominotion of the coot
 gives useful information about the general health of the
The examination of the coat includes a general
patient.
inspection and a local inspection. In the general
examination one forms a general impression of the
Exomination of the skin
coat and takes note of the color, the gloss, the closure
adoie jo seare Aue pue tauiaot shu ieoo aul Aem 1o
In this examination the skin is evaluated on the basis of
the following four aspects.
(also see Chapter 7).
Color and presence of hemorrhages. For this purpose
The local inspection of the coat is an evaluation of its
density (guard and undercoat hairs) and of the
the thinly-haired parts of the skin are examined. In the
Occurrence of loose hair. For this purpose a forceps is
dog and cat the inner surface of the pinna can be used
but sometimes a tattoo is a hindrance. In the dog the
used to lift up portions of the coat (Fig. 8.8). By doing
groin is also suitable for this inspection. To examine
this in the lumbosacral area an impression is also
obtained of the presence of the most important parasite
this area well, the dog must usually be laid on its side
  i  a a  
of the dog and cat, the flea.
pigmentation of the skin.
 In healthy animals the skin is light pink. Sometimes it
The skin
is so thick that the pink color of the vasculature is
The skin {cutis) consists of a thin, superficial avascular
scarcely visible and the skin is rather grayish-white.
cell layer (epidermis) and a fibroelastic layer (dermis). In
The skin can be pale as a result of reduced circulation
or anemia. Locally increased circulation causes redness
{erythema). An increased bilirubin concentration in the
blood leads to a yellow color (icterus).
Hemorrhage in the skin can be in the form of
petechiae (pinpoint bleeding) or larger areasof
bleeding. A fresh hemorrhage in the skin is red. If it
has been present for a short time, it becomes green and
into biliverdin and bilirubin. Bleeding into the subcutis
or musculature produces an accumulation of blood
called a hematoma.
Thickness,
elasticity,
andturgor. Since
these
characteristics are not the same in all areas, we always
evaluate them at the same location, namely, halfway
Fig. 8.8 Local inspection of the coat with the aid of a forceps.
up the side of the thorax by the tenth rib. Here a fold
55
Chapter 8:
GENERAL EXAMINATION
of skin is picked up between the thumb and forefinger to
Exominotion of the mucous membrones
evaluate its thickness and the ease with which it can be
This consists of evaluation of the color and moisture of
raised. How quickly it returns to its place when
the membrane, the capillary refill time, and inspection
released gives an impression of its elasticity (skin
for hemorrhages or lesions.
tension, turgor). The elasticity of the skin is clearly
 greater in young animals than in older animals and this
must be taken into account if the turgor is used as a
measure of dehydration. In young animals the skin
The color of the mucous membranes is easier to evaluate
returns to its place almost immediately (<0.5 s) when
because
the lamina propria is thinner than the
released, while in older animals this can take one
comparable fibroelastic layer (dermis) of the skin.
second without being abnormal. To make this an
Where the lamina propria and submucosa are well
evaluation that can be compared and reproduced, the
vascularized the mucosa in healthy animals is pink. This
animal should be standing without bending of the
is not so on the sclera, where the overlying conjunctival
trunk to either side,which would make the fold snap
mucosa is completely transparent. Inadequate perfusion
back very quickly or very slowly. Poor nutritional
 and anemia can cause the mucosa to be pale. The sclera
condition also results in loss of elasticity of the skin
is used to detect icterus. In a few breeds the mucosa is
without necessarily being an indication of dehydration.
pigmented locally, which may interfere with its
Temperature. An impression of the temperature of
examination.
the extremities such as the feet, lips, and pinnae can be
obtained by holding them or by touching them with
the back of the hand. In healthy animals which have
Copillory refilf time
not just come in from cold surroundings these
An impression of the peripheral circulation is obtained
extremities feel warm. If the peripheral circulation is
by measuring the capillary refill time. After slight
poor (regionally or generally), these extremities feel
pressure is applied to make an area of the mucosa
cool. In the area of an inflammation the skin can feel
"bloodless, the pink color returns in no more than
extra warm. In making these evaluations the influence
one second.13 At first glance this seems attractive: in
 of the coat covering the area must be considered.
a quick and noninvasive manner, it appears to give
Presence of edema. This examination is limited to
an impression of the circulating volume. However, as
inspection and palpation of places in which edema
with some other clinical practices, it has come into
most readily occurs because of gravitation and tissue
use without evaluation (see Chapter 1).
pressure. In the dog and cat these are the ventral
 There have, however, been a few critical assessments
surface of the trunk {in the male dog especially above
a i umous uq sy h ti'au uy u 1 jo
the prepuce) and the area just proximal to the tarsus
results are highly dependent upon the observer {high
between the achilles tendon and the tibia. Inspection of
inter-observer variability). In addition, it does not detect
this area can reveal an increased circumference and
moderate hypovolemia. In blood donors from whom
even a slightly stretched skin. A depression made in the
450 ml blood was removed, the sensitivity of the method
swelling with a finger remains for some time. Edema
(see § 3.1.5) was 0.11. In the same study, the
resulting from inflammation  is  accompanied
by
measurement of capillary refill time had a sensitivity of
warmth and pain, but this is not the case with edema
0.77 in patients with unequivocally low arterial blood
due to other causes.
pressure (hypotension).15
8.3.5 Mucous membranes
Moisture
Introduction
 In healthy animals the conjunctival mucosa is kept moist
The structure of the mucous membranes is quite similar
by tears and the oral mucosa by saliva. Dehydration can
to that of the skin. The most superficial layer is also an
make these dry and sticky.
avascular cell layer of squamous epithelium. Beneath
it lies vascularized connective tissue (lamina propria)
in which there are usually not many glands. The
Hemorrhoges
ducts from the glands in the submucosa pass through
Blood vessels can be recognized in mucous membranes,
this layer.
especially in the scleral conjunctiva (see also § 19.4.6
The mucous membrane of the genital opening is
and 19.4.8). Under normal circumstances there should
generally less suitable for examination because its
be no hemorrhages (petechiae and/or ecchymoses). Their
condition changes with the reproductive cycle (female
presence indicates trauma, or vascular, thrombocyte, or
dog) or inflammation (male dog).
coagulation a bnormalities.
The concept of 'general examination'
Lesions
even with very poor peripheral circulation the refill
 Defects in the oral mucosa can be due to local injury or to
time here is still good.
a systemic disease with mucosal lesions. Local injuries
Inspect the oral mucosa in the same manner on
usually correspond to inflammation of the supporting
both sides, to determine whether any abnormalities
tissue of the teeth (periodontitis) or dental calculus.
observed on one side are only local changes, but also
to increase the chance of detecting any hemorrhage,
defects, or other abnormalities.
Technigue
8.3.6 Lymph nodes
For examination of the oral and conjunctival mucous
membranes it is easiest to hold the animal's head with
Introduction
one hand on top of the skull and the other under the
jaw. From this position the thumb of the lower hand
The lymph nodes are structural and functional units of
can be used to turn down the lower lid for inspection
the lymphatic system. They are so located that they
of the conjunctiva (Fig. 8.9). The thumb of the upper
are well protected against exterior influences and yet do
hand can be used to raise the upper lid for inspection
not interfere with locomotion or with flow in
the vascular system. What we refer to here as a
 of the sclera. The third eyelid (nictitating membrane)
lymph node is in the Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria
is not good for evaluation of color, because of its
described as a lymphocenter.16 It is defined as a lymph
bluish-gray cartilage.
nodule or group of lymph nodules that always occurs in
Next, the upper hand is moved forward a little so that 
the same location and drains the same area. From this
the thumb and forefinger can lift the upper lip. The lip
definition it is apparent that what we call a lymph node
should not be stretched because the capillaries will be
can consist of more than one lymph nodule and that
compressed, making the mucosa misleadingly pale. In
the number can vary from individual to individual. The 
this manner a large area of mucosa can be examined
number of nodes in a given area can also increase
without opening the dog's mouth (Fig. 8.9). In the cat
pathologically, although it is not certain whether by
al asn a e yino an uado on Auessau s i
hypertrophy of preexisting nonpalpable lymph follicles
oral mucosa is normally rather pale, due to its having
or by formation of new follicles.
such a fibrous lamina propria. By opening the mouth
Each lymph node is surrounded by a thin capsule of
you can examine the tongue, which has a nice pink
collagenous connective tissue that extends into the
color in the healthy cat (Fig. 8.10).
node in the form of septa and trabeculae. In the outer
To examine the capillary refill time, press a finger
layer (cortex) are the lymph follicles in which
briefly on an area of nonpigmented mucosa of the raised
lymphocytes are formed and which are partly
upper lip. After abruptly removing the finger, note the
surrounded by a lymph sinus. The sinus is the area
time required for disappearance of the whiteness. The
under the capsule and along the septa and trabeculae
 gingival mucosa is not suited for this because sometimes
through which the lymph circulates (Fig. 8.11).
Fig. 8.9 Inspection of the conjunctival and oral mucous membranes in the dog.
Chapter 8:
GENERAL EXAMINATION
Fig. 8.10 A Mucosa of the lip and gingiva of a healthy dog. It is pink. moist. and without lesions or hemorrhages. B Severe icterus and anemia in a
dog. C Opened mouth of a healthy cat. The gingiva is somewhat pale in comparison with that of dogs. because of the thick lamina propria. while the
tongue is nicely pink. D Close-up view of pale pink mucosa with a few petechiae.
The lymph follicles serve as (1) filters for lymph and (2)
Lymph sinus
Afferentlymph
germinal centers for lymphocytes. The phagocytes which
circuit
surround the sinuses remove microorganisms and other
particles out of the slowly streaming lymph. Such
material is virtually completely removed during one
passage of the lymph through a lymph node. The
 phagocytosis of antigens is potentiated by binding with
specific antibodies, a process which is part of the
immune response.
plasma  cells 
following antigenic
 stimulation. These cells promote cell-mediated immunity,
 secrete antibodies, and form an immunologic memory.
Locofization ond droinoge oreas
sapou qdual jo sdnous pue sapou qdws| saoeld Aueu ul
Efferent lymph
lie close to the surface and are accessible for palpation.
circuit
In the dog18 and the cat, they include the following.
Mandibular lymph node. This consists of a group of
two or three nodules lying ventral to the angle of the
mandible. This node is palpable in the healthy dog and
Artery and vein
cat just rostral to the mandibular salivary gland and it
Fig. 8.11 Structure of a lymph node.
is often confused with the latter.
58
The concept of 'general examination'
The mandibular node drains the skin and more
node lies a few centimeters caudal to the shoulder
superficial structures of the head together with the
joint, where the subscapular artery leaves the brachial
parotid lymph node, which lies under the cranial edge 
artery. This node is bordered on the lateral side by the
of the parotid salivary gland and is not normally
teres major muscle and ventrally by the deep pectoral
palpable. The afferent lymphatics of these nodes have
muscles. Because of this location, high in the axilla, the
slightly overlapping drainage areas so that, for
node is not normally palpable and is only found when
example, the eyelids and their glands and the skin of
markedly enlarged.
the skull drain to both nodes (Fig. 8.12).
The accessory axillary node lies rather caudal to the
Retropharyngeallymphnode.This
isa
large,
axillary node in the fascia between the latissimus dorsi
elongated node that lies between the atlas and the
muscle and the deep pectoral muscle, which lie in
larynx and is covered laterally by the brachycephalic
contact with each other. It is usually not palpable
muscle. It is not palpable in healthy animals.
Its
in healthy animals and if enlarged it is usually felt
afferent lymphatics arise from deeper structures of the
on the wall of the thorax slightly above the level of
head, such as the tongue and walls of the nasal
the elbow.
passages, mouth, and pharynx, as well as from the
The axillary lymph nodes drain the thoracic wall and
larynx and esophagus.
deep structures of the front leg. The afferent lymphatics
Prescapular lymph node. This usually consists of two
on the thorax reach as far cranial as the neck and as far
nodules covered by the thin cleidocervical muscle and
caudal as the wall of the abdomen, including the
the omotransversarius muscle. The node is palpable
first three mammary glands. The afferents from the
about halfway up and just in front of the scapula. This
mammary glands overlap with the lymphatics draining
node drains a large area: the skin of the caudal surface
to the inguinal lymph node.
of the head, superficial parts of the neck, the lateral
Superficial inguinal lymph node. In the female dog
and distal part of the front leg, the shoulder, and the
this lies in the fat between the abdominal wall and the
cranial part of the thorax.
medial side of the thigh, dorsolateral to the last
Axilary lymph nodes. These consist of the axillary
mammary gland. This node is usually not palpable in
node and the accessory axillary node. The axillary
the healthy female dog. In the male dog the node lies
II  Mandibular lymph node
////Parotid lymph node
Prescapular lymph node
Axilary lymph node
 Superficial inguinal lymph node
Popliteallymph node
Drainage deeper structures
Fig. 8.12 Lymph nodes and their associated drainage areas.
59
Chapter 8:
GENERAL EXAMINATION
dorsal to the most caudal part of the penis, just under
Painfuiness
the abdominal wall. It is palpable in the healthy male
The palpation of lymph nodes in a healthy animal causes
dog but palpation may be difficult because of a local
no pain.
accumulation of fat.
In the female dog the afferent lymphatics drain the
Adhesions
abdominal wall and the most caudal mammary glands.
At the level of the third mammary gland there is
In healthy animals the nodules are not attached to each
usually some overlapping with the afferent lymphatics
other (particularly the mandibular nodes) or to the
surrounding tissues. Adhesions can develop chiefly as a
dog the superficial inguinal node drains the penis,
result of inflammation and individual nodules may no
prepuce, and scrotum. There are also afferents from
longer be distinguishable. They may also become
adhered to the surrounding tissues. It is then noted by
the ventral part of the pelvis, the tail, and the medial
palpation that the node is less moveable. Invasion by a
side of the thigh and knee.
tumor through the capsule of a node into the
Popliteal lymph node. This lies in fat between the
biceps femoris and semitendinosus muscles, caudal to
surrounding tissue can also reduce moveability.
the knee joint. The node drains all structures of the
Technique
rear leg distal to the node.
The lymph nodes are examined by palpation and the
Exomination
 corresponding nodes on opposite sides of the body are
The examination of the lymph nodes consists of evaluation
compared repeatedly. It is of great importance to
of their size, form, consistency, and painfulness and the
palpate softly: the sensitivity of your fingers is always
 presence of adhesions.
ueo siut pue dseis puey e yum Suuedied Aq paonpai
also be very unpleasant for the animal.
 Most of the superficial lymph nodes can be palpated
Size
between the thumb and one or more fingers. Palpation
 If a lymph node described above as not normally being
often must begin with finding the node and the chance
palpable can be palpated, this should be considered to
of doing so is improved by letting the thumb slide
be a pathologic change. It is more difficult to decide
sofly over the tips of the fingers with the area of tissue
what is abnormal for the nodes that can normally be
you are examining lying between. Thus the mandibular
palpated. Their sizes vary with the size of the animal,
lymph node is sought caudoventral to the angle of the
from a few millimeters in cats and toy breeds of dogs
mandible and it can be helpful to first seek the more
to 2.5 centimeters in large dogs. The normal size must
dorsocaudally located (and larger) mandibular salivary
always be evaluated in relation to the size of the
gland and to proceed from there in a ventral and
animal. It is helpful to estimate the size of a possibly
rostral direction
(Fig. 8.13). For the (normally
enlarged node in mm or cm after subtracting the
nonpalpable!) parotid lymph node the area under and
contribution of overlying tissue, especially for reference
around the external ear canal is palpated.
in follow-up examinations. An increase to more than
The retropharyngeal area can be palpated by placing one
112 times the expected normal size should be
Or more fingers, on both sides, between the atlas and the 
considered suspicious and a greater increase than this
larynx, and then proceeding medially. In healthy animals
should be considered pathological.
in a normal nutritional condition, the tips of one or two
fingers can almost be brought into contact with those on
Shope
the other side.
To evaluate the prescapular lymph node, the
Many lymph nodes are ellipsoidal and retain this shape
 o u  a 
omotransversarius muscle, lying just in front of the
scapula, is grasped between the thumb and fingers. By
growth of the lymphoid tissue. This shape is usually
then moving cranially (hence along the length of the
lost during enlargement due to other causes such as
muscle), the lymph node is usually felt beneath the
metastases from malignancies in the drainage area.
muscle.
The presence of an enlarged axillary lymph node
Consistency
is examined by palpating high up in the axilla,
 In healthy animals the nodes have the consistency of soft 
  i a  a  a m 
rubber. Depending upon the cause of the change in a
Saou aq unos si apu ui e oe a
lymph node, they can become harder or softer. This
a flat hand over the wall of the thorax (Fig. 8.13.D1).
can be recorded on an ordinal scale {see § 4.1.2 and
In the male dog the superficial inguinal lymph node is
$3.1.2)
evaluated by palpating fairly caudally and high above
60
The concept of 'general examination'
A
D
E
Fig. 8.13 Techniques for palpation of lymph nodes. A Mandibular lymph node. B retropharyngeal lymph node. C prescapular lymph node. D axillary
 ymph nodes. E inguinal lymph node. F popliteal lymph node.
Chapter 8:
GENERAL EXAMINATION
the penis, just under the abdominal wall (Fig. 8.13).
of the general examination. This might be, for example,
In the bitch palpation is carried out on both sides
a tumor in a mammary gland or accumulation of gas
dorsolateral to the last mammary gland. For thorough
under the skin (subcutaneous emphysema). Such
inspection and palpation it is still sometimes necessary
findings are also recorded on the record used for the
to position the animal on its side or back (see also
general examination.
$16.2.2).
The popliteal lymph nodes are usually most easily
8.4 Notation
found by pressing the semitendinosus and biceps
 aa a paq aan as sasn so
The results of the general examination can be recorded
then moving the palpating fingertips caudally. This
on the form shown on the DVD, which combines
brings the lymph node 
caudally
out between the
"General Impression' and *General Examination'. If any
muscles so that it is only covered by the skin and can
structure is found to be enlarged, measurements should
easily be evaluated.
be given (after subtracting the contribution of skin and
surrounding tissue), together with the findings
by
inspection and palpation (see § 4.1.1 and § 4.1.2).
8.3.7 0ther notable findings
If a certain characteristic (e.g., body temperature) is
 During the examinations described above, there may be
to be followed for some time, the results can also be
other notable findings quite unrelated to the objectives
shown graphically.
References
1 Nichelmann M. Thermoregulatorische Bedeutung der Mund- und
10 Webb P. Daily activity and body temperature. Eur J Appl Physiol
 Nasenhohle von Hund und Katze (Thermoregulatory role of the oral
Occup Physiol 1993: 66:174-177.
 and nasal cavities in dogs and cats). Monatsheft Vet Med 1981: 36:64.
11 Baker KP. Hair growth and replacement in the cat. Br Vet J 1974:
 2 Mackem PT. Normal and abnormal function of the diaphragmm.
130:327.
Thorax 1981: 36:161.
12 Muller GH. Kirk RW. Scott DW. Small animal dermatology. 3rd edn.
 3 Fossum TW. Pleural and extrapleural diseases. In: Etinger SJ.
Philadelphia: Saunders: 1983.
 Feldman EC. eds. Textbook of veterinary internal medicine. 5th edn.
13 Haskins SC. Shock. The pathophysiology and management of the
Philadelphia: Saunders: 2000:1098-111.
circulatory collapse states. In: Kirk RW. ed. Current veterinary
4 Bouvy BM. Bjorling DE. Pericardial effusion in dogs and cats. 1.
therapy Vill. Philadelphia: Saunders: 1983.
 Normal pericardium and causes and pathophysiology of pericardial
14 Gorelick MH. Shaw KN. Baker MD. Effect of ambient temperature on
effusion. Comp Cont Educ 1991: 13:173-174.
capillary refill in healthy children. Pediatrics 1993: 92:699-702.
 5 Levi M. Hart W. Wieling W. Fysische diagnostiek - pulsus paradoxus
15 Schriger DL. Baraff L. Capillary refill - Is it a useful predictor of 
(Physical diagnosis - paradoxical pulse). Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd
hypovolemic states? Ann Emerg Med 1991: 20:601-605.
1999: 143:2045-2048.
16 Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria. Vienna: International Committee on
6 Haddad GG. Jeng HJ. Lai TL. Heart rate variability during respiratory
Veterinary Anatomical Nomenclature: 1973.
 pauses in puppies and dogs. Pediatr Res 1987: 22:306.
17 Jeghers H. Clark SL. Templeton AC. Lymphadenopathy and
7 Hamlin RL. Heart rate of the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1989:
disorders of the lymphatics. In: Blacklow RS. ed. MacBryde's signs
25:284.
and symptoms. 6th edn. Philadelphia: Lippincot: 1983.
8 Musacchia X. Fever and hyperthermia. Fed Proc 1979: 38:27.
18 Evans HE. Christensen GC. Miller's anatomy of the dog. 2nd edn.
9 Kanno Y. Experimental studies on body temperature rhythm in dogs
Philadelphia: Saunders: 1979.
1. Application of Cosinor Method to body temperature rhythm in
dogs. Jap J Vet Sci 1977: 39:69.
1
09
Respiratory system
A.A. Stokhof and A.J. Venker-van Haagen
already been done in the general examination. Then, to
Chapter contents
evaluate the respiratory sounds, we return to the
description in the history, although abnormal respiratory
9.1 History 63
sounds are sometimes clearly recognized during the
9.11 Symptoms 63
examination. Then comes the external examination of
9.1.2 Living conditions 65
the nose and sinuses, followed by examination of the
91.3 Past history 65
larynx and trachea, and then finally the thorax.
9.2 Physical examination 65
 92.1 Respiratory movements and sounds 65 
9.1 History
9.2.2 Nose and frontal sinuses 65
 In focusing the history on the respiratory system, we use 
Introduction 65
the same approach as for the general history (Chapter 6).
Nose 66
Further questions are asked about the symptoms
Frontot sinuses 67
reported by the owner. More detailed questions are
Nosophorynx 67
then asked about other symptoms associated with
Orophorynx 67
the respiratory system, such as nasal discharge,
9.2.3 Larynx and trachea 67
sneezing, additional sounds, coughing,
sputum,
Technique 67
gagging or retching, and labored respiration. After
this, additional specific questions are asked about the
9.2.4 Thorax 68
Au p u si d al ym u ue
Thorocic wall 69
previous illnesses in the patient or its relatives. We
Technique 69
go into these aspects of the history as follows.
Respiratory movemments 69
Bronchi lungs. ond pleura 69
9.1.1 Symptoms
Auscultotion 69
Technique 71
Nasal discharge is often associated with one or more of
Percussion 72
the other signs given above. The owner is asked
whether the nasal discharge is from one or both
Technique 72
nostrils and whether it is continuous or only occurs at
9.3 Notation 73
certain times (e.g., mainly in the morning when the
9.4 Further examination 74
dog awakens, or mainly when the dog goes outside), or
only occurs when the dog sneezes. Questions about the
description of the exudate must be asked in layman's
terms, such as watery, mucus, pus, or blood.
If the screening examination has led to formulation of a
A stridor is a respiratory sound that can be heard at
problem and a diagnostic plan that includes examination
 some distance from the animal and keeps recurring; it is
 of the respiratory system, the first step is to further focus 
of fairly constant amplitude and frequency. A narrowing
the history on this system. The second step is to observe
(stenosis) in the upper airways can lead to such an
the respiratory movements, although this has usually
acceleration of the air stream that the Reynolds value
63
Chapter 9:
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
($ 4.1.4) is exceeded and strong turbulence develops.
1 A cough that is started by stimulation of the
The stridor is named after the location of the
laryax usually occurs episodically, is often heavy,
obstruction, such as a nasal stridor, pharyngeal stridor,
and is sometimes associated with gagging or
or laryngeal stridor The location of the obstruction also
retching, a tendency to vomit, and sometimes the
determinest
the sound. For example,
sni ffing
1S
coughing up of a little mucus or saliva.
 characteristic of nasal stridor, snoring is characteristic of
2 A cough that is due to a process in the trachea is a
a pharyngeal stridor, and a soft 'sawing' sound typifies a
loud, explosive cough that often has the
laryngeal stridor. In a few breeds of dogs, selective
characteristics of a bark.
breeding for brachycephalic characteristics has led to
 3 Stimulation of the bronchi can result in various
pasdeloo e jo punos suoot au ropus jo sadki snouna
kinds of coughing. In the acute phase the pattern is
trachea is expiratory, while the sounds mentioned above
not easy to differentiate from a cough due to
dxa pue Aroinndsu yoq no Aroindsu aq un
tracheitis. When much mucus and pus are
depending on the severity of the obstruction. A stridor
produced, the cough has a wet and rough character.
of the nose or nasopharynx disappears as soon as the
animal begins to breathe through the mouth. In very
The tracheal cough—and even more so the bronchial
severe
nasalobstructionthe
animaldoes
t
this
cough—are above all dry and nonproductive in the
spontaneously, but often keeps alternating with attempts 
acute phase and then associated with the coughing up
to breathe through the nose. In a mild stenosis the
of sputum in the chronic phase. In taking the history
stridor is only heard during and shortly after exercise.
an attempt is made to describe the cough in terms of
Sneezing is one of the two reflexes that protect the
frequency, duration, strength, whether it is painful, the 
respiratory system against
injury.
Stimulation
of
production of sputum, the probable localization of the
 subepithelial receptors in the nose triggers the sneezing
cough stimuli, and the time of occurrence {excitement,
reflex. The stimuli include inflammation or products of
time of day, change of environment).
inflammation, foreign bodies, and tumors. In addition
Sputum is the substance in the airways that is
 to sneezing, which everyone recognizes, there is another
transported by coughing. In the dog and the cat we
sound that occurs in the dog and which is called
are seldom well informed by the history about its
'reverse sneezing'. This occurs as a result of stimulation
character {serous = watery, mucous, purulent = pus,
of the mucosa of the nasopharynx, leading to a spasm
mucopurulent = mucus and pus) or the amount, beca use
of the pharyngeal muscles, which hinders the passage of
the
coughed-up
material
is
usually
swallowed
air to the larynx. The dog (it occurs chiefly in the dog)
immediately. In by far the majority of cases it is only on
makes an inspiratory snoring sound and at the same
the basis of the nature of the cough fproductive or
time shows all the signs of severe dyspnea. The
nonproductive) that one can form an impression about 
pharyngeal  spasm  can be interrupted 
by reflex
the presence or absence of sputum. Sputum is coughed
swallowing, which can be brought about by massaging
out only when coughing itself so stimulates the pharynx
the throat or by obstructing the nostrils until the dog
that the animal begins gagging or retching so severely
swallows. Reverse sneezing occurs without warning
in
that swallowing does not occur. The owner can describe
otherwise healthy animals and episodes can last from
the nature of the sputum with the help of questions
seconds to minutes. If there is irritation or inflammation
about its color, stringiness, and odor. Account must be
of the mucosa in the nose and nasopharynx,
the
taken of the frequent mixing with saliva and the possible
 frequency can increase to several times per day.
addition of material from the digestive tract. In acute
Coughing is the second important reflex by which the
lung edema there may be not only coughing of serous
respiratory systerm protects itself against injury. The
 sputum but also serous discharge via the nasal openings,
reflex can occur via stimulation of the airways
with the formation of air bubbles at the nostrils. The
anywhere from the larynx to the larger bronchi.? After
discharge can have a pinkish-red color due to the
a
deep inspiration the intrathoracic
pressure
is
presence of some blood. Damage to the blood vessels 
       
can lead to the production of sputum that is blood-red.
glottis and contraction of the thoracic and abdominal
Dyspnea
{labored
or
difficult
breathing)
is
 muscles. This is followed by an abrupt decompression,
characterized
by
forced
respiratory
movements,
by opening the glottis and driving out the respiratory
whereby auxiliary respiratory muscles are activated.
gas, together with any sputum that may be present.3
When thel
history is being taken it must first be
The frequency, severity, and character of the stimulus is
determined whether the dyspnea is acute and recurring
determined by (1) the nature of the causative lesion, (2)
 Or chronic and continuous. In cases of acute dyspnea it
the presence of sputum, and (3) any complicating
is certainly necessary to also ask about the conditions
factors such as pain or reduced ventilation capacity.
under which this difficult breathing recurs and whether
The following types of cough can be distinguished,
there are any accompanying signs (e.g, stridor).
according to the site of the stimulation:
Owners do not always find it easy to distinguish
64
Physical examination
between panting (thermal or nervous polypnea) and
nasal openings are often small (Fig. 9.1), which can
dyspnea. Questions about the depth of the breathing
ca use res piratory difficulties.
can help here. A chronic dyspnea is sometimes clearly
The nose of dogs and cats is largely filled with richly
recognizable to the owner and the examiner when the
animal is at rest. In other cases the signs occur only
vascularized conchae. A bullous extension of the ventral
during exercise (dyspnea of exertion). In the latter case 
concha (plica alaris), which proceeds craniolaterally into
one must be aware that owners do not always
the nasal ala, divides the incoming air over the dorsal,
medial, and ventral nasal passages. Most of the air is
recognize the difference between the rapid development 
turned ventromedially toward the largest passage, the
of fatigue during exercise and the loss of interest in
ventral nasal passage (ventral nasal meatus). It is only via
exercise. The latter is an apathy, for which there need be
no cardiopulmonary problem. It is also possible that the
this passage that a tube can be passed {hence also
ventromedially) into the esophagus for artificial feeding
animal does not want to continue exercising because of
(Fig. 9.2).4 Caudally the ventral nasal passages are fairly
difficulties in locomotion. By asking questions about the 
wide and they pass through the oval openings (the
character of breathing following apparent respiratory
difficulty, about the development of auxiliary respiratory
choanae) to the nasopharynx. This area is dorsal to the
movements, and about the way the animal was walking,
caudal part of the hard and the soft palate (Fig. 9.2).
we usually succeed, on the basis of the history, in
Of the paranasal sinuses the maxillary sinus is actually a
differentiating among these forms of what an owner
lateral extension or recess of the nasal cavity and only
 sometimes calls reduced endurance.
on the medial side of the caudal part is it bordered by
bone (Fig. 9.3). Hence this sinus is not considered
9.1.2 Living conditions
separately but rather as part of the nasal cavity. The
frontal sinus lies in the frontal bone and varies
Here we are concerned with questions about what is
required of the animal (such as strenuous physical
markedly in form and size due to the great variety in
skull shapes that occur in the dog.
training), its contacts with other animals (possible
These very briefly described structures form the first
transmission of infectious disorders), and whether it is
part of the passages to the site of gas exchange, the
allowed outdoors without observation {increased chance
of tra uma).
9.1.3 Past history
Information about all previous disorders can be of great
importance in connection with interpretation of the
findings. This ranges from illnesses, wounds, and injuries
au pauad uaq seu ieun Aaauns oi saqowne Aq
same applies to any known disorders of the respiratory
system in the relatives of the patient or in the breed.
9.2 Physical examination
9.2.1 Respiratory movements and sounds
Evaluation of the respiratory movements has been
Fig. 9.1 Lateral and rostral views of the nose of a dolichocephalic dog
described in the general examination ($ 8.3.1). The
(eftl and a brachycephalic dog (right).
respiratory sounds have been described in the general
impression (Chapter 7) and in the above discussion of the
history.
9.2.2 Nose and frontal sinuses
Introduction
The shape of the nose is determined by a solid bony
structure and a moveable cranial part having a
cartilaginous skeleton. The flat front surface of the
nose is the nasal plane. There is a small groove down
the middle (the philtrum). The nasal openings (nostrils
 l sm q i q a ( 
Fig. 9.2 Section of the head of a cat. in which a tube has been passed
In brachycephalic breeds the nose is very short and the
via the ventral nasal passage into the esophagus.
65
Chapter 9:
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Fig. 9.3 Skull of a dog. in which the locations of the maxillary sinus
 and frontal sinus are shown. The cranial part of the maxillary sinus
which is not bordered by bone medially. is shown by a dotted line.
lungs. But in addition, these upper airways have a
number of other functions:
They warm and humidify the inspired air.
Fig. 9.4 Testing the airflow through a nasal passage by use of a fluff of
 They protect against inspired particles that are
cotton. The cotton is held at a steady distance from the nasal opening
irritating or infectious. The nose contributes to this
by resting the hand against the bridge of the dog's nose.
by the sneezing reflex and the turbulent air stream
over a richly vascularized mucous membrane.
 Expired air. The symmetry of the air stream is
This is covered by a sticky secretion having
examined by watching the movement of a small
bactericidal properties, that is passed to the
fluff of cotton held before each nostril (Fig. 9.4).
esophagus by ciliated epithelium.
At the same time, the odor of the expired air
They enable detection of odors by the olfactory
should be noted (for nasal fetor).
nerve ends, half of which lie in the ethmoidal
Nasal discharge. In healthy animals there is
conchae. The perception of diverse odors is
sometimes a drop of serous fluid. Abnormal
facilitated by the interior structure of the nasal
discharges may be mucoid, purulent, mucopurulent,
cavity. The convoluted conchae create a variety of
ichorous (rotting), or hemorrhagic. Episodic flow of
turbulent air streams that result in an uneven
pure blood is a nosebleed or epistaxis. Occasionally
distribution of odorant molecules and thereby
during vomiting or regurgitation some material from
selective exposure of olfactory receptors.$
the digestive tract may be discharged through the
The upper airways facilitate emission of heat in the
nasal passages. If milk or other food comes directly
form of heat of vaporization. In the dog and cat
out of the nostrils of a puppy while it is eating, the 
the lateral nasal gland plays an important role in this
palate may not be fully closed. Any material that
 at high environmental temperatures, by increasing
remains in the nasal passages or nasal openings may
the secretion of fluid at an exponential rate. During
dry out and can hinder the passage of the air stream.
thermal polypnea most of the air is inspired via the
 nose and expired via the mouth.7 Hence the inspired
Nasal plane. In most animals the nasal plane is
slightly moist and, depending on the distribution
air is rapidly saturated with moisture on the large
 Of pigment over the body, it may or may not be
 mucosal surface in the nose and then expired via the
pigmented (Fig. 9.5). In some completely healthy
mouth. This prevents the warmth and moisture in
dogs the nasal plane is almost always dry. In other
the expired gasses from being released again to the
animals the nose appears to become dry when
nasal mucosa. In addition, this form of panting has
there is reduced secretion by the tear glands and
a constant frequency, which corresponds to the
the salivary glands.
resonance frequency of the respiratory movements,
Nasal openings. Attention should first be given to
thereby much reducing the energy expenditure for
the width of the nasal openings and the movea bility
these activities.8
of the nasal alae. The plica alaris described above
 prevents direct examination of the nasal passages
Nose
with the naked eye. By slight lateral displacement
After evaluation of the shape of the nose as a whole, the
of the nasal ala only the entrance of the ventral
following are examined in sequence:
nasal passage can be inspected. Further inspection
Nasal stridor. Under quiet conditions, listen very
can be accomplished with the aid of an otoscope
close to the animal's nose with its mouth closed. If
or rhinoscope, under anesthesia.
there is a stridor resulting from a too-narrow nasal
 Palate. By opening the animal's mouth one obtains
opening (brachycephalic breeds), the tone of the
a view of the ventral wall of the nasal passages and
stridor can be changed by moving the nasal alae
thus of any deformities that result from processes in
laterally.
the nose. At the same time, abnormalities may be
66
Physical examination
Fig. 9.5 The nasal plane in two dogs. Left: a moist nasal plane with its characteristic irregular surface. Right: a dry nasal plane. smeared with dried
vomitus (also present in the hair around the mouth).
seen in the mouth (e.g-, involving the canine teeth)
The mouth is opened and the base of the tongue is
depressed (Fig. 9.7) so that the tonsils, hard palate, and
soft palate can be inspected. Sometimes even the glottis
Frontat sinuses
can be seen. Usually this area can only be examined
 adequately when the animal is anesthetized.
The frontal sinus is inspected and palpated to detect
 possible swelling, pain, or crepitation. The frontal sinus 
9.2.3 Larynx and trachea
is surrounded on all sides by bone and thus percussion
produces a slightly hollow tone. When the sinus is filled
The larynx reaches to the base of the tongue and the soft
with fluid or tissue the tone can be slightly damped. This
palate and it lies ventral to the atlas. This mostly
is best detected if the change is unilateral and the
cartilaginous structure is about six centimeters long in a
percussion tones on the left and right are compared.
medium-sized dog. Caudally it joins the trachea, a
Percussion is performed by tapping on the frontal bone
cartilaginous tube with an interior diameter slightly
bilaterally with the forefinger or middle finger (Fig. 9.6).
smaller than that of the larynx. Cranial to the larynx
lies the hyoid apparatus, which is attached dorsally
Nasopharynx
to the skull and acts as a suspensory mechanism for
the tongue and the larynx. Parts of the hyoid apparatus 
Examination of the nasopharynx must be performed
        
completely under anesthesia. Only then is it possible to
mandibles.
reach the caudal part via the mouth and to inspect the
 The examination consists of inspection and palpation.
area with optical instruments and mirrors. As noted
 Inspection is performed with attention to possible
above, the nasopharynx can also be reached by a tube
deformities in the throat and neck regions. Palpation
or an optical instrument introduced via the ventral
 serves to detect possible deformities and to determine
nasal passage. The retropharyngeal lymph node is
sensitivity to pressure.
palpated as described in $ 8.2.6.
Under normal conditions the larynx is palpable in the
throat area and the transition from larynx to trachea-
Oropharynx
marked by an abrupt change to a somewhat smaller
The respiratory and digestive tracts cross here and so this
       
followed to the thoracic inlet. In dogs that are not
area is inspected during the examination of both systems.
especially brachycephalic, the base of the tongue can
be retracted far enough forward during inspection of
the pharynx (Chapter 11) to reveal the cranial part of
the larynx. If further internal examination is necessary,
it must be carried out under anesthesia with a
laryngoscope and a bronchoscope.
Technique
The throat and neck are inspected with the neck stretched
slightly forward and upward. In this position palpation
can be performed by placing one hand around the larynx
Fig. 9.6 Percussion of the right frontal sinus of a dog.
(without pressing!) and then moving it caudally.
67
Chapter 9:
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Fig. 9.7 Oropharynx of a healthy dog. Opening the mouth without pressing on the base of the tongue (left! provides a view at the transition from
the hard palate to the soft palate. By pressing the base of the tongue downward and forward (right). the caudal part of the soft palate (somewhat long
ll jandeun u! llerap u! paqluosap 5! 4anow ayn bujuado joy pouiaw aul pioy lelsuot aut pue sojida ay4 4him layjabot 'paadsui aq ues (6op s!un u!
Note: Few dogs tolerate this inspection without anesthesia and in cats anesthesia is always required.
The pressure sensitivity of the trachea is examined
9.2.4 Thorax
by applying slight pressure at three locations: just before
The objectives of examination of the thorax are:
the thoracic inlet, at the midpoint of the cervical trachea,
and at the level of the first tracheal rings. The pressure
observation of the respiratory movements by
should be just sufficient to cause a slight deformation
inspection
of the trachea. After this kind of deep palpation, always
detection of abnormalities in the thoracic wall by
pause slightly (at least until the next expiration) to see
inspection and palpation
if a cough follows (not normal!). Finally the larynx is
detection of abnormalities in the structure and
aul Aiensn asneoaq isel lun yal si sui 'paedied osie
function of the bronchi, lung tissue, and pleura by
larynx in dogs and cats is more sensitive to pressure
auscultation and percussion
than the trachea and because even in healthy animals a
Good examination of the thorax requires some familiarity
cough may be stimulated by this palpation. If a laryngeal
with the anatomy. The following remarks refer to the
or tracheal stridor is suspected but there is some
superficial anatomy of the thorax and cranial abdomen
       
(Fig. 9.8) and to the branching of the bronchi and the
pressure can be applied to the larynx and to various
divisions of the lung lobes (Fig. 9.9).
places along the trachea. A change in tone of the stridor
usually gives more certainty about the location of the
Examination of the first ribs and most cranial parts of
obstruction.
the cranial lung lobes is partly or completely prevented
Fig. 9.8 Structures in the thorax and cranial part of the abdomen of the dog seen from the left and from the right.
Physical examination
The shape of the thorax varies markedly among different
breeds. Especially among racing and hunting dogs there are
breeds whose thorax is very deep dorsoventrally. When
these dogs lie on the sternum they easily develop pressure
sores. In other breeds the form of the thorax is much less
Soq ysug au u aadsa pue passadoo aeae
the thorax is almost cylindrical or even dorsoventrally
flattened. Pups generally have a much more cylindrical
 thorax than do adult dogs.
The examination for abnormalities of the thoracic
wall is, in this examination of the respiratory system,
only concerned with those related to respiration. Those
only affecting the skin are dealt with in Chapter 15.
Hence we are concerned here with subcutaneous or
deeper lesions that can be the cause or result of
abnormalities of the pleura or lungs.
Technique
Examination of the thoracic wall is carried out by
looking at the shape and symmetry of the thorax from
above and slightly to one side. Then the superficial
layer of the wall is palpated from behind, with one
hand on each side. Attention is given to the presence of
Fig. 9.9 Diagram of the lung lobes and bronchial tree in dogs and cats
any difference in temperature, pain, and/or crepitation.
viewed in the ventrodorsal direction (LA = accessory lobe of the right
If a local abnormality is found, it is examined in more
lung!.
detail (§ 4.1.2). Next, the ribs and the strength of the
intercostal muscles are examined. The ictus cordis is
by the musculature of the front legs. In order to count
palpated on the right and the left, followed by deeper
suoidao jo no ued jo seare Aue iaiap on uoedied
      
most caudal (twelfth) intercostal space. Keep in mind
Respiratory movements
that just behind the front leg the thorax is covered,
especially dorsally, by the serratus, scalenus, and
See § 8.3.1.
latissimus dorsi muscles.
On the right side the lung field is bordered caudally by
Bronchi, fungs, and pteurg
the liver, which lies against the diaphragm, while on the
These structures are examined by auscultation and
left the stomach forms most of the caudal border. The
percussion. Some fundamental aspects of these techniques
ventral part of the thorax is largely filled by the heart.
have been explained in Chapter 4.
Nevertheless, the lungs on both sides reach nearly to
the sternum as very thin extensions of the cranial lobes
Auscuftotion
(Fig. 9.8). The left lung is divided into two lobes, the
The sounds heard by auscultation may be extrathoracic,
cranial one being further divided into a cranial and a
pleural, or bronchopulmonary in origin. Extrathoracic
caudal part. The right lung consists of four separate
sounds can be caused by such things as movement of
lobes. As a result, the left and right bronchial branching
the stethoscope tube over the hair, or muscle trembling.
also differs markedly. In Figure 9.9 it can be seen that
 Pleural movements can also produce sounds. They
the right main bronchus gives off three branches, while
occur in pleuritis when there is little fluid production
on the left there is one large branch that further divides
(pleuritis sicca). This is called ‘pleural rubbing" and
into branches for the cranial and caudal parts of the
resembles the sound of walking on hard snow ('snow
cranial lobe. The bronchus of the right middle lobe is
crunching").10 However, it is seldom if ever heard in
directed quite ventrally.? This has the consequence
dogs and cats, because in these species pleuritis is
that, especially in mucopurulent bronchitis, mucopus
 usually exudative rather than fibrinous.
accumulates primarily in this lobe and can result in
Bronchopulmonary sounds may be inaudible (no
complete obstruction of the bronchus.
sound), weaker than expected ( weak respiratory sound),
of normal loudness and only during inspiration (normal
Thorocic wofl
respiratory sound), or louder than expected and including
This examination consists of evaluating the shape of the
the beginning of expiration (enhanced respiratory sound).
thorax and looking for abnormalities.
 Chapter 9:
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
heard over the trachea, in which inspiration and expiration
 are alike (bronchial respiration).
 The movement of respiratory gasses is only audible if
there is some turbulence. The development of turbulence
is very much dependent on the diameter of the airway
and the speed of the air stream (see also § 4.1.4) and
therefore above all the respiratory frequency. In large
dogs with a normal respiratory frequency, turbulence is
 present down to about the bifurcation of the trachea.
Peripheral to this the stream of the respiratory gasses is
laminar and thus no respiratory sound is produced.
The reason is that towards the periphery the total
diameter of the air passages continuously increases; the
velocity of the stream of the respiratory gasses is
therefore very slight. There are no indications that the
soft tissues of the peripheral airways or the alveoli are
able to produce vibrations of an audible frequency if
 they are subject to gradual pressure changes.11
Fig. 9.10 These are the locations on a medium-sized dog (15-30 kg)
where one can hear normal respiratory sounds (n). bronchial
If the respiratory frequency increases then the limit of
respiratory sounds (b). and heart sounds (h).
turbulence extends to the first branches of the main
bronchi. In smaller animals the usually somewhat higher
respiratory frequency and the small diameter of the
also be heard on the thoracic wall. One then hears
airways leads to respiratory sounds that under normal
respiratory sounds which are similar to the sounds that
conditions can be heard over a relatively large area. In
can be heard over the large air passages {trachea) and
contrast, in larger dogs with a relaxed respiration there
these are called bronchial respiratory sounds. We must
are often almost no audible respiratory sounds at the
remember that in smaller animals this type of
level of the caudal lobes.
respiratory sound is heard in the cranial part of the
The transmission of sound from the larger air passages
thorax even under normal conditions (Fig. 9.10).
to the thoracic wall is determined by the acoustic
During
rapid respiration
1(including
impedance {density of the material X speed of the
thermal
polypnea) the turbulence is so intensified and the
sound) of the intervening tissues. If the impedances are 
borders of turbulence are extended so far peripherally
an ise sat uni pn ue uum se es a
thoracic wall, a large part of the sound is transmitted.12
heard far caudally. In lung disorders in which there is
When there is a large amount of gas-containing lung
active expiration as the result of obstruction of the
tissue between the source of the sound and the thoracic
peripheral bronchi or bronchioles, a very clear expiratory
wall, a large part of the sound is reflected back from the
sound is heard. In such an expiration the intrathoracic
pleural surface. When the lungs and thoracic wall are
pressure rises so much that the central bronchi and the
 separated by gas or fluid in the pleural space, sound 
 trachea are narrowed enough to cause turbulence.
transmitted through the lung is reflected back when it
reaches the lung surface, with the result that no
 Under pathologic conditions other sounds can be heard
 respiratory sound reaches the thoracic wall.
in addition to the respiratory sounds. After many years 
The respiratory sound is audible over the trachea
throughout the respiratory cycle. It is also audible on
rhonchi (rhonchus is Greek for snoring sound) are now
the cranial part of the thoracic wall, certainly
in
distinguished.11,14
smaller animals, but as one moves caudally along the
Musical rhonchi. These are sounds with a peeping or
thoracic wall, the expiratory sound in particular
wheezing character. They occur in patients with
becomes softer and sometimes falls away completely.
obstructive lung diseases that result in active expiration.
This situation, in which a fairly constant respiratory
They can sometimes be heard at a distance. Parly via the
 sound is heard during inspiration but dies away during
Venturi effect (§ 4.1.4), the larger airways sometimes
expiration, is called the normal respiratory sound.
become so narrowed that the opposing walls almost come
Inspiration is an active process and expiration is
into contact. They begin to vibrate between the open
passive. During expiration the speed of the respiratory
(inspiration) and almost closed (expiration) state and
gasses decreases such that peripherally there is no
thus produce one musical tone. The tone is low if a large 
longer a sound that is still audible on the thoracic wall.
 and soft mass is in vibration and high if the vibrating
As noted above, infiltration of the lung can lead to
tissues are light and stiff. Such a “peep' can sometimes
better transmission, such that expiratory sounds can
 Occur during inspiration, ifthe bronchus is not adequately
70
Physical examination
open during inspiration because of a persisting stenosis,
such as may be caused by a foreign body or tumor in the
bronchus.
Nonmusical
rhonchi. These are  short crackling
sounds
{crepitation) at the end of inspiration,
sometimes continuing to the beginning of expiration.
They occur in areas that are not adequately filled with
respiratory gasses but are infiltrated with fluid. It was
for a long time supposed that these sounds were the
result of an excess of fluid in the airways. Now,
however, there are good grounds for assuming that
they are caused by the abrupt opening of previously
 closed bronchioles.15 Because of the very rapid change 
in the pressure, turbulence suddenly occurs in the 
bronchioli. In addition, the explosive equalization of
Fig. 9.l1 Auscultation of the left side of the thorax. The auscultation
the gas pressure brings the adjacent walls of the air
sites are shown by the dots
 passages into vibrations, which results in the sound.
The interstitial accumulation of fluid affects the
not hard, one can avoid the disturbing sound of hair
elastic properties of the lung and causes the closure of
scratching on its diaphragm.
bronchioles. This also explains why nonmusical
In order to detect even small localized lesions, the
rhonchi sometimes recur directly after an episode of
diaphragm or the cup of the stethoscope is placed on
heavy coughing, at exactly the same point in the
at least five locations on each side. At two-thirds of the
respiratory cycle and with the same rhythm as before.
height of the thorax the eighth, sixth, and fourth
A series of moist rhonchi can result from the opening
intercostal spaces are auscultated, and at one-third of
of different bronchioles one after another and/or from
the height the sixth and fourth intercostal spaces are
the opening of the same bronchioles time after time.
used (Fig. 9.11).
It is possible that sputum in the larger bronchi can
cause such sounds, but it seems likely that narrowing
For auscultation of the left side of the thorax it is best
also contributes. Narrowing of a large bronchus can be
to stand at an angle on the left side behind the animal
or
(Fig. 9.12) and hold the stethoscope with the left hand
the sagging inward of the membranous part of the
against the thoracic wall. The right hand can help to
bronchus. At the beginning of inspiration the walls of
hold the animal in position. To auscultate on the right
 i      
side it is best to be positioned on the right side, holding
the animal with the left hand. At each auscultation site,
u aui se dn uado uai u (wds a e ia d
expands and the intrathoracic pressure decreases.
the examiner should listen to at least two respiratory
In addition to muscle trembling, vocal sound can also
cycles, concentrating fully on the inspiration and the
interfere with auscultation. Vocal sounds are weakened
and filtered through the lung and thoracic wall, just
the respiratory sound. In addition, a search is made for
like the respiratory sounds and other sounds. Low
the occurrence of other sounds and if any are detected,
frequency sounds are especially well transmitted.
the type, number and location are recorded.
Auscultation can also be hindered by groaning of the
patient. In cats, purring makes lung auscultation
completely impossible. Purring occurs via frequent
alternating activity of the diaphragm and the intrinsic
also often be heard over the entire lung field and can
prevent auscultation of the lungs.
Borborygmi are not heard in the lung field under
normal conditions.
Technigue
room. The patient should be allowed to relax as much
Fig. 9.12 Lung auscultation in a dog. The researcher is positioned on
as possible, for muscle tension causes a quite disturbing
the side of the auscultation sites and keeps contact with the animal with
his other hand.
1
 Chapter 9:
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Percussion
In contrast with the percussion of an air-filled barrel,
the tension of the thoracic musculature.
percussion of the thorax only produces a slight resonance.
Both sides of the thorax are percussed along three vertical
The vibrations are quickly deadened by the structures of
and three horizontal lines {Fig. 9.14). First, the caudal
the thorax. The pitch and above all the intensity of the
border of the lung field is determined on the basis of
sound are very much determined by the elasticity and
three horizontal lines equally spaced over the thoracic
thickness of the thoracic wall. This explains the fairly
wall. In many animals these lines are found to be at (1)
large variation in percussion tones obtained with different
the midpoint of the scapula, (2) the shoulder joint, and
shapes of thorax and from animals in different states of
(3) the midpoint of the humerus. It is advisable to begin
nutritional condition. In animals with a thin thoracic wall
percussion on the right side, because there the caudal
the percussion tone sounds definitely more hollow than it 
border is usually clearly determined by the damping of
does in animals with a thick thoracic wall. Nevertheless,
the sound by the liver. As noted earlier, the stomach is on
in the individual animal sounds of such differing tone
the left side and it often contains some gas, which can
value can be produced that it is possible by percussion to:
make determination of the lung border difficult.
 determine the borders of the lungs
 obtain an indication of whether the amount of gas
in the underlying structures is increased or
decrea sed
Technique
The examiner presses slightly against the standing
animal and bends over in such a way as to be able to
percuss on the other side (Fig. 9.13). Depending on the
size of the patient and the height of the examination
table, the animal may or may not be placed on the
table. It is not very satisfactory to attempt percussion
with the animal lying down, because the underlying
table will also resonate. However, the condition or the
type of animal (cat) may not allow a standing position
to be maintained and so percussion may have to be
performed with the animal lying on its sternum. The
animal is positioned in such a way that the entire
Fig. 9.14 The percussion lines are shown with the caudal and ventral
spinal column as seen from above forms a straight line,
limits of the lung field.
plessimeter.
72
Notation
 For the vertical percussion lines the front leg is moved
the absolute damping can lie a little higher in dogs
forward so that the cranial part of the thorax 
is
with a deep thorax than in those with a more rounded
covered somewhat less by the triceps muscle. In spite
 thorax. During percussion one should pay attention to
of this, the percussion area in small animals is quite
possible reactions of the patient, such as coughing,
small. Hence in the area cranial to the sixth intercostal
and/or pain reactions.
space, one to three lines are percussed, depending on
Some authors are of the opinion that percussion of
the size of the animal, to determine the ventral border
the thorax has little or no diagnostic value in dogs and
of the lung field (= absolute damping by the heart).
In a bealthy animal a slightly dull (muscle) tone is heard
Along with many others, we have the experience that
along the top horizontal line. Caudally the tone becomes
serious
a hollow (lung) tone, which makes it possible to define
intrathoracic
a bnorma lities
(liquothorax,
the border (tenth intercostal space) of the abdomen,
pneumothorax, and diaphragmatic hernia) can be
uoeuexa peoisaud aq sieo pue ssop ul pazuaneieu
which produces a damped tone, especially on the right 
side. During percussion along the middle horizontal
(Table 9.1). In large dogs some examiners find it better
to use a percussion hammer and plessimeter (Fig. 9.13)
line a muscle tone is only heard directly behind the
to generate a sound that can be interpreted. In small
triceps muscle. Caudal to this a full lung tone
is
dogs and in cats the thoracic wall is much thinner than
produced,
which makes the caudal border (eighth
in large dogs, and usually the finger-finger method
intercostal space) easy to define. Especially on the left
side, the relative damping of the sound by the heart 
produces an adequate percussion sound.
An overview of possible thoracic abnormalities that
 affects percussion along the lowest horizontal line,
where definition of the caudal border of the lungs
can be found is presented in Table 9.1. The table lists
global characteristics that may be observed by physical
(sixth intercostal space) is already difficult because the
examination in some of the conditions of the lungs and
stomach does not give a clearly deadened tone.
pleura.
Percussion along the vertical lines first produces a
muscle tone dorsally and then a full lung tone, which
9.3 Notation
gradually becomes damped in the lower half of the
thorax because of the relative damping by the heart.
The form on the DVD can be used to record findings in
Here the lungs are only a thin covering over the heart,
a way that provides an overview. Drawings are included
especially on the left. Depending on the size of the
onwhichtomark the results of auscultationand
patient, the lower border of the lung percussion field is
percussion. Both the location of various sounds and the
found to be 1.5 to 4.5 cm above the sternum, in the
borders of the lung percussion field can be shown on
form of the absolute damping by the heart. However,
the drawings.
Table 9.1 Overview of findings by inspection/palpation, auscultation, and percussion in some abnormalities of the lungs and
pleura (see also Chapters 4, 8, and 10). (This table is meant to stimulate thinking about the basis for the findings;
it is not meant to be memorized)
condition
inspection/palpation
auscultation
percussion
Lrquothorox in
Usually na abnormalities except farced
Very few or na respiratary sounds ventrally
The percussion sound is damnpened
ejatelq s6op
respiratory movemments. Breathing is often
 in thorax. Heart sounds can also be
 ventral to the (horizantal fluid
in cats
pendulous.
 darmpened. Usually enhanced respiratary
sufface. Above it the resonance is
sormetimes
 sounds dorsal to the (horizontal) fluid line.
normal or increased.
unilateral
Pneumothorux
Trauma mmay have caused local lesions
 Respiratory sounds weak ar inaudible
Increased resonance. especially
usually
[sweling. skin defect. subcutaneous
 despite forced respiratory mmovennents.
dorsally. Enlargement of the
 bilateral
ermphysema). Breathing is usually
Heart sounds are audible and unaffected.
percussion field caudally but caudal
 pendulous.
inits are dificult to identify.
Oraphragmatic
Pendulous respiration. Change in location af
 Heart and lung sounds decreased on the
 Decreased resonance on the side of
hennrc often
the ictus cordis: weak on the side of the
 side where intestines are located and
the hernia. but if a gas-filled stommach
unilateral
hernia and enhanced on the contralateral
 enhanced on the contralateral side.
is herniated into the thorax. the
side: it may alsa be shifted cranially.
 can be increased
Lung rnfrltrote
As in liquothorax.
Enhanced respiratory sounds (bronchial
Decreased resonance in the affected
often unilateral
 respiratory sounds) in the area where the
eaje
infiltrate reaches the tharacic wal. If the 
 bronchus is clased the lung sounds are
weak
73
Chapter 9:
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
9.4 Further examination
cytologic examination, rhinoscopy with
appropriate optical instruments, bronchoscopy,
If further examination of the respiratory system is
bronchography
necessary, there are several possibilities, at progressively
 lung function studies (including dynamic
higher levels of practice:
 scintigraphy), lung biopsy
white blood cell count and differential
 radiographic examination, aspiration from the
thorax, bacteriologic examination, rhinoscopy
with otoscope, laryngoscopy
References
     a   
8 Crawford EC Jr. Mechanical aspects of panting in dogs. J Appl
 Fedlman EC. eds. Textbook of veterinary internal medicine.
Physiol 1962: 17:249.
 Diseases of the dog and the cat. 5th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders:
9 Venker-van Haagen AJ. Bronchoscopy of the normal and abnormal
2000:194-197.
canine. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1979: 15:397.
 2 Widdicombe JG. Mechanism of cough and its regulation. Eur J
10 Jansveld CAF. Bakker W. Braat MCP. Rapport van de Commissie
Respir Dis 1980: 61:5110.
Nomenclatuur Longgeluiden (Report by the Commission
 3 Newhouse M. Sanchis J. Bienenstock J. Lung defense mechanisms.
Nomenclature Lung Sounds). Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 1991:
New Engl J Med 1976: 295:990.
135:2380-2383
 4 Crowe DT. Clinical use of an indwelling nasogastric tube for enteral
11 Forgacs P. Lung sounds. London: Bailliere Tindall: 1978.
 nutrition and fluid therapy in the dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp 
12 Donnerberg RL. Druzgalski CK. Hamlin RL. et al. Sound transfer
Assoc 1986: 22:675.
function of the congested canine lung. Br J Dis Chest 1980: 74:23.
 5 Sitzel SE. Stein DR. Walt DR. Enhancing vapor sensor discrimination
13 Murphy RLH. Holford SK. Knowler WC. Visual lung-sound
 by mimicking a canine nasal cavity flow environment. J Am Chem 
characterization by time-expanded wave form analysis. New Engl J
Soc 2003: 125:3684.
Med 1977: 296:968.
6 Blatt CM. Taylor CR. Habal MB. Thermal panting in dogs: the lateral
 14 van Everdingen JE. De ratel des doods (The death rattle). Ned
 nasal gland. a source of water for evaporative cooling. Science 1972:
Tijdschr Geneeskd 1982: 126:1704-1705.
177:804.
 15 Munakata M. Homma Y. Matsuzake M. et al. Production mechanism 
7 Schmidt-Nielsen K. Bretz WL. Tayor CR. Panting in dogs:
of crackles in excised normal canine lungs. J Appl Physiol 1986:
 unidirectional air flow over evaporative surfaces. Science 1970:
61:1120-1125.
169:1102.
10
Circulatory system
A.A. Stokhof and A. De Rick
The circulatory system can only function optimally
Chapter contents
when both the flow of lymph and the circulation of
blood are adequate. Examination of the lymphatic
10.1 History 75
system, chiefly by examination of the lymph nodes,
10.11  Symptoms 75
was described in Chapter 8. The examination of the
Dyspnea ond ropid fotigue (dyspnea of
remainder of the circulatory system can be divided into:
exertion) 75
 arterial system
Coughing 76
capillary system
Edemo 76
venous system
Fainting 76
the heart
Other signs 76
The examination of the circulatory system consists of
10.12 Living conditions 76 
taking the specific history and the examination of the
10.1.3 Past medical history 76
above systems and the heart.
10.2 Physical examination 76
10.2.1 Arterial system 76
10.2.2 Capillary system 77
10.1 History
10.2.3 Venous system 77
Among the disorders of the circulatory system which
Jugulor vein 78
lead to signs observed by the owner, cardiac
Edemo 78
insufficiency is the most important and so questions
Size of the liver 78
are concentrated around this. The picture of the failing
Ascites 79
usuo suni jo suis aq pneup si aua al
Saphenous vein 79
and lung edema. A failing right ventricle leads to signs
10.2.4 The heart 80
of systemic venous congestion and peripheral edema. A
Inspection 80
combination of the two also occurs frequently. In these
cases endurance can be markedly reduced and fainting
Patpation 80
can occur. Hence the following aspects are relevant to
Auscultotion: heort sounds 81
a history concerned with the circulatory apparatus.
Auscultotion: murmurs 82
Auscultation: technique 82
Percussion 84
10.1.1 Symptoms
10.3 Notation 85
Dyspnea ond rapid fotigue (dyspnea of exertion)
10.4 Further examination 85
These signs were discussed in Chapters 8 and 9. Cardiac
75
 Chapter 10:
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Other causes, but sometimes a remark by the owner leads 
10.1.3 Past medical history
to questions about differences between rest and exercise;
difficulty in breathing that is of cardiac origin can
The interpretation of findings may take into account
decrease markedly during rest.
previous illnesses and treatments, i
including viral
infections, septic processes, and the occurrence of heart
Coughing
disorders in relatives of the patient.
Coughing has been described in Chapter 9. Sometimes the
owner has heard episodes of loud coughing at night.!
10.2 Physical examination
During sleep the animal remains in the same position for
10.2.1 Arterial system
 a long time and this can lead to redistribution of blood
from the large (systemic) to the small (pulmonary)
The quality of the peripheral pulse {uniformity,
circulation, resulting in stimulation of cough receptors
amplitude, and form) is dependent on the forward
 in the trachea and bronchi.2 The coughing often stops
stroke volume of the left ventricle, the ejection speed,
after a small amount of thick, foamy material has been
the elasticity of the arterial vascular bed, the peripheral
coughed up. The material is then usually swallowed,
resistance, the pulse frequency, the systolic and
leading to gagging. Sometimes white, foamy fluid flows
diastolic blood pressure, the size and pressure-volume
from the nasal opening; this fluid may also be slightly
characteristics of the specific vessel, and the distance
red because of the presence of blood.
between the heart and the place where the pulse is
palpated.3 Other aspects of　this part of the
Edema
examination were discussed in Chapter 8.
The owner may notice edema in the locations described
No reliable impression of blood pressure can be
in Chapter 8, but the edema is often so slight that it is
obtained by counting the peripheral pulse. Blood
only detected by physical examination. The increased
pressure can be measured by direct (invasive) and
venous pressure can also lead to accumulation of fluid
indirect (noninvasive) methods. Direct measurements
in the peritoneal cavity, such that the owner observes
 e     i   
an increase in the size of the abdomen. Portal
not suited for routine clinical use. As described in
congestion in cardiac insufficiency can also result in
§ 4.2, two indirect methods are being used in dogs and
diarrhea. Pleural fluid due to heart failure is primarily
cats and they employ two different physical principles:
 seen in cats and—-understandably—causes dyspnea.
oscillometry and the Doppler principle.
In both of these indirect methods a cuff is placed
Fointing
around a leg or the tail. The cuff is inflated until there is
Inadequate perfusion of the brain with blood can lead to
complete closure of the underlying artery (Fig. 10.1).
inability to continue walking or even to falling down
and brief loss of consciousness. The owner's description
will reveal that fainting occurs during periods of
inadequate reserve cardiac capacity, thus in particular
after exercise or exertion. When it has been shown that
the fainting spells have a cardiac etiology, they are called
Adams-Stokes seizures.
Other signs
There is a wide range of other signs. Growth can be
retarded in young animals with cardiac insufficiency,
probably as a result of suboptimal perfusion of various
organs. Anxiety and restlessness may occur during
episodes of tachycardia. Some cardiac disorders affect the
concentrating ability of the kidney {the mechanism is not
fully understood), with the result that polyuria may occur.
10.1.2 Living conditions
The use of the animal can be important if it is required
Fig. 10.1 Measurement of systolic blood pressure in a cat by use of the
for work involving physical effort which it can no
Doppler system. The position of the cuff enables measurement of blood
pressure in the brachial artery. Both slightly fexing the cat's elbow and
longer fulfil. There might not be a problem under
placing a finger on the cuff help to prevent the cuff from sliding down.
other conditions.
The transducer is placed over the artery distal to the cuff.
76
Physical examination
Then the cuff pressure is lowered gradually by releasing
detected if at least one-third of the normal amount of
the air. The pressure at the reopening of the artery is the
hemoglobin is present in the circulation.10 Hence in a
systolic blood pressure. Further lowering of the cuff
 more severe anemia the poor oxygenation of the blood
pressure leads to complete opening of the artery, and the
is not seen as cyanosis.
corresponding pressure is the diastolic blood pressure.
The capillary refill time and the temperature of the
The changes in sound frequency associated with the
skin of the extremities reveal information about the
latter are not accurately detected by the Doppler system
peripheral perfusion (§ 8.3.4 and § 8.3.5).
but oscillometric measurements often allow measurement
of both diastolic and systolic blood pressure.
10.2.3 Venous system
Noninvasive blood pressure measurements are in
Under normal conditions S9% of the circulating blood
increasing use in dogs and cats. While the currently
volume is in the venous system (Fig. 10.2). Blood
available instruments appear to provide useful results,
flows from all of the systemic veins to the right atrium.
they do not accurately reflect blood pressure.
For
The pressure in the right atrium is called the central
example, in comparison with the results of invasive
venous pressure (CVP) and it depends on both the
measurements of arterial blood pressure in dogs (the
venous flow to the heart and the ability of the heart to
upper limit of normal systolic pressure being 160 mm
pump out the blood that is delivered. A marked
Hg)，t
the
sensitivity and   specificity
of
indirect
underfilling of the vascular system will result in a low
measurements were 0.65 and 0.85 by oscillometry (see 
central venous pressure, but this can also result from a
 also § 3.1.5) and 0.71 and 0.86 by the Doppler system.5
very strong heart action. An abnormally high central
 Particularly in cats, blood pressure measurerments are
venous pressure can be caused by cardiac insufficiency
being made because of the not infrequent occurrence of
as well as by overfilling of the vascular system.
signs suggesting hypertension. In these patients results
appear to be reliable only with the Doppler system,6
In
cardiac
insufficiency
therenin-angiotensin-
oscillometric  measurements giving  erroneously
low
aldosterone system (RAAS) is stimulated. This leads to
values. For measurements with the Doppler system, the
enlargement of the circulating volume and thereby to
upper limit of systolic blood pressure in healthy cats is
further
elevation
of
theCVP.
The
observed
usually considered to be 170 mm Hg. Accuracy {see
abnormalities depend on the severity of the increase in
also § 3.1.3) is influenced by several factors. In
pressure. A slight increase in pressure can only be
addition to technical aspects such as the width and
observed by examining the jugular and saphenous
placement of the cuff, the resting condition of the
veins.
patient is important. Measurements are most easily
enlargement and ascites develop. Peripheral edema is
made with the cat sitting on the owner's lap. If this is
seen in only the most severe cases.
not possible, the cat should be put at ease as much as
 Since a high venous pressure causes the walls of veins
possible and should be supported ventrally. Stress may
to be under tension, pulsations in the large veins are
cause a rise in arterial blood pressure of >20 mm Hg.
7.8
visible
moreperipherallythan
under
 normal
conditions. The pressure wave is transmitted better by
the increased tension of the wall of the vein. During
10.2.2 Capillary system
each heart cycle, three venous pressure waves can be
recorded {Fig. 10.3): the A wave, the C wave, and the
At the point where blood flows from the arteriole into
V wave. The A wave or presystolic wave follows
the capillary, the pressure is about 4 kPa (30 mm Hg).
 In the systemic circulation the capillary blood can be
considered to be arterial blood as far as blood gasses
are concerned. The flow rate in the capillaries is
Small arteries-
1/1000 of that in the aorta {the cross-section of the
Venous sinuses
aorta being 2.5 cm? and that of the capillaries being
Large arteries-
25%
 and venules
2500 cm?) and it has a value of about 0.3 mm/s.9 Since
capillaries have a length of 0.3 to 1 mm, a unit of
blood remains in the capillaries for 1 to 3 s.
Lung vessels-
12%
The condition of the capillaries is examined by
evaluating the mucous membranes.
.Their color
indicates the degree of oxygenation of the blood.
Heart-
34%
Reduced hemoglobin is slightly more blue than
Large veins and
oxygenated hemoglobin. When the blood is poorly
venous reservoir
 oxygenated, a blue coloring of the mucous membranes
Fig. 10.2 Distribution of the blood volume among various types of
(cyanosis) is observed. However, cyanosis can only be
blood vessel
77
Chapter 10:
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
R
Fig. 10.4 Measurement of the central venous pressure with the aid of
a column of fluid.
Fig. 10.3 Schematic illustration of an electrocardiogram (above) and a
insufficiency. A number of peripheral veins are suitable
 pressure recording in the jugular vein. The A wave or presystolic wave
is the result of the atrial contraction. The C wave results from a
for estimating the CVP.
 presystolic wave caused by bulging of the tricuspid valve during
 In the physical examination, attention is first given to
isovolumetric contraction and from the propagation of the moverment of
the jugular vein, after which the ventral surface of the
the adjacent carotid artery. The V wave is caused by accumulation of the
thorax and abdomen, the prepuce, and the tarsus are
venous blood. The decrease which follows is the result of the opening of
the tricuspid valve. The fall at X is the result of relaxation of the atrium 
examined for signs of edema. The abdomen is palpated to
and the decrease in bulging of the tricuspid into the atrium at the end of
determine whether the liver is enlarged and an undulation
the contraction of the right ventricle. The fall at Y marks the rapid filling
test is performed. Finally, the saphenous vein is examined.
 phase of the right ventricle after opening of the tricuspid valve.
Juguior vein
immediately behind the P wave in the ECG and is the
When an animal is in a standing position and holding its
result of atrial contraction. The C wave is a presystolic
head in the normal way, the jugular vein is not visible or
wave and is synchronous with the plateau phase of the
palpable. At the thoracic inlet soft pulsations may be
carotid pulse. It is a movement of the jugular vein
recognizable. When the venous return is obstructed, the
caused by pulsations of the carotid artery. The V wave
jugular is often easily seen and/or palpated. If the
is a somewhat flatter wave and marks the end of
animal's coat is not too long, the A, C, and V waves
ventricular systole; it is caused by the gradual filling
are also visible more peripheral to the heart than under
of the right atrium with blood from the venous
normal conditions. The variation in venous tension
system. The associated movements are called the
caused
lbyi
intrathoracic pressure changes during
'venous pulse'.
respiration is also more easily seen when the central
venous pressure is increased. A recording is necessary
Measurements made by a catheter introduced via a
for precise examination of the venous pulsations.
 peripheral vein into the right atrium (Fig. 10.4) reveal
that the central venous pressure in healthy dogs is
Edemo
between -1 and +4 cm HzO. During the physical
If a hindrance to venous drainage leads to peripheral
examination, it is possible to obtain an impression of
 edema, the edema will be seen in dependent areas having
the central venous pressure and the associated venous
a relatively low tissue pressure. These areas are the
tension by a number of external signs.
ventral thoracic and abdominal walls, the prepuce, and
The venous system is a system of communicating vessels.
the area around and above the tarsal joint (Fig. 10.5).
It does not beha ve entirely as such, however, because it is
A slight depression made in the edematous area remains
a closed system. Yet due to the fact that the veins are
for some time.
collapsible, it is possible by examination of peripheral
veins to obtain an impression of the central venous
Size of the fiver
pressure. Such a peripheral vein is thus used as a
The liver is capable of taking up a large amount of blood
manometer tube. It must be remembered that any
as a result of the compliance of the intrahepatic venous
system and the elasticity of this organ. Thus an
 and the right heart can cause an increase in venous
increase in central venous pressure quickly leads to
tension, without being an indication of cardiac
enlargement of the liver. This can be used to evaluate
78
Physical examination
Fig. 10.5 Left. a 12-year-old dog with cardiac insufficiency.
photographed from behind. There is edematous thickening around both
tarsi and metatarsi. At the time the photograph was taken. this was
most pronounced on the left. This type of asymmetry may occur when
the patients lies for a long time on one side. Right. a skinny boxer (note
ribs and spinous processes of vertebrae) with severe ascites.
the venous circulation. The liver then becomes palpable
dog {Fig. 10.5). If the volume is sufficient this fluid
on the right behind the costal arch. The examiner  can be detected by testing for undulation. For this
stands behind  the dog and  moves the right hand
purpose the examiner stands behind the dog (Fig. 10.7).
caudally over the right ventral surface of the rib cage.
With one hand placed flat on one side of the
Normally the liver is not palpable but when the liver is 
abdomen as a detector, a short tap is made with the
enlarged a resistance is felt in the abdomen just behind
fingers on the abdominal wall on the other side.
the costal arch. An estimate is made of how far (in cm)
The undulation test is positive when the resulting
behind the costal arch the liver is palpable (Fig. 10.6).
vibration is very clearly felt with the flat hand {see
also § 11.2.3). In the cat an increased central venous
Ascites
pressure leads after a short while to accumulation
 Persistent elevation of the central venous pressure leads
of free fluid in the pleural cavity rather than the
to free fluid in the abdominal cavity, especially in the
abdominal cavity.
Sophenous vein
Although examination of the jugular vein can sometimes
reveal hindrance to the central venous return, local
venous obstructions either proximal or distal to
the place of observation can cause an erroneous
  a   o   s
shape of the thorax and neck, so that another vein
would be preferable. The saphenous vein is quite
suitable, with the understanding that it is a relatively
small peripheral vein and the resulting ‘manometer
system? responds rather slowly. The venous pulsations
referred to above as the A, C, and V waves, cannot be
Fig. 10.6 Detecting hepatic congestion by palpation. In the ventral
observed here, but variations in venous tension induced
epigastrium the right hand carefully palpates with a back-and-forth
movement to determine whether resistance is felt in the abdomen 
by respiration are surprisingly easy to observe here in
drectly behind the costal arch.
large dogs.
79
Chapter 10:
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Fig. 10.8 Assessment of the venous tension at the saphenous vein. In
this healthy dog in lateral recumbency the leg has been moved to a
 height a few centimeters above that of the central venous system.
In this position the saphenous vein has not yet collapsed completely.
The vein is still visible (arrows). but tension is no longer palpable.
The frequencies above 30 Hz can only be heard. The
Fig. 10.7 Undulation test to determine whether there is free fluid in the
examination of the heart must therefore include
 abdominal cavity (ascites).
inspection, palpation, and auscultation. Percussion can
also be used. Both inspection and palpation are used to
observe the apex beat or ictus cordis. This local
For examination of the saphenous vein the patient is
   i     
placed lying on its side and, because of the almost
of the contraction of the left ventricle, in which it moves
median position of the central venous system and the
forward and touches the thoracic wall.11 The location
modest sensitivity of the measuring system, it does not
and strength of the ictus are normally determined by the
matter whether on the right or the left side. The distance
size of the heart, the stroke volume, the ejection time,
is then measured from (a) the sternum to the table
the ballistic rebound, and the turning of the heart during 
surface and (b) the dorsal process of the seventh thoracic
systole. The ictus is influenced by the thickness of the
vertebra to the table surface. The sum of these two
thoracic wall and the amount of lung tissue between the
values, in centimeters, is divided by 2 to obtain
heart and thoracic wall. The position of the patient is
the distance of the central venous system from the table
also very important.12 In the healthy dog and cat the
surface. This distance is the O value for the measurement
ictus cordis is found in the ventral part of the thorax,
of central venous pressure in this dog. If the saphenous
closer to the sternum on the right side than on the left.
vein is raised to this height by lifting up the leg, under
normal circumstances the vein will lose its tension and
Inspection
partially collapse (Fig. 10.8). Only when the vein is
Inspection is especially useful in animals with a deep
about S cm above the reference point does it collapse
thorax and a short coat. Note should be taken of the
completely. The tension of the vein is evaluated by
place where the heart action is visible and also the
inspection and especially by palpation, which is possible
intensity with which the thoracic wall moves in this
even in long-haired dogs without clipping the hair. If the
location. Normally the movement is visible at locations
vein does not collapse, the leg is raised further and the
where the ictus is palpable. In healthy animals the ictus
height at which the vein finally does collapse gives an
is stronger on the left than the right. The ictus is
indication of the degree of venous hypertension.
inspected from a position to the side and slightly
behind the animal.
10.2.4 The heart
Poipotion
The heart action produces a range of vibrations whose
The examiner stands behind the animal and performs
frequencies are between 1 and 1000 Hz (cycles/s). These
palpation with both hands (Fig. 10.9). The movements
vibrations can be perceived on the outer side of the body
 in the healthy animal are always more intense on the
 and have diagnostic meaning. The lower frequencies, up
left than on the right. To determine the intercostal
to about 30 Hz, can only be seen or felt but not heard.
 spaces in which the ictus cordis is palpable, counting is
80
Physical examination
Auscuftotion: heort sounds
The heart sounds detected by auscultation are described as
the first, second, third, and fourth sounds. In the healthy
dog and cat the first and second sounds are particularly
well heard. The origin of the sounds is as follows:13
First beart sound. The first heart sound is mainly
caused by the contraction of both ventricles. Four
components can be differentiated, indicated as A, B, C,
and D (Fig. 10.11).
The atrial contraction brings the atrioventricular valve
into a state of preparation for closure. This forms the
beginning of the first heart sound (A). This is followed
Fig. 10.9 Palpation of the ictus cordis in a medium-sized dog.
by the isovolumetric pressure increase in the ventricle,
via which the intraventricular column of blood is
begun in the 12th space and proceeds forward ventral
brought under pressure and begins to vibrate (B). The
to the level of the latissimus dorsi muscle. Two
pressure now becomes higher in the ventricle than in
characteristics of the ictus are determined: (1) the areas
the aorta and pulmonary artery, causing the semilunar
over which it is palpable, and (2) whether there is a
valves to open (C). Part of the blood in the ventricle is
fremitus (palpable vibration or thrill) and, if so, where
now ejected (D).
it is located.
Second beart sound. During the remainder of systole
there are normally no audible sounds. After ejection of
The strength of the ictus cordis is difficult to describe
the blood, the pressure in the ventricle falls below that
exactly. The surface over which the ictus is felt
in the aorta and the pulmonary artery, so that the
provides information about its strength. For example,
blood column in these vessels begins to flow back and
excitement leads to agreater stroke volume and
the semilunar valves close. The resulting vibration
consequently the ictus is clearly stronger than at rest,
and it can also be palpated over a larger number of
causes the second heart sound. The first component of
intercostal spaces. In the healthy animal at rest the
ictus cordis is palpable on the left side in the 4th, Sth,
and 6th intercostal spaces, and on the right in the 3rd,
4th, and Sth spaces. Normally there is no fremitus
(vibration which can be felt on the thoracic wall). If a
fremitus is felt with the animal in a standing position,
the intercostal space in which it is located and its
height on the thoracic wall are both recorded.
In small dogs and in cats the ictus cordis can also be
palpated by holding the thorax with one hand from
below, using the other hand to count the intercostal
 spaces as described above (Fig. 10.10).
E
Fig. 10.11 Schematic explanation of the development of the heart
sounds. The first heart sound is built up from the following 
components: A atrial contraction prepares the atrioventricular valve for
 closure. B isovolumetric contraction. C opening of the semilunar
valves. and D rapid ejection phase. The second heart sound is mainly
Fig. 10.10 Palpation of the ictus cordis in a cat. whereby the intercostal
produced by the closure of the semilunar valves. E The third heart
 spaces are being counted.
sound marks the beginning of diastolic relaxation. F.
Chapter 10:
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
this sound consists chiefly of the vibration caused by the
S2
aortic valve and the second component is from the
pulmonary valve. The aortic valve closes just slightly
earlier than the pulmonary valve.
Third heart sound. Since the first heart sound the
ventricle has still been in the contraction phase. At this
moment it comes to an end. The blood which has
accumulated behind the closed atrioventricular valve
flows rapidly into the relaxed ventricle. This causes the
third heart sound.
Fourth heart sound. During the remainder of diastole
there is no audible heart sound except during the
contraction of the atria, which can be heard as the
pue sop aui ul pueau aq ueo siul 'punos yeau qhnoy
Fig. 10.12 ECG and location of the heart sounds during two heart
cat when the propagation of the impulse from the
cycles. illustrating the relative sound intensity. S1 and S2: first and
atrium to the ventricle is completely disturbed.
second heart sounds. a: ECG. b: heart sounds without murmurs (pure
In healthy dogs and cats only the first and second
 heart sounds). c: systolic crescendo-decrescendo murmur. d:
heart sounds are audible. The third and fourth heart
continuous murmur. both systolic and diastolic crescendo-decrescendo.
Aluou pueau aq ot Aiisuaul ue mol ool aaeu spunos
e: prediastolic crescendo-decrescendo murmur. f: presystolic
crescendo-decrescendo murmur.
but become audible in certain pathologic conditions
(ga llop rhythm).
the cardiac cycle. The quality or character of the sound
Auscuftotion: murmurs
is described in terms such as blowing, creaking, rough,
If additional sounds are heard, it is important to
musical, etc.
The transmission of the murmur can sometimes be
determine whether they are cardiac or extracardiac in
origin (see Technique). If the origin is cardiac, the
important for its localization. Transmission of murmurs
intensity of the murmur is recorded on an ordinal scale
is good when very little of their energy is absorbed.
($ 3.1.2) having six classes or grades for each valve
Acoustic impedance (resistance) also plays a role
(§ 4.1.4). With certain abnormalities the transmission of
intensity is called the maximal point. This may indicate
the murmur is such that it is heard at locations other
an abnormality in that valve.
than the maximal point. For example, in aortic stenosis
When, for example, we speak of a murmur with an
the crescendo-decrescendo noise during systole is easily
heard over the carotid arteries. The stethoscope is
intensity of 4/6, we indicate that the intensity is grade
4 on a scale of 6. The grades can be described as follows:
therefore placed over the thoracic inlet, where the
grade 1: a murmur of very low intensity, only heard
pulsations of the carotid arteries can be felt.
when one has been auscultating for a few seconds
grade 2: a very soft murmur that is heard directly
Auscuftotion: technique
upon auscultation
The examination must be ca rried out in as quiet a room as
grade 3: louder than grade 2 but without fremitus
possible, and the patient must be as relaxed as possible.
grade 4: a loud murmur, with fremitus
Conversation should be stopped during auscultation.
grade 5: louder than grade 4 but no longer heard when
The examiner stands behind and to the left of the animal
the stethoscope is removed from the thoracic wall
to auscultate on the left thoracic wall and to the right in
 grade 6: the sound of the murmur is even audible
order to auscultate on the right side. The diaphragm
when the stethoscope is held slightly away from the
side of the stethoscope end piece is used (§ 4.2). The cup
thoracic wall.
side is used only when low-tone diastolic murmurs
The variation in intensity in relation to the heart action
are suspected. When listening to the heart one must
is described as, for example, a systolic crescendo-
differentiate between cardiac and extracardiac sounds,
decrescendo murmur, a crescendo noise, a continuous
the epicardium forming the border. It is helpful to
noise, a diastolic noise, etc. (Fig. 10.12).
These
temporarily stop the animal's respiration by closing its
characteristics can often only be recognized by an
nostrils (Fig. 10.13).
experienced examiner. For a more objective and detailed
evaluation of the murmur, a phonocardiogram is made.
In the systematic approach attention is given to:
Heart rate. In dogs a heart rate above 120/min is
In addition to the intensity and the maximal point, the
termed tachycardia and a rate below 60/min is termed
type of sound is described (pitch, quality, intensity), as
bradycardia. In cats the corresponding limits are 180/
well as the variation in the sound related to times in
min and 120/min.
82
Physical examination
Fig. 10.13 Closing the animal's nostrils to exclude the respiratory
sounds during auscultation of the heart.
Pulse deficit. As discussed in § 8.3.2, the heart rate
and the pulse rate should be identical. A pulse deficit
indicates arrhythmia.
Heart rbythm. In dogs with heart rates below 120/
min there is usually respiratory sinus arrhythmia {see
§ 8.3.2). This physiological arrhythmia becomes more
pronounced as the heart rate decreases and it disappears
as the heart rate increases. A very regular rhythm at a
low frequency indicates the presence of a conduction
disturbance. Arrhythmia at a high frequency indicates a
pathological condition such as extrasystoles or atrial
fibrillation.
Heart sounds. Under physiological conditions, two
heart sounds can be(
distinguished. At very high
frequencies, such as in cats, often only one heart sound
Fig. 10.14 Valve areas in the dog: 1 mitral. 2 pulmonic. 3 aortic.
is heard. The presence of more than two heart sounds
4 tricuspid.
is a bnormal.
Murmurs. Murmurs are characterized by their
valve region in which one is listening. In the regions
intensity, quality (see above), and location (valve area).
Clinical experience has shown that abnormalities of
of the mitral and tricuspid valves the first heart sound
Be oyads e ui pausinus aq isq ue aaiea yea
a jo suo a un uo an un hanol s
of the thoracic wall. In dogs four valve areas are
pulmonic and aortic valves, the opposite is true. Using
BR to represent the first sound and TP to represent
recognized. On the left side: the mitral area is in the
01 suanal lews pue siel Sussn Aq pue puooas aul
Sth intercostal space {corresponding to the bicuspid or
indicate the intensity, we can create Table 10.1 (PCG =
left atrioventricular valve), the pulmonic area is in the
3rd intercostal space (corresponding to the valve of
phonocardiography).
the pulmonic trunk), and the aortic area is in the 4th
Then one concentrates on the third or fourth heart
intercostal space (corresponding to the aortic valve)
sound to determine whether either is audible. When
(Fig. 10.14). On the right side the tricuspid area (right
the third or fourth sound is audible, the effect is
atrioventricular valve) is in the 4th intercostal space
usually referred to as a gallop rhythm (S3 and S4
just below the level corresponding to the aortic valve
gallop). In dogs and cats the fourth heart sound is
on the other side.
mainly audible in third degree atrioventricular block.
First, one concentrates on the first heart sound and
In the cat, which often has a relatively small thorax, the
compares it with the succeeding first heart sound. Then
valve regions are more difficult to describe. We usually
one concentrates on the second heart sound and
limit auscultation to three regions (Fig. 10.15):
compares it with the succeeding second heart sound.
mitral: left Sth and 6th intercostal spaces
Then attention is given to the relation between the first
-aortic and pulmonic: left 2nd and 3rd intercostal
and second heart sounds together in relation to the
spaces
83
Chapter 10:
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Table 10.1
valveregion
Symbot
PCG
ECG
e
BRtp
pulmonic
br
TP
TP
Ao
 tricuspid
BRtp
TrP
tricuspid: right 4th and Sth intercostal spaces
above the costochondral junction.
The difference in accent on the first and second heart
sounds is the same as described above for the dog.
Purring can be very disturbing. One can try to stop
purring by stretching the cat's head backward and
pressing slightly on the trachea just under the larynx,
or asking the owner to let the cat loose. Also, it can
often be stopped by holding an alcohol-soaked ball of
cotton in front of the cat's nose.
Percussion
When it is not possible to make radiographs of the
thorax directly, percussion still has a useful place in the
examination.
Indirect   finger-finger   percussion  or
hammer-plessimeter percussion makes it possible to
define the percussion damping caused by the heart.
Vertical percussion lines are chosen cranial to the sixth
intercostal space, beginning on the left side. The
technique is described in (§ 9.2.4). One can obtain an
impression of the relative and absolute damping by the
heart. Normally the relative heart damping begins just
under the shoulder line as a gradually increasing
damping. The absolute damping due to the heart is
easily defined. In healthy, medium-sized dogs it is
approximately 3 cm above the sternum on the right
side and approximately 4 cm above the sternum on the
left. These values must be adjusted according to the
size of the dog and the shape of the thorax. In a dog
with a deep thorax the line of damping lies a little
higher than in a dog with a round thorax. Percussion is
84
Fig. 10.15 Valvular regions in the cat: 1 mitral. 2 and 3 pulmonic and
particularly useful when there is liquothorax, marked
aorta (not easily differentiated). 4 tricuspid.
cardiac dilatation, or pericardial effusion.
Further examination
10.3 Notation
plain radiography
electrocardiography (ECG)
The form on the DVD provides a convenient overview of
phonocardiography
the findings.
ultrasonography
scintigraphy
10.4 Further examination
cardiac catheterization
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
If the above examinations do not lead to a diagnosis,
further examinations can be carried out. In order of
increasing requirements of equipment and experience,
these include:
References
1 De Morais HA. Pathophysiology of heart failure and clinical
7 Sparkes AH. Caney SM. King MC. et al. Inter- and intraindividual
evaluation of cardiac function. In: Etinger SJ. Feldman EC. eds.
variation in Doppler ultrasonic indirect blood pressure
Textbook of veterinary internal medicine. Diseases of the dog and
measurements in healthy cats. J Vet Int Med 1999: 13:314-318.
 cat. 5th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders: 2000:692-713.
 8 Belew AM. Barlett T. Brown SA. Evaluation of the white-coat effect
:snapunes eudiapeld Ahojoipuen auue dd jans 'rs jabua z
in cats. J Vet Int Med 1999: 13:134-142.
1970.
9 Guyton AC. Textbook of medical physiology. 4th edn. Philadelphia:
 3 ORourke RA. Shaver JA. Silverman ME. The history. physical
WB Saunders: 1971.
examination. and cardiac auscultation. In: Fuster V. Alexander RW.
10 Keele CA. Neil E. Joels N. Samson Wright's Applied physiology.
ORourke RA. eds. Hurst's The heart. 1Oth edn. New York: McGraw
Oxford: Oxford University Press: 1982.
Hill: 2001:223
 11 Bickley LS. Szilagyi PG. Bates' Guide to physical examination and
 4 Erhardt W. Henke J. Carr A. Techniques. In: Egner B. Carr A.
history taking. 8th edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:
 Brown S. eds. Essential facts of blood pressure in dogs and cats.
2003:273-277.
Babenhausen. Germany: Beate Egner Vet Verlag: 2003:34-59.
 12 Franke P. Allgemeine und spezielle Auskultation des Herzens.
5 Stepien RL. Rapoport GS. Henik RA. et al. Comparative diagnostic
Munich: JF Bergman: 1984.
test characteristics of oscillometric and Doppler ultrasonography
13 Rushmer RF. Cardiovascular dynamics. 3rd edn. Philadelphia:
methods in the detection of systolic hypertension in dogs. J Vet Int
Saunders: 1970.
Med 2003: 17:65-72.
14 Harvey WP. de Leon Jr AC. Murmurs. In: Fuster V. Alexander RW.
 6 Sander C. Horauf A, Reusch C. Indirekte Blutdruckmessung bei
ORourke RA. eds. Hurst's The heart. 6th edn. New York: McGraw-
 Katzen mit Diabetes mellitus. chronischer Nephropathie und 
Hill: 1986.
 hypertropher Kardiomyopathie (lndirect blood pressure
measurement in cats with diabetes mellitus. chronic nephropathy
 and hypertrophic cardiormyopathy). Tierartzl Prax 1998: 26:110-118.
85
11
Digestive tract
J. Rothuizen, E. Schrauwen, L.F.H. Theyse and L. Verhaert
 Chapter contents
Abdominol lymph nodes 96
Percussion 96
11.1 History 87
Auscultotion 97
11.2 Physical examination 88
Generotion of sploshing sounds 97
11.2.1 Head 88
Undulotion test 97
Introduction 88
11.2.4 Anus and circumanal area 97
Chewing musculature 88
introduction 97
Oral cavity 88
Inspection 98
Phorynx. tonsils. ond soft polote (Fig. 11.1) 90
 Palpation 98
Salivary glands (Fig. 11.2) 90
11.2.5  Rectum and adjacent sructures 99
Hyoid bones 90
Introduction 99
Technique 90
Technique ond interpretotion 99
Teeth 91
Anus 99
Hard polote 93
Rectum 99
Tongue 93
Coccygeal ond levotor oni muscles 99
Pharynx 94
Internal iliac lymph nodes 100
11.2.2  Esophagus 94
Pelvic bones 100
Introduction 94
Prostote 100
Technique ond interpretotion 94
11.3 Notation 100
11.2.3 Abdomen 94
11.4  Further examination 100
Introduction 94
Inspection 94
Poipotion 95
In addition to the symptoms described by the owner in
Superficiol poipotion 95
the general history (Chapter 6), such as dysphagia
Deep polpotion 95
(difficult swallowing or complete inability to swallow),
Polpation of the kidneys ond urinary
vomiting, abnormal feces, and abnormal defecation,
troct 95
several other symptoms  may  originate from  the
Polpotion of the liver 95
digestive tract. These will be discussed below in the
Poipotion of the spleen 96
specific history. When there is suspicion of aspiration
Poipotion of the poncreas 96
pneumonia, as can occur with swallowing disorders,
Polpotion of the ovory. uterus. ond
the history and physical examination must be extended
prostote 96
to include the respiratory tract (Chapter 9).
Poipotion of the stomoch 96
The examination of the digestive tract is usually
sy ym waod al ot iuaalan hed eui ot pail
Poipotion of the intestinol troct 96
now been formulated (Chapter 3). Rectal examination
86
History
is not needed when the problem is dysphagia, nor is
retrograde expulsion of vomitus. This is often preceded by
examination of the upper digestive tract necessary
swallowing, salivation, and restlessness (symptoms of
when the problem is tenesmus alvi (painful, repeated
nausea).
Active vomiting is a reflex phenomenon.
urgency to defecate). If a complete examination of the
 Neurogenic stimuli which lead to vomiting stimulate the
digestive tract is indicated, then the examination
vomiting center in the brainstem. Humoral stimuli that
proceeds in sequence: mouth, pharynx, esophagus,
lead to vomiting stimulate the chemoreceptor center, from
abdomen, anus and perineum, and rectum.
which the vomiting center is then stimulated. Stimulation
of the vomiting center leads to coordinated muscle
11.1 History
activity, of which the contractions of the muscles of the
 abdominal wall are the most striking.
The best known manifestations of abnormal functioning of
The term diarrhea is used when the characteristics
the digestive tract are vomiting and diarrhea. These
of the feces are changed by an increase in the volume
 symptoms will be discussed in detail below and a series of
and/or percentage of water. Diarrhea is also often
 specific questions will be presented together with examples.
used to describe an increased defecation frequency, with
These questions also illustrate the importance of a careful
or without an increase in volume or water content.
Similar to the important distinction between vomiting
In ‘vomiting" animals, questions must be asked to
and regurgitation, it is essential to distinguish between
differentiate between regurgitation and active vomiting.
small bowel diarrhea and large bowel diarrhea.
Regurgitation is the passive, retrograde expulsion of
A small bowel diarrhea occurs when the effluent
contents from the throat, esophagus, or stomach. The act
from the small bowel to the large bowel is so changed
of regurgitation is ‘passive’ in the sense that it is not a
 in volume and composition that in spite of the reserve
recognizable, reflex-determined phenomenon. Expulsion
capacity of the colonic mucosa to absorb water, the
Occurs under the influence of the position of the head
final contents and hence the feces are too voluminous
and neck, gravity, the intrathoracic pressure,
the
and/or too watery. This form of diarrhea can be caused
       
by  an  increased
dosmotic value of the intestinal
the pressure in the abdomen. The manifestation
of
contents, or by increased secretion and/or exudation of
regurgitation can vary greatly with regard to the nature of
the intestinal mucosa, and/or by abnormal motility.
the regurgitated material, the amount, and the time after
Large bowel diarrhea occurs as the result of abnormal
eating. Regurgitation of food during eating can indicate an
colon motility, reduction of the absorptive surface of the
inability to relax the proximal esophageal sphincter
colonic mucosa, or increased secretion and/or exudation
(cricopharyngeal achalasia) or the presence of pharyngeal
in the colon. The most characteristic features
are
paralysis. Regurgitation of large amounts of mucus or
summarized in Table 11.1. The table once more illustrates
that the distinction between small bowel diarrhea and
and after), is usually related to esophageal paralysis.
large bowel diarrhea relies on findings in the history.
Regurgitation of large amounts of food may occur
with pyloric stenosis. Occasionally, regurgitation
is
Questions that can be asked about problems that may
characterized by belching of fluid, which can be due to
involve the digestive tract are given below, with a few
dysfunction ofthe cardia or it can be due to pyloric stenosis.
examples to illustrate their relevance.
We speak of active vomiting when there are active
Developrment. After determining the age at which the
contractions of the abdominal muscles before the
 animal was acquired by the present owner, the next step
Table 11.1 Most characteristic differences between small bowel diarrhea and large bowel diarrhea. This distinction is only
important in chronic diarrhea. Not all of the criteria have to be present for either type and there can be some
overlapping
Smoll bowel diorrheo
torge bowel diorrheo
Defecation frequency
MD7
High
Tenesnus
Rare
Often (persisting)
Valurne of feces
Large
 Small
Mucus in feces
Rare
Often
Blood in feces
Rare
Often
Palydipsia
Often
Rare
Palyphagia
Often
Rare
Borborygmi and flatulence
Often
Rare
Weight loss
Often
Rare
87
Chapter 11:
DIGESTIVE TRACT
is to ask when gastrointestinal problems were first
through the pharynx and esophagus to the stomach.
noticed. Food intolerance generally appears at a young
 Dogs and cats hold large pieces of food with the front
age, whereas enteritis is most often seen in young adult
feet and then tear off pieces mainly with the incisor
to middle-aged animals. Neoplasia is more likely to be
 and canine teeth. Larger pieces can be cut off with the
involved in gastrointestinal problems in older animals.
carnassials (fourth premolars in upper jaw and first
Course. Knowing whether the problem is continuous
 molars in lower jaw). The incisor teeth are used to
or episodic is often helpful. Enteritis is often episodic,
pick up smaller pieces of food or to tear them loose.
while exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI) results in
a1 pooy uiaul mauo Aeuiueu Aquo sieo pue ssoq
continuous problems without spontaneous remission.
 premolars are mainly suited for holding the food (prey).
Further characterization ofthe problem.The iatrotropic
The teeth of cats are characteristic of a real carnivore,
problem (s 3.1.1) is documented and further described.
whereas those of dogs have some characteristics of an
Apart from vomiting and/or diarrhea (see above) there
omnivore. In dogs the upper and lower molars have a
may be associated problems such as anorexia, dysphagia
grinding occlusal surface.
(swallowing problems), or bloody feces.
By means of the short “catching' movements of the
Additional symptoms may include:
head, which are very noticeable in the dog, the food,
- Decreased appetite, which is considered to be very
which is held and guided by the hard palate, cheeks
serious if associated with weight loss. Malignancy
and tongue, is moved caudally. Saliva is added while
(gastric carcinoma, malignant lymphoma) should
the food is broken or ground into slightly smaller
be considered.
pieces by the molars. The bolus of food formed in this
- Weight loss may not only be caused by decreased
way is pressed against the hard palate by the tongue
food intake, but may also be the result of
maldigestion/mala bsorption.
it is brought into the esophagus.
- Pica is the tendency to eat things that are
The soft palate closes off the nasopharynx in this
inedible for dogs and cats, such as potato
process. The larynx is pulled more or less under the
peelings or cloth. It may be the result of extreme
root of the tongue and together with tension on the
hunger, as can occur in EPl. Eating grass or
vocal folds, the airway is closed off.
other plants may be a prodrome (forerunner) of
vomiting and may be one of the manifestations
Chewing muscufature
of nausea.
Of these muscles the masseter and temporal muscles are
- General signs of illness. Lethargy associated with a
accessible for physical  examination. The masseter
gastrointestinal problem usually indicates a serious
muscle is on the lateral surface of the ramus of the
disorder. It can also be secondary to one of the
mandible, ventral to the zygomatic arch. The temporal
consequences of gastrointestinal disease, such as
muscle is the largest and strongest muscle of the head
dehydration. Conversely, a problem outside the
and lies in the temporal fossa. Both muscles are
gastrointestinal tract may lead to general illness
important in opening and closing the mouth.
with vomiting, as occurs in renal disease when
accumulating waste products trigger the vomiting
Oral cavity
center.
- Manifestations of abdominal pain. Conditions such
The mouth or oral cavity lies between the mouth opening
as acute pancreatitis and intestinal foreign body
and the entrance to the throat. The hard palate forms the
with peritonitis may give rise to striking
dorsal border; the lips form the rostral, the cheeks form
manifestations of pain. Dogs often assume a
the lateral, and the tongue and sublingual space form
the ventral border of the oral cavity.
extended forward so that the ventral thoracic wall
The teeth separate the mouth into the oral cavity
touches the floor, while the hind legs remain
proper {inside the teeth) and the labial vestibule and
vertical. During attacks of pain the animal may
buccal vestibule (outside the teeth), bordered by the
Aissasan uae pue un dn de Aapns
lips and cheeks, respectively.
walk around.
The mouth opening is closed by the lips. There is a
sharp border between skin and oral mucosa. The upper
 11.2 Physical examination
(maxillary) lip makes a transition to the nasal plane.
        
11.2.1 Head
amol aui 1aao suey d 1addn aul iru os addn
especially at the angle of the mouth. The buccal mucosa
Introduction
changes to gingiva at the mucogingival junction. The
Maintenance of the organism requires that food be
cheeks are between the angle of the mouth opening and
taken in, reduced to smaller pieces, and transported
the mucosal fold that runs behind the last molar
88
Physical examination
between the palate and the lower jaw. The openings of
the ducts of the parotid and zygomatic salivary glands
are in the caudodorsal mucosa of the cheek. The
opening of the parotid duct is situated dorsal to the
fourth premolar and the opening of the zygomatic duct
is dorsal to the first molar. The mucosa of the cheeks
 also changes to gingiva at the mucogingival junction.
The most common head shape in dogs is described as
mesocephalic or mesaticephalic. Dogs with short skulls,
such as boxers, are called brachycephalic, and those
with
1 long skulls (greyhound type) are called
dolichocepahlic. Brachygnathia refers to an abnormally
short lower jar or mandible and prognathism refers to
relative elongation or protrusion of the mandible. In
brachycephalic breeds there is shortening of the upper
jaw, termed maxillary brachygnathia, so that the lower
1
incisors  protrude
beyond the upper (undershot').
When the lower jaw is shorter than normal we speak
of
overbite("overshot'}or
 mandibular
brachygnathia. The terms overshot and undershot do
not describe jaw length per se but rather the relative
proportions of the jaws. Especially with an overbite,
mucosal damage can be expected due to the pressing of
the lower canines into the hard palate.
The set of teeth is described by dental formulas (Table
11.2). The incisors (I), canines (C), premolars (P), and
molars (M) are grouped according to the quadrants of
the mouth {upper right = 1, upper left = 2, lower left
Fig. 11.1 The opened mouth of a dog with the base of the tongue
= 3, and lower right = 4) and the tooth number is
depressed: 1 soft palate. 2 tonsillar sinus. 3 epiglottis. 4 palatoglossal
counted from the central incisor (based on a complete
fold. 5 vallate papillae. 6 conical papillae. 7 filiform and fungiform
set of teeth). Thus, the fourth premolar of the upper
papillae. 8 median sulcus of the tongue.
right jaw is indicated as 108 and the second molar of
the lower left jaw as 310.
mandibular and sublingual salivary glands open into the
The hard palate has 6-10 slightly angled ridges ( palatine
mouth in the sublingual caruncles, lateral to the frenulum.
rugae), which help in moving the food backward in the
The ducts from these two glands lie in a small mucosal
mouth. Behind the first incisor teeth lies the incisive
fold (sublingual plica) that runs caudally from the caruncles.
papilla, separated from the palate by two grooves. On
 In addition to its role in taking up and transporting
both sides the nasopalatine duct opens here, the duct
food, the tongue also has the function of sorting and
being a connection between the mouth and the nasal cavity.
testing food. In the cat the tongue also fills an important 
The bottom of the mouth (apical sublingual cavity) is
leaq ul pasn os[e si anbuot aui Apoq aut suuea ul ajou
under the tongue. The frenulum divides the space into two
regulation, communication, and caring for the young.
elongated lateral sublingual recesses. The ducts of the
The tongue (Fig. 11.1) is a strongly muscled organ that
fills a large part of the bottom of the mouth and the oral
part of the pharynx. The tip of the tongue lies completely
Table 11.2 Dental formulas per quadrant in the upper and
free while the body of the tongue is attached on its ventral
lower jaws in the dog and the cat
side to the bottom of the mouth by the frenulum. The
root of the tongue, of which only the upper surface is 
dog
cot
free, is attached near the epiglottis. The palatoglossal
Deciduous
 3i. 1c. 3p
3i. 1c.3p
folds or plicae are mucosal folds which run from the
 3i. 1c. 3p
 3i. 1c. 2p
side of the root of the tongue to the soft palate. On the
Permanent
 31. 1C. 4P. 2M
 31. 1C. 3P. 1M 
flat upper surface of the tongue there is a longitudinal
31. 1C. 4P. 3M
31. 1C. 2P. 1M
 groove, the median sulcus of the tongue.
On the mucosa of the tongue various types of papillae
1 = Incisor. C = Canine. P = Premmolar. M = Malar (deciduous teeth in
can be recognized: filiform, fungiform, vallate, foliate,
lower-case letters).
and conical (Fig. 11.1). The filiform papillae have a
89
Chapter 11:
DIGESTIVE TRACT
 primarily mechanical function, while the others play a
to the skull. The structure consists of a single basihyoid
role in the sensation of taste. A very rough mucosal
bone, paired thyrohyoid, keratohyoid, epihyoid, and
surface is characteristic in the cat. On the ventral side
 stylohyoid bones, and paired tympanohyoid cartilages.
of the tongue of the dog, beginning at the tip and
The thyrohyoid is attached to the thyroid cartilage of
running caudally in the lingual septum, is the lyssa. It
the larynx. The tympanohyoid is attached to the
was once thought that there was a relation between
mastoid process of the skull.
this ‘string" and rabies (= lyssa in Greek). Possibly it 
fills a role as a stretch receptor.
Examination of the head is necessary in animals that are
troubled by problems in eating or by dysphagia. The
examination includes the muscles of mastication, oral
Pharynx, tonsils, ond soft potate (Fig. 11.1)
cavity, pharynx, salivary glands, and hyoid bones.
The pharynx is a space that connects the mouth with the
esophagus, and the nasal cavity with the larynx. The soft
Technigue
palate divides the pharynx into the nasopharynx
The examination begins with inspection of the head, taking
dorsally and the oropharynx ventrally. The oropharynx
is divided into the isthmus of fauces (throat opening)
special notice of the masseter and temporal muscles for
atrophy, swelling, or asymmetry. Note the closure of the
and a laryngeal part. The isthmus of fauces is bordered
lips and any deformities of them. Salivation and the
by the root of the tongue, the palatoglossal folds, and
absence of closure of the mouth can be important findings.
the soft palate. The laryngeal part of the oral pharynx
The muscles of mastication are then palpated, with
extends from the base of the epiglottis to the entrance
 attention to painfulness, consistency, warmth, and size.
to the esophagus. In the side walls of the isthmus of
The oral mucosa (labial and gingival) was examined
fauces lie the tonsils (palatine tonsils). They lie in the
d iaddn aui jo sul aq uoueuuexa jeaua aui u
tonsillar sinuses and are covered on the medial side by
(Chapter 8). This can also be done now to examine the
a thin wall, the semilunar fold.
buccal side of the teeth.
Sativary gtonds (Fig. 11.2)
For further examination of the oral cavity the mouth
must be opened. Standing in front of the dog, a right-
The dog has four pairs of major salivary glands: the
handed person places the left hand over the top of
"spuel suewosaz pue 'iensuqns ienqpueu puoied
the nose with the thumb and forefinger curving down
al yo as a sasa d u  a
each side of the upper lip just behind the canine teeth.
ear and is covered on the outer surface by muscles
The forefinger of the right hand is used to open
of the ear. On the ventromedial side the gland overlaps
the mouth by pressing on the lower incisor teeth. If this 
the dorsal edge of the mandibular salivary gland. The
is done slowly and quietly, most dogs will allow the
mandibular gland is more or less rounded and lies in
mouth to be opened in this manner. In order to examine
the angle formed by the internal and external maxillary
the caudal part of the oral cavity and the isthmus of
veins; it is always easily palpated. This salivary gland is
fauces, the right hand is moved so that the forefinger
sometimes mistaken for the mandibular lymph nodes
and middle finger press the base of the tongue forward
(see § 8.2.6). The sublingual gland is connected to the
and downward. The left hand can now be shifted to
mandibular gland by a connective tissue sheath. The
encircle the nose, with the thumb resting against the
zygomatic gland lies within the orbit.
hard palate (Fig. 11.3). This stimulates a refex which
causes the dog to keep the mouth open.
Hyoid bones
Together the hyoid bones form the supporting and
connecting structure which joins the tongue and larynx
Aq uado pay 5! ynow aul en leno aun jo uooadsul t'l di
Fig. 11.2 Salivary glands in the dog: 1 parotid. 2 mandibular
holding the thumb of one hand against the hard palate and using a
06
 3 sublingual, 4 zygomatic.
finger of the other hand to press down on the base of the tongue.
Physical examination
incisor teeth (Fig. 11.5). It is usually necessary to restrain
the front legs, as most cats resist the opening of the mouth.
While the mouth is being opened, attention is given to
the ease or difficulty of passive movement of the
temporomandibular joints. The animal's breath should
be noted; a fetid odor may indicate necrotic tissue.
Inspection of the mucosa of the buccal cavity is aided
by stretching the cheek laterally with a finger. The
teeth, hard palate, ventral part of the central area of
the oral cavity, and the tongue are then examined.
To close this description of the technique of oral
inspection we emphasize once more that this method
can only provide global information about oral
pathology.  For thorough inspection and palpation,
 general anesthesia is required.
Teeth
 Depending on the age of the animal, oral inspection will 
reveal deciduous or permanent teeth, or a mixture of the 
two. Deciduous teeth are much smaller than permanent
Fig. 11.4 Cloth straps can be used to hold open the mouth of a dog that
teeth (Fig. 11.6). In both dogs and cats, the eruption of
resists the usual method. It is very important to remain aware of the
permanent teeth is complete by the age of 5 to 7
forces involved and for this reason both cloth bands should be in the
months, a variation that is somewhat breed dependent.
hands of one person.
The molars are the last to appear. In most dogs, molar
3 only erupts at the age of 7 months. The dentition is 
It is clear that oral inspection as just described can only
examined for completeness. If teeth are found to be
be carried out in cooperative dogs. If a dog resists having
missing
during
oral
inspection,  radiographic
its mouth opened, an attempt can be made to bring
examination is needed to differentiate between absence
strips of strong cloth between the teeth in order to
and lack of eruption. Deciduous teeth found to be
spread the jaws. This usually succeeds if the dog is held
present after eruption of the permanent teeth are called
quite securely, even if it is necessary to use tissue forceps
retained or persistent deciduous teeth (Fig. 11.7). Their
between the canine tooth and first premolar to open the
presence can lead to malocclusion, mucosal damage,
mouth just enough to place the cloth strips. The mouth
 trapping of food particles, early deposition of dental
  s  a      
calculus, and periodontitis.
should always be done by just one person (Fig. 11.4).
The occlusion or closure of the teeth is considered next.
In cats the oral cavity can be inspected in a similar way. The
With correct {scissors) occlusion, the incisive border of
 lamo aun uo prmumop sussnd Aq pauado si yinou
 the lower incisors touches the palatal side of the upper
Fig. 1.5 Left: Opening the mouth of a cat. Right: Close-up view of the tongue. showing the large and markedly keratinized conical papile.
characteristic of this species.
Chapter 11:
DIGESTIVE TRACT
A
B
Fig. 11l.6 A The deciduous teeth of a pup (let) and the permanent teeth of a 1-year-old dog (right)
 B Frontal and side views of the teeth of an adult cat. The incisors are smaller than in the dog and the canine teeth are longer and sharper. These
 pictures also illustrate the sharp cuting premolars.
Fig. 11.7 A 7-month-old dog with persistent deciduous teeth (upper
Fig. 11.8 A 9-year-old dog with plaque (cremor dentium) on the canine
 and lower canines).
teeth. There is also wearing of the central cusp of 101 and 201. while
the cusps of 301 and 401 are stillintact.
incisors. The lower canines occlude halfway between
the third incisors and the canine teeth of the upper
(e.g-, canine, incisive, or maxillary P4) (Fig. 11.10),
enamel defects, and other tooth abnormalities.
jaw. With correct occlusion, the premolars and
Finally, the gingiva is examined for the presence of
molars interdigitate with one another ('pinking shears
effect'). If the occlusion is abnormal, there may be
redness, swelling, and
hemorrhages
(gingivitis,
 periodontitis). This inventory provides a first impression
mucosal damage. For example, a lower canine tooth
 of the condition of the dentition. An extensive inspection
that is more lingual in position can damage the hard
 palate, leading to pain and diffculty in eating.
of the complete set of teeth is only possible with
anesthesia and the use of a sharp probe and a
The teeth are examined for the presence of plaque
 periodontal probe. Radiographic examination is usually
{cremor dentium) (Fig. 11.8), dental calculus {calculus
necessary, since only the crown, which is just one-third of
dentium), and foreign material between them, such as  the tooth, is visible.
hair or food residues (Fig. 11.9). The examination also
 In principle, the cha nges in dentition during growth and
includes a check for possible damage, such as fractures
 adult life {deciduous teeth, permanent teeth, wear of
92
Physical examination
Fig. 11l.9 Side view of the mouth of a 10-year-old greyhound with large amounts of dental calculus. before (let and immediately after (right)
treatment. There is loss of gingival attachment to the mesial root of 108 (periodontitis).
hair), eyes (cataract), and teeth may suggest a certain
age, but it is still only a rough estimate and may
actually be off by several years. The same holds true
for cats. In fact, estimating age from the wearing away
of the teeth is even less accurate in cats than in dogs.
Hord polote
The hard palate is inspected for mucosal lesions and
deformities, as described for the general examination
(§ 8.3.5), and to confirm that it is closed (no cleft palate).
Tongue
Fig. 11.10 Complicated (open pulp) fracture of crown and root of the
Examination of the tongue concerns its color, surface
first molar in the right lower jaw (409).
appearance, the presence of papillae, localized
thickening, and foreign bodies. It is important to be
lobules on the incisors, and the development of plaque and
conscious of the possibility of foreign bodies. Foreign
 dental calculus) aid in estimation of the age of the animal.
bodies around the tongue cause swelling due to
However, in adult dogs no reliable estimate can be made.
congestion of the entire tongue and such a tongue can
The wear of the incisors can vary greatly, depending on
become necrotic and then slough. In cats, needles can
use and occlusion of the teeth. Some dogs only eat soft
become embedded in the root of the tongue. The
food, while others gnaw bones and/or play with hard
frenulum should be given special attention to be
materials {Fig. 11.11). The first appearance and the
 certain that no string or thread is caught there. Foreign
progress of plaque and dental calculus may also vary
bodies may also cause lesions under the tongue.
 greatly between individual animals.
The lateral sublingual recesses and the apical
In the adult dog, the combined impression of the
sublingual cavity can be examined by using one finger
posture, behavior, body proportions, haircoat (gray
to move the tongue to one side and lift it slightly.
Fig. 11. Pronounced wearing down of the teeth of a 5-year-old male bull terrier that enjoys playing with tennis balls and stones lletl. In viewing
this dog's maxilla from below (right). we can see that this has resulted in exposure of the pulp of the canine teeth (104 and 204) and teeth 103
and 203. Tooth 105 is missing. which could be a congenital abnormality
93
Chapter 11:
DIGESTIVE TRACT
The mucosa of the ventral surface of the tongue and of
Inspection and palpation of the neck can sometimes
the bottom of the oral cavity can thus be examined
be helped by standing before the dog and raising its
a a     
head with one hand. Special attention is then given to
Inspection of the frenulum and the ventral surface of
the thoracic inlet, to look for signs of a dilated
Pmdn Sissad Aq paaondw aq ueo anuon aui
esophagus. This is indicated by a slight bulging of the
slightly between the mandibles while the mouth is
inlet, synchronous with expiration. If the esophagus is
open. The location of the sublingual salivary glands
dilated, the left side of the thoracic inlet will probably
(Fig. 11.2) can be examined. A salivary cyst (ranula)
feel full when palpated. By causing some movement in
may be found under the tongue. Under normal
Suiso pue suuado aipidei puey aui uiim rane siui
conditions, only the mandibular and part of the
the hand or grasping and sliding the hand cranially and
 sublingual salivary gland is palpable.
caudally), sloshing sounds may be heard (fluid and air).
Although the thoracic portion of the esophagus is not
Pharynx
directly accessible for examination, it can be examined
Unless the dog or cat is anesthetized, the pharynx can be only
radiographically if necessary.
partially inspected for a few moments while the tongue is
The most frequent cause of obstructed passage through
depressed with the fingers. The isthmus of fauces, soft
the esophagus is a foreign body. If it has been present for
more than a few hours, there can be serious damage to
palate, and tonsils can be examined. The soft palate can
usually be seen if the base of the tongue is depressed.
the wall of the esophagus due to pressure necrosis.
 If the tonsils are hidden by the semilunar folds in an
Because of the risk of perforation, the blind use of a probe
adult dog, it can be assumed that there is no
 or tube has no place in the examination of the esophagus.
abnormality; if they are visible, they are enlarged. If they
are enlarged, the shape, color, presence of hyperemia,
11.2.3 Abdomen
 and appearance of the surface should be noted. In young
animals the somewhat more active lymphoid tissue in
introduction
the tonsils usually causes them to be visible.
For purposes of physical examination of the liver,
A thorough examination of the oropharynx requires
pancreas, stomach, and intestines, the entire abdomen
general anesthesia. Additional information about the
is examined. For this examination a good knowledge of
pharynx can be obtained by palpating the area between
the anatomic relationships is an important requirement.
the caudal edge of the mandible and the larynx. One
To describe and communicate our findings, we can
hand is used to hold the dog's nose slightly elevated so
divide the abdomen into 18 compartments (Fig. 11.12):
that the area can be more easily palpated with the other
the epigastrium, mesogastrium, and hypogastrium;
hand. The hyoid bones can also be examined in this
dorsal, medial, and ventral; left and right.
ma nner to detect deformities or pain.
s wnusaosau ue wnseaida uaamiaq iapio au
a transverse plane just caudal to the 13th rib. The border
11.2.2 Esophagus
between mesogastrium and hypogastrium is a transverse 
Introduction
plane just cranial to the thigh musculature. Two
horizontal planes equally divide the space between the
The oral esophageal sphincter lies dorsal to the larynx. In
lumbar muscles and the ventral abdominal wall into
the neck the esophagus passes on the left of the trachea
dorsal, medial, and ventral parts. A median plane
and in the thorax it is more dorsal. Under normal
divides the abdomen into left and right halves.
conditions it is empty, completely collapsed, and thus
does not contain air. When a bolus of food is swallowed
inspection
pue kinwd kq yowois aul on pauodsuu si 1
 sometimes secondary peristalsis. If peristalsis is reduced,
We begin by inspecting the abdomen, giving attention to its
the esophagus loses its tonus and becomes dilated,
size and form. The observations are interpreted in
lea ding to the accumulation of fluid, food, and air. In the
connection with other information, such as anorexia or
neck the esophagus is covered by musculature and is not
pregnancy. An increase in abdominal size can lead to a
pal pable in healthy animals.
 specific form or shape. Hence a marked increase in the
size of the liver or overfilling of the stomach will increase
the size of the epigastriurm and mesogastrium. Sometimes
Technique ond interpretotion
great overfilling of the intestinal tract can result in
During inspection, attention is given to the position of the
segments of intestine being noticeable by inspection.
neck, for pain caused by an abnormality in the esophagus
 A large amount of free fluid usually results in bulging of
can be manifested by keeping the neck stretched and the 
 the ventral part of the abdomen and falling inward of the
head low. Loss of saliva from the mouth can result from
 upper part. Thus in the transverse plane the abdomen
ineffective or inadequate swallowing.
becomes pear shaped (see also § 10.2.3).
76
Physical examination
Superficiol poipation
Meso-
Hypogastrium
Epi-
Experience teaches that a little discipline is required not to
forget superficial palpation of the abdomen. It can
provide valuable information. Superficial palpation
means that the abdominal wall is pressed in as little as
possible. The entire abdomen is explored in this manner.
It allows the abdominal organs to be examined in place,
that is, without affecting their position by palpating.
H3
Abnormal muscular tension may indicate resistance
by the animal due to unwillingness or pain. A tense
and painful abdomen may be observed in association
with acute and severe abdominal lesions. It can also be
due to abnormalities in the spinal column that cause
 pressure on the spinal cord and/or spinal nerves.
 During superficial palpation, overfilled intestinal loops
 and abnormal masses are not so displaced or changed in
B
5
Dorsal
form that they are no longer recognized. Yet to be
 detected by superficial palpation, the abnormal structures
Medial
must be more or less in contact with the abdominal wall.
Deep poipotion
Ventral
 "shem suara u paad aq uo uoedied daaa
should always be approached slowly and performed
carefully. The examiner must remain aware of and
responsive to the reactions of the patient.
One method is to palpate by repeated movements
Fig. 11.12 Lateral view of the abdomen. divided into compartments:
1 diaphragm. 2 liver. 3 stomach. 4 pancreas. 5 kidneys. 6 spleen.
with the fingers of both hands from a superficial level
7 intestine. 8 ovary. 9 ureter. 10 bladder. 11 urethra. 12 rectum.
to as deep as possible. At many places in the
13 scrotum. 14 prostate.
abdomen the fingers from the two sides can come in
contact.
Poipotion
Another method of deep palpation is to bring the
This is the most important part of the abdominal
fingers of the two hands as close to each other as
examination. It should if possible be performed while the
 possible and then to slowly move them simultaneously
animal is standing. The examiner takes a position at the
dorsally or ventrally so that the abdominal contents
end of the table and the person who is holding the animal
pass between them.
stands at the side. All compartments are examined
The objective of palpation is to discover abnormal
 systematically and an effort is made to form an opinion
structures, enlarged organs, pain, a thickened intestinal
about all organs in the abdomen. These findings must
wall, abnormal intestinal contents, etc.
be directly translated into words and recorded.
 In general, the palpation is done with both hands, using
Palpotion of the kidneys ond urinory troct
the fingertips of more or less flat hands. The abdomen is
This is described in Chapter 12.
thereby approached from its two sides for examination
 Of the epigastrium and mesogastrium. Certainly in large
dogs the hypogastrium can also be palpated from below
Polpotion of the fiver
by standing behind the dog and bringing the hands
forward between the rear legs. In small dogs and in cats,
costal arch and slightly to the right. In most dogs it
it may be easier to hold one hand on the animal's back
cannot be palpated, though it may be in those with a
 and use the other hand to palpate from underneath.
broad thorax. In a dog with a deep thorax, such as
Palpation begins in the dorsal epigastrium
and
 greyhounds, the liver lies completely within the costal
proceeds to the hypogastrium.  Palpation can
be
arch and cannot be reached. In healthy cats the caudal
performed from dorsal to ventral and/or from ventral to
borders of the liver can usually just be touched.
dorsal. Full examination of the mesogastrium requires
As can be appreciated from Figure 11.12, diffuse
many repetitions of palpation movements. It may be
enlargement of the liver is first detectable in the ventral
very difficult to perform abdominal palpation in obese
epigastrium by superficial palpation. With further
animals. Diagnostic imaging may provide a solution.
95
Chapter 11:
DIGESTIVE TRACT
the medial epigastrium, certainly if one palpates with the
'supple loops", which indicates no abnormality of the
fingers inside the costal arch. This can usually be carried
 wall and little luminal contents. During palpation of the 
out quite well in cats. The enlarged liver will be found
intestine, the contents may give a crepitating or
sooner on the right side than on the left. One can
crackling sensation. The small intestine of the cat feels
au jo anxan aul auap ot uodied kq idwan
more firm and solid. Local thickening
and/or
surface and the presence of pain, although these features
irregularities can be an indication of foreign bodies,
 are rarely found to be abnormal.
adhesions, granulomas, or tumors. Signs of obstructed
passage through the intestine can also be found: to0
Poipotion of the spfeen
much material in the lumen, distended loops, splashing
sounds. Pain associated with this may indicate peritonitis.
The spleen is normally located in the epigastrium against
In most animals the colon is felt in the dorsomedial
the major curvature of the stomach. Since it is entirely
within the costal arch, it cannot be palpated. The 
mesogastrium and hypogastrium as a somewhat stiff
spleen and the stomach are loosely connected by the
tube of variable diameter. By careful palpation this
structure can be followed almost from the epigastrium
gastrosplenic ligament, so t
that when the spleen
enlarges, and thus becomes heavier, it easily shifts
to the hypogastrium. Its diameter is determined by the
ventrally and caudally. Enlargement of the spleen
amount of feces it contains. It is usually filled, unless
(splenomegaly) can usually be detected by superficial
the animal has not been eating for several days. The
colon contents are usually more segmented in cats than
palpation in the ventral and medial mesogastrium and
in dogs. Constipation and megacolon can result in
be
extreme enlargement of the colon and
extreme
 recognized as the spleen because of a more or less oval
hardness of the fecal material. The wall of an ermpty
cross-sectional profile. In contrast to the liver, the
colon feels more stiff than the wall of the small
spleen can be displaced caudally by palpation.
intestine. The diameter of the empty colon is also
If the spleen is palpable, an attempt is made to
larger than that of the small intestine. When the
determine whether its shape is still normal.
contents are not too hard, careful pressure may cause
an indentation. This indicates feces rather than a solid
Polpotion of the poncreos
foreign body or a soft-tissue structure such as a lymph
In general the pancreas is not palpable, even if abnormal.
node. Solid feces also indicate there is no diarrhea.
 It lies in the right ventromedial mesogastrium.
    
colon can lead to palpable thickening and stiffness of
Paipation of the ovory, uterus, and prostate
its wall and the palpation can be painful for the
See Chapters 13 and 14.
animal.
Polpotion of the stomoch
Abdominol fymph nodes
If the liver is of normal size, the stomach, if empty, is
The mesenteric and colonic lymph nodes can only be
completely within the costal arch and is not palpable.
identified if enlarged. The mesenteric nodes and the
right and middle colonic lymph nodes are in the medial 
 of fullness because of a poorly defined mass that can
mesogastrium. The left colonic node is nearer the
be compressed.
junction of the mesogastrium and the hypogastrium.
 In exceptional situations a markedly thickened gastric
wall or a foreign body in the ventral part of the stomach
Percussion
can be palpated. An attempt to palpate the stomach can
 Percussion is only attempted if the abdomen is enlarged.
be made by lifting up the cranial end of the dog, in the
The results may provide some information about the
expectation that the stomach will move somewhat
cause.
Finger-on-finger percussion is used. It is
caudally. The results are almost always disappointing.
 performed along three vertical lines over the abdominal
wall of the mesogastrium. Attention is given to the
Poipotion of the intestinof troct
tone and possible local damping or a horizontal
Severe overfilling of the small intestine can sometimes be
damping line. The presence of a horizontal damping
detected by superficial palpation. By deep palpation
nq uoissnad au sueadau Aq pauuo aq uey au
        
with the dog in another position, such as sitting. If
abdominal structures pass between the fingers of the
there is ascites, a horizontal line will also be found in
two hands. This allows evaluation of the thickness of
this position. The percussion tone is determined by the
the intestinal wall, the contents of the lumen, the
 abdominal contents: excessive gas in the intestine gives
diameter, local thickening, and the presence of pain.
a tympanic tone, fluid gives a dull tone. Localized
In most healthy animals the small intestine is felt as
 space-occupying processes cause a local damping.
96
Physical examination
Auscuttation
The examiner stands behind the animal with a flat
The objective of auscultation is the detection of sounds
hand against one side of the abdomen, while using the
occurring
 d         
inthe
gastrointestinal
1tract,called
borborygmi. They require the presence of fluid and gas
against the abdomen below the line of damping. The
pressure wave which this causes is transmitted through
as well as peristalsis. Their frequency says something
the fluid and is felt by the flat hand at almost the same
indirectly about the character of the peristalsis, if it is
known whether the animal is fasting or is in a digestive
moment. If the dog does not have a very heavy coat,
phase. A completely empty intestine can be completely
the pressure wave can also be seen to cause slight
silent. When the intestine is in a digestive phase of
movement of the abdomen (see Chapter 10).
In a dog with a large amount of abdominal fat, the fat
activity, the sounds are intermittent, infrequent, low-
toned, and not very loud.
can give a slight pressure wave, but it is not so clear as
that in ascites. Either a full bladder or a large fluid-
Auscultation is performed by placing the stethoscope 
on the ventral abdominal wall and listening for a few
filled cyst that is in contact with both sides of the
minutes. Frequent, loud borborygmi with an extremely
abdomen can give a quite clear undulation, but it
variable high tone indicate a very strong peristalsis.
should be possible to differentiate either of these from
The absence of borborygmi, even though fluid and
ascites by abdominal palpation.
other material can be detected in the intestine by
palpation or the presence of splashing sounds, indicates
lack of peristalsis. This may be observed in intestinal
11.2.4 Anus and circumanal area
 obstruction, which is called ileus.
introduction
The coccygeal muscle and levator ani muscle are
Generotion of spfashing sounds
important to the structure and function of the anus
Splashing sounds can be induced if there is a closed space
and rectum. The rectum is so enclosed by these muscles
containing gas and a large amount of fluid. Fluid
that they can be thought of as its supporting structures.
accumulation without gas, such as ascites, an overfilled
The anus is the terminal opening of the alimentary
bladder, or pyometra, does not result in splashing sounds.
canal, but we also use this term for the combination of
Splashing sounds can be generated when there are large
the internal and external anal sphincters. The anal sacs
amounts of gas and fluid in the stomach and/or intestines.
are located between the two sphincters and their
Using the hands placed lower down on the abdomen on
excretory ducts pass along the caudal edge of the
both sides, the abdomen is quickly moved up and down,
internal sphincter and exit ventrolaterally in the internal
while the ear is placed as close as possible or the
part of the cutaneous zone of the anal canal. The anal
stethoscope is placed against the abdominal wall. If
sacs form a reservoir for the secretion of the anal glands,
splashing sounds are heard, an effort is made
to
Aiaa e sy suewnu ioy pue Kea ised 1o uul ! ym
determine the area from which they are coming and
objectionable odor. The anal sacs are emptied in
hence the part of the gastrointestinal tract that is
defecation and during sudden contraction of muscles in
involved. Splashing sounds from the epigastrium usually
the anal area, as in fright and resistance.
arise in the stomach, suggesting poor gastric emptying.
The anal canal is about 1 cm long and lies between
Splashing sounds from the entire abdomen indicate an
the termination of the rectum and the anal orifice. The
accumulation of gas and fluid in the small intestine. This
mucosa of the anal canal is divided into three zones:
 suggests poor passage in the intestine, which could be due
cutaneous, intermediate, and columnar (Figs 11.13 and
to a local obstruction or a generalized loss of peristalsis.
11.14). The cutaneous zone has an external and an
Splashing sounds in the mediodorsal mesogastrium can
internal part. The external part does not actually
arise from the colon and can therefore suggest the
belong to the anal canal. The border between the two
presence of watery contents, i.e., diarrhea. Interpretation
parts, i.e., the anus, is not sharp but varies with the
of splashing sounds must be related to findings in the
position of the tail. If the tail is hanging, the anus is
history and the rest of the physical examination.
visible as a transverse groove. The external part of the
cutaneous zone does not have hair. The circumanal
Undulation test
glands lie in the wall. The extent of this zone is largely
The cause of abdominal enlargement may be found by
determined by the degree of development of the
palpation if it is a tumor or an abnormal organ, or by
circumanal glands. In older male dogs the external
percussion if it is accumulation of gas. If the percussion
zone can be very broad, so that the external, dorsal
tone is dull, the undulation test is performed
1to
determine whether the damping is due to accumulation
part runs ventrally in a slightly V-form. The internal
 of free fluid in the abdomen (ascites) or enlargement of
part of the cutaneous zone is about 4 mm wide and has
abdominal organs or accumulation of fat.
a slightly moist surface.
97
Chapter 11:
DIGESTIVE TRACT
Dorsal to the rectum is the ventral part of the
sacrococcygeal muscle and laterally the rectum is
mainly bordered by the levator ani muscle. Ventrally it
is bordered by the vagina in the female and by the
urethra in the male.
inspection
When the rectal temperature is being measured, several
observations can be made, as described in Chapter 8.
In dogs with defecation problems or other problems in
this area, the inspection is more extensive. The
following questions are a guide.
 Is the area beside the tail thickened? A loss of
can lead to bulging out in this area, or perineal
Fig. 11.13 Almost horizontal section of the anus of a dog: 1 cutaneous
hernia. It can be on one or both sides.
zone. 2 opening from the anal sac. 3 anocutaneous line. 4 columnar
Are there perineal fistulas? Fistulas indicate
zone. 5 anal sac.
extensive inflammation of the anus and sometimes 
also of the rectum. The inflammation and its
The intermediate zone has a width of no more than
consequences can cause problems in defecation.
1 mm and forms an irregular, fairly sharp edge, the
The openings of fistulas can be very small and
anocutaneous line. This follows a more or less sinus
therefore not readily seen.
wave form. The anal glands empty out into this zone.
Are there circumanal tumors? If so, they are
Their secretion is slightly fatty.
described in the usual manner ($ 4.1.2).
The wall of the columnar zone consists of longitudinal
Are there proglottids of tapeworms, in the anus or
or slightly transverse ridges separated by the anal sinuses.
among the hairs of the adjacent skin?
The size of the latter is related to the course of the wave-
Are the anal sacs overfilled?
shaped anocutaneous line. Most anal sinuses end
cranially in a line which forms the cranial border of the
anal canal, called the anorectal line. The rectum is the
Poipotion
caudal part of the colon that is located within the pelvic
Palpation of the perineal area is done with one hand
canal, up to the anorectal line.
while the other hand holds the tail up slightly. First,
Fig. 11.14 Anus and circumanal area. Left: Raising the tail provides a view of the external part of the cutaneous zone. Right: dilation of the anus
reveals the internal part of the cutaneous zone and the columnar zone. The internal sphincter is closed. The opening of the left anal sac is indicated
 by the arrow. while the opening of the right anal sac is hidden behind a small fold.
98
Physical examination 
the condition of the coccygeal and levator ani muscles is
In general, animals do not strongly resist rectal
noted. The area under the skin just to the left and right
palpation and the examiner should therefore recognize
of the anus should be firm if these muscles are present
that resistance can be due to pain. Circumanal and
and of normal size. Atrophy of these muscles can
 rectal disorders can lead to pain that is so great that
contribute to development of perineal hernia. When a
 rectal palpation cannot be continued unless the animal
perineal hernia is present, the skin can be pushed with
is anesthetized. This may especially be required in
the fingers of the palpating hand inward along the
animals with perianal fistulas.
rectum, unless this is prevented by the accumulation of
The tonus of the anus must also be assessed. In general
feces in the rectum.
the tonus is such that the sphincters close firmly upon the
Next, the circumanal area is palpated. Note is taken
finger. Either a reduced or an increased tonus is of
of the fullness of the anal sacs, thickening that could
importance. A reduced tonus can indicate a disturbance
be due to tumor, or the presence of pain.
of innervation of the anus. If the tonus is reduced, both
the anal reflex and the bulboca vernosus reflex should be
11.2.5 Rectum and adjacent structures
checked. In the bulbocavernosus reflex, pressure on the
bulb of the penis results in contraction of the anal
introduction
sphincters. An increased anal tonus can indicate an
Rectal examination is included in examination of the
increased sensitivity of the defecation reflex, which
digestive tract only when there are specific indications
could be the reason for abnormal defecation behavior,
for it. Important indications related to the digestive
such as defecation in the house.
system are: constipation (obstruction or stricture),
The structures of the anus are then examined: the
blood in the feces (tumor, inflammation), diarrhea
mucosa of the anal canal, the sphincters, the anal sacs,
(differentiation  of  small  bowel and  large bowel
and the circumanal region. The examination can be
diarrhea), fecal incontinence, and tenesmus. Because
carried out by palpating the entire area between the
cats tend to resist this examination, it is sometimes
thumb and the finger in the anus. This main purpose of
this palpation is to detect irregularities and thickening.
neglected even though there are indications for it, but
this neglect is a mistake.
The anal sac can be felt as a circumscribed thickening
ventrolateral to the anal sphincter on each side.
Technique ond interpretotion
Rectum
The examiner stands at the end of the table and the
Now attention is given to the rectum and its contents.
assistant stands at the side to hold the animal. The
When the finger is inserted further and meets feces, the
examiner uses one hand to hold the animal's tail
slightly elevated. An excess of lubricating cream is
amount and consistency are assessed. The presence of a
applied to the gloved forefinger of the other hand. A
large amount of hard feces can be important (Why
small amount of lubricating cream is applied to the
wasn't there a defecation reflex, or why did it not lead
anus, which gives the animal some warning and allows 
to emptying of the rectum and colon?).
a litle time for it to be calmed, if necessary. The
Examination of the rectal mucosa is of great
palpating finger is then placed against the anus with
importance in animals with signs of large bowel
diarrhea. In healthy animals the mucosa is supple,
light pressure and this should allow it to pass through
the sphincters. No force may be used, and no turning
slightly folded and uniform. Inflammation can make
the mucosa less supple and the surface finally becomes
or boring motion, since this can cause extreme pain.
irregular. In addition, the palpation can be very
Rectal
information. In order not to miss abnormalities, the
painful.
Palpation should also reveal whether there is any
examiner should take the time needed for careful
attention to the following structures.
thickening of the rectal wall or narrowing of the
lumen by compression outside the wall of the rectum,
Anus
or a rectal stricture. During palpation there may be a
rectal contraction and this ring should not
be
A normally functioning anus can be distended easily. The
misinterpreted as a stricture. Soft pressure will usually
diameter of the anal canal should easily accommodate the
ca use it to relax.
palpating finger (assuming that this has been considered
in advance and that the size of the finger is not too great
for the size of the animal). Circumanal abnormalities can
Coccygeat and tevator ani muscles
result in narrowing of the anal canal, sometimes to the
After examination of the rectal wall, attention is given to
extent that the finger cannot pass the anus. This should
the muscles bordering the rectum on the left and right
have been anticipated from a history of tenesmus together
 sides, namely, the coccygeal and levator ani muscles.
with the production of feces of very small diameter.
As mentioned above, a defect in these muscles leads to
66
Chapter 11:
DIGESTIVE TRACT
a perineal hernia. If these muscles are intact, palpation
result in a diagnosis, in which case a therapeutic plan
will reveal a firm wall beside the rectum on both sides.
will be made. More often they do not lead to a diagnosis
 If the muscles have atrophied, the palpating finger can
but allow formulation of the problem to be sharpened so
reach directly to the subcutis. Because the lateral
 that a plan for further diagnostic studies can be made.
support for the rectum has been lost, there is usually a
 Sometimes it is necessary to start symptomatic therapy
dilatation of the rectum and as a result the rectum is
in the mea ntime.
incompletely emptied by defecation. Since the feces
remain longer in the dilated rectum, more fluid is
removed and they may become hard.
11.4 Further examination
There are many possibilities for further examination.
Internat itiac tymph nodes
Their applicability depends very much on the cost of
apparatus, the anticipated number of patients to be
The internal iliac lymph nodes are only palpable if
examined in a given period, and the opportunity for
enlarged. Enlargement is usually due to tumor. The
the veterinarian to develop and maintain knowledge
1 aq ueo sapou paieua au1 jo apioq lepneo
 and experience.
dorsally through the wall of the rectum, below the
blood examination (routine clinical chemistry,
lumbosacral junction. Enlargement of the nodes can
trypsin-like immunoreactivity)
also displace the colon and rectum ventrally.
 urine examination
fecal examination (parasites)
Petvic bones
 plain radiography
ultrasonography
The bones of the pelvic canal can be palpated.
contrast radiography
Abnormalities of the pelvis can lead to narrowing of
 thin-needle aspiration biopsy and cytologic
the canal, via which the passage of feces can be
examination
severely obstructed and constipation can develop.
diagnostic laparotomy, also for full thickness
biopsies of the gastrointestinal tract
Prostote
 endoscopy (esophagus, stomach, duodenum,
colon) with biopsies
Examination of the prostate is described in § 12.2.3. The
laparoscopy
 prostate should be palpated in any male dog with a large
tolerance tests
bowel problem in which there is tenesmus or with any
 pH measurements in the esophagus
 signs suggesting obstruction of fecal passage.
 pressure measurements in the esophagus
measurement of gastric juice secretion, with
11.3 Notation
stimulation
liver biopsy
The results of the examination can be recorded on a form
such as that shown on the DVD. The observations might
References
1 Bistner S. Ford RB. Handbook of veterinary procedures and
5 Tams TR. Handbook of small animmal gastroenterology. Philadelphia:
ermergency treatment. Philadelphia: Saunders: 1995.
Saunders: 1996.
2 van Foreest A. Tandheelkunde bij Gezelschapsdieren. Maarssen:
6 Thomas DA. Simpson JW. Hall EJ. Manual of canine and feline
Elsevier/Bunge: 1999.
gastroenterology. Shurdington (Cheltenham). British Small Animal
3 Guilford WG. Center SA. DA Strombeck. et al. Strombeck's Small
Veterinary Association: 1996.
animal gastroenterology. Philadelphia: Saunders: 1996.
and clinical procedures. Philadelphia: Saunders: 1991.
100
12
Kidneys and urinary tract
A.M. van Dongen and H.F. L'Eplattenier
the urinary tract often lead to abnormal urine and/or
Chapter contents
an abnormal pattern of micturition. Kidney diseases
may progress for quite some time before symptoms
12.1 History 101
appear, and these may be aspecific.
12.11  Kidneys 101
If the formulation of the problem points in this
Symptoms 101
direction, it must still be decided whether attention
Living conditions ond past history 102
should be focused on the kidneys or on the urinary
tract, bearing in mind that disorders of the urinary
12.12 Urinary tract 102
tract can affect the kidneys and, to a lesser degree, vice
Symptoms 103
versa. While problems of the kidneys and urinary tract
12.2 Physical examination 104
may overlap, it is simpler to discuss them separately, as
12.2.1 Head 104
will be done throughout this chapter, above all with
12.2.2 Abdomen 104
regard to the history.
Kidneys 105
12.1 History
Ureters 105
Blodder 105
12.1.1 Kidneys
Prostote 105
Via glomerular filtration and tubular reabsorption and
12.2.3 Rectal palpation 106
 an u o an s a u
Urethro 106
of isovolemia, isosmosis, and isotonicity. In addition,
Prostote 106
the kidneys play an important role in the endocrine
12.2.4 Penis and prepuce 106
system, producing the hormones renin, erythropoietin,
12.2.5 Vulva and vagina 106
and dihydroxycholecalciferol. They are also the target
Vuivo 106
organs for other hormones, such as aldosterone,
Vogina 107
parathyroid hormone, and vasopressin. Consequently,
disturbed kidney function can affect many of the
12.3 Further examinations 107
mechanisms of homeostasis.
Symptoms
Acute kidney disease is not usually recognized by the
The functions of the kidneys and the urinary tract are
owner. Even with considerable loss of function in the
closely related and yet differ greatly from each other.
acute phase, the only symptom may be oligouria or
The kidneys fill an important role in maintaining
 anuria, which can escape the owner's attention. Hence,
homeostasis. The production of urine eliminates the
end  products of metabolism and maintains 
the
failure, such as persistent poor perfusion due to shock,
composition of the extracellular fluid within narrow
it is important to ask questions about urine production
limits. The urinary tract provides for the removal of
and/or to measure it.
urine, by means of a gradually filling reservoir which
O1 peal ueo uonp iaauol jo aseasip kaupi
can be emptied at an appropriate time. Disorders of
101
Chapter 12:
KIDNEYS AND URINARY TRACT
functional disturbance: (1) decreased concentrating
as a result of hemorrhagic diathesis. The latter is due
ability, {2) loss of plasma proteins, and {3) progressive
loss of functional nephrons. Depending on the type of
related disturbance of the interaction of thrombocytes
functional disturbance and its duration, the symptoms
and vascular wall.5.6
can vary considerably.
 In chronic renal failure the conversion of vitamin D to
Tubular dysfunction may lead to decreased renal
the metabolically-active  1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol 
concentrating ability. This results in increased urinary
(calcitriol) may decrease, which in turn decreases the
volume (polyuria), which is compensated by increased
absorption of calcium from the intestine. The resulting
water intake (polydipsia). If the opportunity to urinate
tendency to hypocalcemia stimulates the release of
out of doors is restricted, the increased urine
parathyroid hormone (PTH) from the parathyroid
production may cause the animal to urinate in the
 glands. The decrease in negative feedback of calcitriol on
house. Since the night is usually the longest period of
PTH production contributes to increased PTH release.
restriction, nocturia is usually noticed first.
 In young animals this secondary hyperparathyroidism
Decreased selectivity of the glomerular membrane
may give rise to hyperostotic reactions on the skull,
leads to increased permeability for plasma proteins of
which may be observed by the owner. In older animals
lower molecular weight. The principal result is a
hyperparathyroidism leads primarily to osteodystrophy.
decrease in the concentration of albumin,
but
This consequence of r
renal insufficiency
rarely causes
antithrombin Ill may also be lowered. Eventually the
bone loss
sto the extent that a so-called rubber jaw
colloidal osmotic pressure can decrease to the extent
develops.
that fluid from the vessels shifts to the interstitium,
causing edema, and/or the peritoneal cavity, causing
Living conditions ondpost history
ascites (see also § 8.3.4 and § 10.2.3). A reduction in
It is important to consider two diseases which may not
antithrombin levels can lead to the formation of
thrombi, which, if they occur in the lungs, can cause
be i
indigenous
tothe
area,
leishmaniasis and
dyspnea.
dirofilariasis, which are often associated with severe
 An ascending infection of the lower urinary tract may
glomerulonephritis. This possibility underscores the
cause pyelonephritis. Symptoms of lower urinary tract
importance of questions about the patient's living
inflammation {dysuria) are usually prominent, but if
conditions and past history, whether it has originated
from or been taken to foreign countries.
there is general malaise (fever and anorexia), the cause
cannot be a lower urinary tract infection alone. Further
examination is indicated and may reveal pyelonephritis.
12.1.2 Urinary tract
Independent of the cause and the location of the
primary lesion (glomerular, tubular, or vascular/
The bladder has two functions. In its reservoir function
interstitial), progressive loss of nephrons eventually
it is gradually filled with urine and in its micturition
leads to symptoms of chronic renal failure.2 When
function it is rapidly emptied. The detrusor muscle of
more than 50% of renal function is lost, the
the bladder facilitates the reservoir function and also
eliminating
and
homeostatic
functions
become
contributes to emptying. The neck of the bladder and
inadequate. There is retention of compounds that are
the cranial part of the urethra facilitate opening and
normally cleared by the kidneys, including metabolic
closing.
end products such as urea and creatinine, organic
When there is a relatively low degree of filling the
acids, and hormones such as gastrin and parathyroid
 pressure in the bladder remains low and the neck of the
hormone. In addition, the excretion of administered
bladder remains closed. As the filling increases, stretch
drugs is delayed.
receptors in the bladder wall activate a spinal reflex. If
This leads to the combination of symptoms usually
higher centers do not suppress the urge to urinate, this
described as the uremic syndrome. In most cases the
reflex leads
to a detrusor contraction, which is
symptoms first noticed by the owner are those related
accompanied by relaxation of the neck of the bladder
to the gastrointestinal tract (decreased appetite 
and
and of the urethra. When contraction and relaxation are
vomiting). At an earlier stage there may be very subtle
coordinated (detrusor-urethral synergism) the bladder
 symptoms of uremic encephalopathy, such as decreased
empties itself with very little back pressure from the
consciousness and tremors.3 The owner will observe
neck of the bladder and the urethra.
that the animal is increasingly lethargic, for anemia
The
detrusor
contracts
after
cholinergic
also develops.4 This is because with progressive loss of
parasympathetic stimulation by the pelvic nerve. The
renal epithelium, the production of erythropoietin
decreased sympathetic stimulation of the neck of the
decreases. In advanced cases there may also be loss of
bladder and urethra (predominantly via α-adrenergic
blood via the gastrointestinal tract, not only from
receptors) results in lowering of the resistance of the
  s   Posse s s
bladder outflow tract. The simultaneous reduction in
102
History
T11-L4
consideration will be given to tenesmus alvi, a sign
 Parasympathetic:
pelvic nernve
sometimes seen in abnormalities of one of the adnexa
Somatic:
Sympathetic:
of the urinary tract, the prostate. Just as in preceding
hypogastric
pudendal
nerve
chapters,
the
various
signs
will
Ibe（
nerve
independently but it should be understood that they
often occur in combination.
The urine of intact male cats in particular has a very
penetrating odor. In dogs and female cats this is not so
Internal  External
often the case. If there is a pronounced bacteriuria the
Detrusor I sphincter | sphincter
owner may note a 'sharp' odor because a large amount
of urea is converted to ammonia.
Fig. 12.1 Neurologic infuence on the bladder and urethra.
Whenever bloody urine is reported, it must be
determined whether this means bematuria (mixing of
sympathetic stimulation of the fundus of the bladder
blood in the urine) or blood loss independent of
(passing via the hypogastric nerve and β-adrenergic
micturition. This is a question which many owners
receptors) makes an unimpeded contraction of the
cannot immediately answer with certainty. Questions
detrusor muscle possible. Thus the micturition phase is
concerning the animal's house training, fluid loss in the
dominated by parasympathetic stimulation  via  the
house, and the pattern of micturition almost always
provides a definite answer. Blood loss independent of
minimal (Fig. 12.1.). The reservoir phase is dominated
micturition indicates hemorrhage distal to what is
by the hypogastric nerve. S
Sympathetic control
of
 sometimes referred to as the internal sphincter (neck of
α-adrenergic receptors in the neck of the bladder and
the bladder and proximal urethra). Sources of such
urethra leads to adequately high closure pressure.
blood loss in male dogs include the prostate, penis,
Simultaneous stimulation of β-adrenergic receptors in
prepuce, and urethra. Bright red blood suggests a very
the neck of the bladder causes a reduction in the
distal bleeding, while darker blood corresponds to a
parasympathetic reflexes. During the reservoir phase
 more proximal bleeding. In female animals the source of
the sympathetic influence thus dominates and the
the bleeding can be in the genital tract (see Chapter 13).
parasympathetic influence is minimal (Fig. 12.1).
The occurrence of hematuria means that the source
An uninterrupted detrusor contraction is only possible in
of the blood is proximal to the internal sphincter
(Fig. 12.2). Concentrations of 2.5 × 10 erythrocytes/l
the absence of blocking influence from higher centers.
The possibility of voluntary interruption of micturition
can be observed with the naked eye; in other words,
must always be considered in the evaluation. It is
this is
the border between microhematuria and
macrohematuria. It is very exceptional for urine
important, for example, in the micturition behavior of
 male dogs.
streaming through the urethra to become mixed with
blood   originating
 The micturition of female dogs and cats and intact
locally in the urethra,
without
blood loss also occurring independent of micturition.
and castrated male cats can be considered to be normal
Hematuria can originate in the bladder, ureter, or kidney.
if a large volume of urine is produced by the first
attempt at urination. The owners of healthy female
Hemorrhage originating in the bladder can be
dogs and cats should be able to report that the urine is
differentiated from that originating in the kidney or
released in an adequately forceful stream. The male
ureter by asking whether there is simultaneous dysuria
urinating for the purpose of marking his trail. The
Rightkidney
conclusion ‘undisturbed micturition’ in male dogs can
Ureter
only be made after an extensive history interview and/
or the veterinarian's own observation. Sometimes it is
necessary to measure the amount of residual urine
Prostate
bae peu seu lewue au J uape aui u
opportunity to urinate, this volume should be small
(0.2-0.4 ml/kg).7
Left kidney
Symptoms
Internal sphincter
Symptoms of a urinary tract abnormality that the owner
can observe concern the urine (odor and color) and
Urethra
micturition (dysuria and urinary incontinence), and
Bladder
they will be discussed in this order. Finally,
Fig. 12.2 Schematic drawing of the urinary tract in a male dog.
103
Chapter 12:
KIDNEYS AND URINARY TRACT
(painful and/or difficult micturition). If there is dysuria it
incontinence is being considered, it is important to
is very likely that the blood enters the urine in the
check whether there is polyuria. Rapid overfilling of the
bladder. Blood loss from the kidneys or ureters is not
bladder can lead to involuntary urine loss in the presence
associated with dysuria.
 of an otherwise appropriately functioning sphincter.
The color of the blood, the presence of blood clots,
 In some bitches, castration leads to loss of sphincter 
and the mixing of blood with the urine can also aid in
function and thus urinary incontinence. Disorders of
differentiating between hemorrhage in the bladder and
the nerves controlling bladder function may also cause
hemorrhage in the kidney or ureter. If blood in the
incontinence. A neurogenic cause could be suggested
 urine occurs primarily at the end of micturition and the
by the presence of other neurogenic deficits: ataxia or
color is bright red, it is highly probable that the
paresis, decreased tone of the tail muscles, and fecal
bleeding is occurring in the bladder. The presence of
incontinence. The simultaneous occurrence of dysuria
blood in the urine throughout urination, resulting in a
dark red fluid and usually without blood clots,
incontinence is usually caused by a functional urethral
indicates bleeding in the kidney or ureter.
obstruction with an overflow bladder.
Dysuria is the result of stimulation of pain-sensitive
The occurrence of urinary incontinence in a young
and stretch-sensitive receptors in the bladder wall.
animal should lead to consideration of a congenital
These stimuli follow an afferent pathway via the
disorder. One or both ureters may be ectopic, inserting
pelvic nerve and the resulting efferent stimuli
via
in the urethra caudal to the sphincter. This typically
parasympathetic   fibers  
to
detrusor
results in a history of persistent urine loss, drop by
contractions. Owners then report symptoms such as
drop. Owners sometimes mistake the loss of another
painful discharge of urine (stranguria) and/or frequent
fluid for urinary incontinence, such as the loss of fluid
passage of small amounts of urine (pollakiuria) In the
associated with vaginitis or balanoposthitis.
 absence of a urethral obstruction this is associated with
Tenesmus alvi is painful and/or difficult defecation
a moderately filled or empty bladder. Disorders such as
(see also Chapter 11). Enlargement of the prostate can
cystitis, a tumor of the bladder, or cystic calculi can
lead to hindrance of the passage of feces through the
 generate persisting afferent stimuli, leading to repeated
rectum. In pronounced cases the feces are even
nonproductive straining. The owner usually reports 
flattened.
An
enlarged prostate sometimes slides
that the animal remains straining after micturition.
forward toward the abdomen, which increases the
Urinary incontinence is involuntary urine loss in
space for passage of feces, but abdominal pressure
which the bladder pressure exceeds the resistance of
during defecation displaces it caudally again, with the
the urethra (Fig. 12.3). There are two principal types
result that the defecation reflex which has arisen is
to differentiate:
increased even further, leading to tenesmus.
1 a relatively too low urethral resistance (sphincter
incontinence)
12.2 Physical examination
 2 a relatively too high bladder pressure (detrusor
The physical examination includes examination of the
incontinence).
head and the abdomen, with special attention to the
In the discussion with the owner it is usually possible to
kidneys, bladder, and prostate. The urethra and
differentiate
betweenthesetwoforms.
Detrusor
prostate are examined per rectum and then the penis
incontinence is usually seen in connection with signs of
and prepuce or the vulva and vagina are examined.
dysuria. The owner usually reports that the dog loses
urine while lying and/or sleeping. When sphincter
12.2.1 Head
The examination of the head begins with examination of
the bony structures, which are palpated to detect
possible hyperostotic changes. Then the jaws are
examined for possible softening or flexibility ('rubber
jaw"). The color of the mucous membranes may
Bacder
pressuire
indicate the presence of anemia. In severe uremia there
may be a strikingly sharp fetor ex ore due to ammonia
Urethral
 and eventually there may be mucosal ulcers.
pressure 
12.2.2 Abdomen
Examination of the abdomen proceeds as described in
Fig. 12.3 Urodynamic relation between the bladder neck and the
§ 11.2.3 and includes inspection and palpation of the
bladder lumen.
abdomen and, if indicated, percussion and testing for
104
Physical examination
undulation. The abdomen is inspected to determine
palpating fingers, which sometimes results in a kidney
being mistaken for an abnormal mass.
too low, and whether it is distended, symmetrically or
Because of the more supple abdominal wall of the cat
asymmetrically. The abdomen is first examined by
it is usually easier to say something about the size and
superficial palpation and then by deep palpation.
consistency of the kidneys than it is in the dog.
 Percussion and testing for undulation are performed if
Sometimes even the surface can be described. Thus it
the abdomen is enlarged. Ascites can be the result of
may be possible to detect the effects of fibrous tissue
severe proteinuria (see § 12.1.1) but it can also occur
contraction  in
the
kidney
{in chronic
following traumatic rupture of the urinary tract.
insufficiency), as well as perirenal cysts and neoplasia.
Examination for the presence of ascites is discussed in
In obese cats the kidneys may be surrounded by so
Chapters 10 and 11. Sometimes a full abdomen is seen
much fat as to create the false impression that they are
in combination with dysuria; this can be the result of
enlarged. In very thin cats the kidneys can usually be
urine retention of such severity that the increased
 palpated in detail, including the hilus.
circumference of the bladder is outwardly visible.
Ureters
Kidneys
The ureters are retroperitoneal and even when markedly
 In dogs both kidneys are retroperitoneal and are held in
dilated they are not palpable. Both ureters lie chiefly in
position by subperitoneal connective tissue. The fixation
the immediate vicinity of the aorta and caudal vena
is fairly loose and the kidneys are slightly displaced by
cava. They proceed caudally and then curve ventrally
respiratory movements. The right kidney lies slightly
to open out in the trigone of the bladder.
more cranial than the left (Fig. 12.4). In most dogs the
right kidney does not lie entirely within the costal arch.
Biodder
The cranial pole lies in the caudal fossa of the liver.
The bladder is bordered ventrally by the abdominal wall
The medial limit of the right kidney is immediately
 and dorsally by the descending colon. Depending on the 
adjacent to the caudal vena cava and the ventral
degree of filling, the bladder may also contact the
border makes contact with the pancreas and the
abdominal wall laterally. In the cat the colon is so
ascending colon. The left kidney also contacts the
moveable that when filled it can lie lateral to the
pancreas cranially and the craniolateral surface
lies
bladder. In this case a well-circumscribed bolus of feces
against the medial side of the spleen and the major
could be mistaken for a bladder stone, but a bladder
curvature of the stomach. The caudal vena cava also
stone cannot be compressed.
lies on the medial border of this kidney and the
In dogs and cats the bladder is almost always palpable
descending colon is ventral to it.
if the abdominal wall is not too tense. If it is only slightly
In the dog usually only the caudal pole of the left
filled, the bladder is recognized as an accumulation of
kidney can be palpated. A distinct increase in size as a
fluid surrounded by a supple wall. If the bladder is tense
result of tumor, cyst, or hydronephrosis can usually be
and stiff, there is an increased degree of contraction of
confirmed by palpation. In contrast, a reduction in size
the detrusor muscle, which must always be considered
is very difficult to confirm and attempts to do so still
abnormal. An empty bladder will be felt as a ball of
lead to mistakes.
tissue. The position of the bladder is naturally much
 In the cat it is usually possible to palpate both kidneys.
 dependent upon the degree of filling. A moderately filled
bladder will be found in the ventral and medial
The retroperitoneal fixation is much less firm than in
hypogastrium, while a very markedly filled bladder can
the dog. The kidneys can also be moved by the
 reach into the epigastrium.
In large dogs, two-handed palpation beginning at
the top of the abdomen is best. In small dogs and in
/22
cats the bladder can be palpated easily from the ventral
side with one hand. The degree of filling can be
determined  by superficial  palpation. By  somewhat
deeper palpation one can sometimes detect bladder
stones or abnormalities of the wall due to tumor.
Prostote
The normal prostate lies in the pelvic cavity and hence
is not detected by abdominal palpation. When it is
      
hypogastrium as a firm, usually rounded mass of tissue.
Fig. 12.4 The location of the left and the right kidney.
Enlargement due to cyst formation can be mistaken for
105
Chapter 12:
KIDNEYS AND URINARY TRACT
the bladder. This is particularly so when the cyst arises
ventrally through the corpus spongiosum and is partly
from the remnant of the Millerian duct, lying in the
enclosed by the os penis.
dorsal capsule of the prostate (paraprostate cyst).7
The prepuce is largely attached to the ventral
Sometimes both the bladder and the cyst can be palpated 
abdominal wall. Only the tip hangs free. In the absence
but in other cases further examination is needed, such as
of erection the prepuce encloses the pars longa and
Aq rappeiq aui suidua iahe uonedied aui suneadan
part of the bulb of the penis. Congestion of the
catheterization.
extended penis preventing its withdrawal back into the
prepuce results in paraphimosis. The preputial mucosa
12.2.3 Rectal palpation
contains lymph follicles which are most numerous
where the mucosa is reflected around onto the penis.
Rectal palpation has been described in § 11.2.5. Here we
Inspection of the penis and prepuce is mainly
are concerned with using it to examine the urethra and
important if there is a history of blood loss independent 
prostate.
of micturition. Sometimes the lesions which are the
source of the bleeding can only be found by very careful
Urethra
inspection of the mucosa of the penis and prepuce.
 o o an o a  ai    a
Under normal conditions the mucosa is pink, smooth
pelvis and can be palpated per rectum in the male dog
(except for the lymph follicles), and moist. In many
from the caudal border of the prostate until it turns
 male dogs the mucosa is slightly inflamed, which causes
over the edge of the pelvis. In the female dog the
a slightly red color and the accumulation of some
urethra can be palpated over its entire length.
 purulent exudate in the preputial opening.
A normal urethra feels smooth and supple and is fairly
 Inspection is performed with the dog lying on its side.
easy to move over the floor of the pelvis.
Holding the dog with its back slightly arched will tip the 
pelvis slightly forward. This makes the exposure of the
Prostote
penis easier (Fig. 12.5). A finger placed against the fold
In the noncastrated male dog which has reached sexual
of skin between the prepuce and the abdominal wall
maturity the prostate is easily palpated rectally. A sulcus
  s n ao     
can almost always be felt on its dorsal midline. This
the penis. This movement also points the penis in a
corresponds to a medial septum that divides the prostate
more ventral direction and the prepuce can be brought
into left and right lobes. As the animal ages the prostate
back over the bulbus. This exposure of the penis
becomes enlarged by hypertrophy. As a result of severe
should not meet any noticeable resistance.
hypertrophy the prostate can gradually become more
abdominal in position. This displacement can be so great
12.2.5 Vulva and vagina
that the prostate is no longer palpable per rectum
without other maneuvers. After castration the prostate
This subject is also covered in Chapter 13. Here we cover
atrophies markedly but is often still palpa ble per rectum.
only a few aspects that are of importance in connection
While palpating as described in § 11.2.5, the opposite
with function of the kidneys and urinary tract.
hand is used to slightly raise the hypogastrium during
rectal palpation to help in evaluating the size and
Vulvo
displacement of the prostate. For this purpose the hand
Attention is given to the position of the vulva. A more
is placed flat against the abdominal wall just in front of
cranioventral
position can be an indication of
the pelvis. By pressing upward on the abdominal wall
with this hand one lifts the prostate up slightly and
brings it more into the pelvic canal. This considerably
rectum. Rectal examination is rarely performed in the
cat. The fifth finger is used and sometimes sedation is
examination in the cat than in the dog.
12.2.4 Penis and prepuce
The glans penis of the dog is divided into a bulbus and a
pars longa. The pars longa is the distal three-fourths.
The more proximal bulbus is a cavernous expansion of
 the corpus spongiosum. During erection the dorsal part
Fig. 12.5 With the dog in lateral recumbency. the penis can be exposed
by pushing against the fold between the prepuce and the abdominal
in particular is swollen enormously. The urethra passes
wall.
106
Further examinations
intersexuality, in which case an enlarged clitoris can
12.3 Further examinations
also be found. Attention is also given to the skin and
In order to increase levels of practice, the following
hair coat immediately surrounding the vulva. Moist
hair and skin changes can be associated with urinary
 procedures can be used:
incontinence.
urine examination (biochemistry and sediment)
blood examination (for renal function)
Vogina
 plain radiographs
ultrasonography
In larger female dogs with a large enough vagina, the
bacteriological examination of urine, with
   d      
antibiotic sensitivity testing
with a finger. The urethral orifice can be felt as a small
quantitative measurement of protein loss
depression in the ventral vaginal wall at the height of
renal function studies (including endogenous
the ischial arch. Cranial to this the urethra can be felt
creatinine clearance)
as a stiff cord with a diameter of about 0.s cm.
CT and/or MRI
The urethral orifice is examined closely
during
vaginoscopy. Attention is given to possible deformities
 and also to the appearance of the adjacent mucosa.
References
1 Grauer GF. Glomerulonephropathies. In: Nelson RW. Couto CG. eds.
medicine. Diseases of the dog and cat. 5th edn. Philadelphia:
 Small animal internal medicine. 3rd edn. St. Louis: Mosby:
Saunders: 2000:1634-1662.
2003:600-607.
6 Brassard JA, Meyers KM. Person M. et al. Experimentally induced
2 Finco DR. Brown SA. Brown CA. et al. Progression of chronic renal
renal failure in the dog as an animal model of uremic bleeding. J
 disease in the dog. J Vet Intern Med 1999: 13:516-528.
Lab Clin Med 1994: 124:48-54.
 3 Fenner W. Uremic encephalopathy. In: Bonagura RW. ed. Kirk's
7 Root Kustriz MV. Klausner JS. Prostatic diseases. In: Ettinger SJ.
Current veterinary therapy Xll. Small animal practice. Philadelphia:
Feldman EC. eds. Textbook of veterinary internal medicine.
Saunders: 1995:1158-1161.
Diseases of the dog and cat. 5th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders:
4 King LG. Giger U. Dierens D. et al. Anemia of chronic renal failure in
2000:1687-1698.
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1992: 6:264-270.
5 Polzin DJ. Osborne CA. Jacob F. et al. Chronic renal failure In:
 Ettinger SJ. Feldman EC. eds. Textbook of veterinary internal
107
13
Female reproductive tract
A.C. Schaefers-Okkens and H.s. Kooistra
internal examination of the vagina and possibly
Chapter contents
palpation per rectum. It may be necessary to repeat the
physical examination one or more times, e.g, on
13.1 History 108
 alternate days to determine the optimal time for mating.
13.11  Symptoms 108
13.1 History
13.1.2 Living conditions 110
13.2 Physical examination 110
 After the general history, detailed questions concerning
13.2.1 External examination 110
the functioning of the reproductive system are asked.
Vulvo ond perivulivor orea 110
The information of interest includes any observation of
Abdomen 111
vaginal discharge, any change in the size of the
abdomen, estrous cycles, attempted matings, and
13.2.2 Internal examination 112
 parturition and the postpartum period.
Voginol exominotion 113
Rectol polpotion 114
13.1.1 Symptoms
13.3 Further examination 115
One of the most frequent symptoms of a gynecological
problem is an abnormal vaginal discharge.
A
distinction must be made between a physiological and
An important consideration in this examination is that
a pathological discharge. The latter is usually the result
not only the condition of the female reproductive tract
ofinflammation of the uterus {endometritis or
but also the animal's behavior depends on the stage of
pyometra), but vaginitis, tumors of the vagina, and
reproductive
function
{estrous
cycle:
anestrus,
urological  disorders  can  also  cause an abnormal
pregna ncy,
parturition,
postpartum period).
In
vaginal discharge. Particularly in middle-aged and
addition, ovariectomy or ovariohysterectomy results in
older bitches, inflammation of the uterus can develop
considerable change.
directly
or
shortly after estrus.
Treatmentwith
 The animal's age and breed are also important. The
progestagens to prevent estrus or with estrogens to
frequency of gynecological abnormalities in the bitch
s  m  e d a
    i    
the chance of endometritis. The owner must be asked
number of relatively heavier pups delivered in smaller
about the amount and character of the discharge. The
breeds of dogs than in larger breeds. This can have
discharge from an endometritis is usually yellow
major effects on parturition, certainly if the size of the 
(mucopurulent).   Chocolate-colored    (hemopurulent)
bitch's pelvis and the shape of the pups are not
discharge indicates a severe inflammation, the color
 compatible, as in some brachycephalic breeds.
resulting from the mixture of blood with the purulent
If, after the general history and formulation of the
exudate. This discharge almost always has a
problem, the diagnostic plan includes examination of the
characteristic nauseating odor, which has also been
female genital system, the next step is to take a specific
noted by the owner.
history concerning this system. The physical examination
 Physiologic discharges occur at the time of parturition,
then begins with external examination of the vulva and
 during the postpartum period, and during the estrous
its surroundings and of the abdomen. This is followed by
cycle. The normal discharge after parturition lasts 2-3
108
History
weeks in the dog. In dogs and cats the placenta is usually
Follicular
expelled directly after delivery. The color of the
phase
discharge in the dog is red-green shortly after the end of
parturition, becoming red after 1-3 days, then rust-
colored, and finally colorless and mucoid at 8-14 days
after parturition. The green component of the discharge
directly after parturition is the result of the release of
hemochlorine from the green zone at the edge of the
placenta. In the cat the discharge is red for a few days
after parturition, but quickly becomes lighter in color
and then finally becomes colorless and transparent.
Usually
thereisnodischargeafter7-10
days
postpartum. Involution of the uterus takes about 12
weeks in dogs but much less in cats.
The period in which the female is in heat—attractive
to males—includes proestrus, estrus, and about the first
two days of metestrus. It lasts 212 to 3 weeks and is
      
serosanguinous, gradually changing to pink, then light 
Luteal
yellow, and finally colorless and mucoid. In some dogs
1Anestrus
phase
the
vaginal
discharge
remains
serosanguinous
Proestrus
throughout the heat. At the end of the heat or during
3
 Estrus, ovulation
the first days of metestrus the discharge ceases. The
4Metestrus
blood comes from the endometrium and its presence in
 Fig. 13.1 Diagram of the estrous cycle and anestrus in the dog.
the lumen is explained by the loss of red blood cells
from the capillaries by diapedesis. In the cat the
vaginal discharge during estrus is much less noticeable
but a small amount of clear serous fluid is observed.
The size of the abdomen can increase as a result of
 pregnancy, pyometra, or tumors of the reproductive system.
Abnormalities of the estrous cycle are observed quite
150
Proestrus
Estrus
often. Certain gynecological disorders are related to the
stage of the cycle. It is important to obtain information
about (1) the time and duration of proestrus and
40
estrus, (2) the length of the interval between estrous
periods, (3) the nature and amount of the discharge,
(4) the animal's breeding behavior, (S) matings during
estrus, and (6) other notable information such as the
30-
(nmol/)
100
Occurrence of pseudopregnancy during metestrus in the
250
(pmol/)
bitch and any hormone therapy to prevent estrus or to
(μg/)
one
ster
 A short summary of the estrous cycle in dogs is given
工
200
Estrac
below. The first estrous period in a bitch can be expected
20
at around 6-9 months of age. The dog is monestrous: its
150
sexual cycles occur at intervals of 6 months to a year. In
50
1
  si asr   s s
anestrus of at least 1-2 months, prior to the follicular
1100
10
phase of the next cycle. In some breeds, such as the
basenji and the Tibetan mastiff, estrus usually occurs
50
only once a year.
The phases of the estrous cycle can be classified
1-
according to the behavior of the bitch (proestrus,
-10
0
10
estrus, and metestrus) or according to the hormonal
Cycle (days)
and ovarian changes (follicular phase, ovulation, and
Fig. 13.2 Concentrations of estradiol. LH. and progesterone in blood
luteal phase) (Figs 13.1 and 13.2).23 The follicular
plasma in relation to estrus behavior of the bitch.
109
Chapter 13:
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
phase comprises the end of anestrus, proestrus, and the
Information should also be obtained about the sire and
 s as rel a rssa jo i i
the mating and about the number, dates, and course of
ovulation and comprises the second part of estrus,
earlier deliveries {normal, abnormal, full term, size of
including the fertilization phase and metestrus.
litter, perinatal deaths, therapeutic interventions, etc.).
 Proestrus. The average duration of this phase is
If problems appear following delivery, questions are
9 days (range 3-16 days) and its onset is marked
also asked about the postpartum period.
by the first discharge of blood. There is considerable
ovarian follicular activity and thus production of
13.1.2 Living conditions
estrogens. The blood supply to the genital tract
increases and various parts of it increase in size (the
The surroundings can have a great influence on the
vulva swells, the diameter of the uterus increases,4
progress of parturition. Anxiety and restlessness can
 and the vaginal mucosa swells).
markedly retard the process.
The bitch's behavior changes and her pheromones
Information about the health and general condition
 attract male dogs but she does not allow mating.
of other animals in the surroundings (e.g-, in a kennel)
Proestrus is thus a clearly recognizable and
should be included in the history. Bitches living closely
unmistakable phase of the cycle in the dog. It is
together in kennels can mutually influence the onset of
also quite long in the dog, in comparison with
their estrous cycles.
other species, but certainly should not be confused
13.2 Physical examination
with estrus.
Estrus. The average duration of this period is also 9
13.2.1 External examination
days (range 4-12 days). In part the signs are the same
as those in proestrus, but the most important
The external examination consists of examination of the
characteristic is that the bitch now accepts being
aul jo uojeunwexa uaul pue ssupunouns sh! pue bajna
bred. The discharge gradually changes from red to
abdomen.
 pink and then becomes colorless. Ovulations usually
Vulva ond perivulvar oreo
occur on the second, third, and/or fourth day of
It is noteworthy that in the dog, in contrast to many
estrus. During these days the bitch usually displays
the optimal standing reflex, also called the tail reflex.
other animal species, the distance between the anus
and vulva is fairly great (Fig. 13.3). From the vulva the
When the bitch is touched around the vulva she holds
her tail away from the body andto one side, while the
vaginal  vestibulum rises steeply in  a  craniodorsal
vulva is turned toward the other side by contraction
direction to the junction between the vestibulum and
of the constrictor vestibuli muscle.
vagina, just under the level of the anus. The vestibulum
 Metestrus. This period lasts for about two months.
in the dog lies just beneath the body surface and hence
It begins when the bitch will no longer allow
a space-occupying structure within it (e.g., a tumor, or
mating and it ends when the corpora lutea are no
a
fetus during delivery) causes a rounded elevation
longer active and the plasma progesterone
between the anus and the vulva. This is noticeable
concentration decreases to the basal level. The
during the inspection and can be palpated.
swelling of the vulva and the vaginal mucosa
 gradually decreases in this period.
Anestrus. This is primarily a rest phase. There is
little activity in the ovaries.6 The vulva is small,
the diameter of the uterus is small, and the vaginal
mucosa is not swollen. Anestrus continues until
the next follicular phase. Since domestic dogs are
④
in estrus every 6 or 7 months on average, anestrus
lasts 3-4 months, but there are large differences
③
both within and between breeds. Anestrus is
relatively short in German shepherd dogs (21
weeks?) and relatively long in collies (47 weeks).
As noted above, in the Tibetan mastiff and the
basenji estrus occurs only once a year.
pue saop un uound suunp swaqod are aau uaua
Fig. 13.3 Schematic sagittal section through the vestibulum and vagina
cats, an adequate history must be obtained concerning
in the bitch. 1 pubis. 2 clitoral fossa and clitoris. 3 vestibulum. 4 urethral
the pregnancy and the course of parturition thus far.
 orifice. 5 dorsal medial fold. 6 cervix. 7 uterus. 8 bladder
110
Physical examination
In a dog with vulvar discharge the underside of the tail
of the uterus or birth canal the mucosa is often eroded,
and the skin around the vulva can be soiled, especially
         
abrades the vulva. In contrast, during estrus the
enable good inspection it may be necessary to cleanse
mucosa is pale pink and has a glossy, edematous
the perivulvar area and to clip away the hair.
appearance. Under the influence of estrogens, the 2-3
The  vulvar opening and  especially  its 
ventral
cell layers increase to 20-30.
commissure can be examined for the presence and
An impression smear of the vaginal vestibulum may
characteristics of a discharge by use of a white gauze
indicate the prevailing hormonal influence and thereby of
pad. Physiological and pathological types of discharge
the stage of the cycle. During the early follicular phase,
were mentioned briefly in § 13.1.1. Pathological
there are a few superficial cells but mainly large and
discharge can be further characterized as mucopurulent
small intermediate and parabasal cells, neutrophils,
(white to yellow), purulent, hemopurulent, ichorous
       
(rotting, green to red-brown, from dead fetuses), or
of proestrus, the picture is dominated by superficial
hemorrhagic. It is especially important to note the odor
 cells and a variable proportion of large intermediate cells
of the discharge. As indicated in § 13.1.1, in a dog or
 and erythrocytes. The cytological picture does not change
cat with endometritis the discharge usually has a very
until the beginning of metestrus, thus remaining the same
characteristic nauseating odor. There may be particles
through the follicular phase, ovulation, and the first part
 of tissue in the discharge, as can result from a tumor in
of the luteal (fertilization) phase. The cytological changes
the vagina.
may not be synchronous with the behavioral changes of
The examiner evaluates the shape and size of the
the transition from estrus to metestrus. During metestrus
tuiva. Changes in shape and size occur especially in
and anestrus varying proportions of large and small
the bitch. During anestrus the vulva of the bitch is
intermediate cells, parabasal cells, and neutrophils are
small and well closed and the vulvar opening is largely
observed (Figs 13.5, 13.6, and 13.7). During anestrus 
covered by a fold of the skin between the vulva and
basal cells can also be found. Cytological examination
the anus, called the dorsal fold. During estrus the vulva
thus allows recognition of (1) the early follicular phase,
swells, sometimes becoming so large that the dorsal
(2) the advanced follicular phase up to and including
fold disappears (Fig. 13.4). Both the ventral and the
the beginning of the luteal (fertilization) phase, and
dorsal commissures are then visible. During metestrus
(3) the beginning of metestrus. The time of ovulation,
the vulvar swelling gradually decreases. At the end of
which is needed to determine the optimal period for
pregnancy and around the time of parturition the vulva
mating, cannot be identified by this method.
is also markedly swollen. Vulvar swelling also occurs
in a few pathologic processes in the reproductive tract,
such as inflammation. Sometimes the lips of the vulva
Abdomen
are not well closed {e-g, due to a vaginal tumor or
The external examination of the abdomen is very
extensive edema {vaginal fold prolapse) of the floor of
important in the dog and the cat. The normal
the posterior vagina).
nonpregnant 1
uterus
passest
through
thedorsal
By carefully spreading the lips of the vulva one can
mesogastrium and hypogastrium to the pelvis and is
examine the mucosa of the vulva and the most caudal
about 5 mm thick. During proestrus, estrus, and much
part of the vestibulum in the bitch. During anestrus
of metestrus in the dog, the uterus is slightly thicker.4
this mucosa is pink and nonglossy, and small blood
When
the
uterus
increases  considerably
1n
vessels are usually visible. When there is inflammation
circumference for physiologic or pathologic reasons
Fig. 13.4 The vulva of a beagle bitch during anestrus (et) and proestrus (right.
117
Chapter 13:
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
(sometimes with sunken flanks), or tumors. The
enlargement of the abdomen is then usually symmetrical.
Even superficial palpation may reveal certain
abnormalities. In animals in advanced pregnancy it
may be possible to feel the curvatures of the uterine
horns or the fetuses, or even the movements of a fetus.
Parts of the tense surface of the uterus enlarged by
pyometra can also sometimes be felt during superficial
palpation. In this case deep palpation should not be
 performed because of the considerable risk of rupturing
the inflamed wall of the uterus, which may be very thin.
Two-handed deep palpation is performed
as
Fig. 13.5 Cytology of the vaginal vestibulum of a bitch during the early 
follicular phase: mostly intermediate cells (il. a few superficial (s) and 
described previously (§ 11.2.3 and § 12.2.2). Palpation
parabasal (p) cells. erythrocytes (e). and leukocytes (0). (x200. May-
of the uterus is very difficult in nervous animals which
Grunwald-Giemsa stainl.
strongly contract their abdominal muscles and in obese
animals. A normal, nonpregnant uterus is not palpable
in dogs and cats. Palpation is often possible when the
circumference of the uterus increases for physiologic or
pathologic reasons.
Under normal conditions the ovaries of the dog and
cat cannot be palpated but they may be palpable when
pathologically enlarged by cysts or tumors. The normal
ovary is located in the dorsal mesogastrium at the level
Of the third lumbar vertebra, just caudal to the kidney.
When the ovaries are pathologically enlarged, they can
By means of two-handed abdominal palpation it is
possible to diagnose pregnancy at certain stages. Firm,
Fig. 13.6 Cytology of the vaginal vestibulum of a bitch during the
round or oval gestational vesicles can be palpated at
 second part of the follicular phase. the time of ovulation and
aul ui skep I7 ie pue sop aut ul snulooisod shep s7 inoqe
beginning of the (uteal phase: superficial cells (s) and erythrocytes (e).
cat. These ovoid enlargements increase in circumference
ea shep s inoqel sop ur snosod shep 2e Aq pue
in cats) the uterus is homogeneously thickened and
flexible, so that a reasonably reliable diagnosis of
pregnancy is no longer possible. However, by about 45
days postcoitus the skeleton of the already fairly large
fetus becomes ossified and palpation of the fetus is
possi ble. Sometimes it is necessary during parturition to
determine by abdominal palpation whether all of the
pups or kittens have been delivered or whether one or
more is still present in the uterus. This is sometimes very
difficult because the uterus contracts strongly and hence
feels firm. Most of the time a fetus can be recognized
due to its size and bony structure.
Fig. 13.7 Cytology of the vaginal vestibulum of a bith during
metestrus. beginning 6-10 days after the preovulatory LH peak:
intermediate cells (il and leukocytes (1).
13.2.2 Internal examination
 If there is an indication for bacteriological examination
 e u y a u i "(d 1o uud "a)
of the vagina, the sample should be collected before
 part of the abdominal cavity.
the internal examination.
The examination of the abdomen consists 
of
In the bitch a vaginal examination is usually
inspection and palpation.
performed first and thereafter a rectal examination is
During inspection attention is given to
the
performed if indicated. There are generally no serious
circumference and shape of the abdomen. The
risks associated with the vaginal examination. There are
circumference can be increased by pregnancy, pyometra
 seldom injuries to the birth canal during delivery which
112
Physical examination
result in inflammation, as can occur in large animals.
the entire 360° circumference. In many bitches this
Rectal palpation of the reproductive tract of the bitch
 junction is also contractile. In some, especially young,
usually  provides  no additional  information  when
bitches vaginal examination is impossi ble beca use of a
vaginal examination can be carried out satisfactorily. A
toonarrow vulva and/or a too narrowjunction
simple internal examination is usually not possible in
between the vestibulum and vagina.
the cat or can at best be only partly performed.
Performing vaginoscopy. In the bitch this examination
Voginol exominotion
should be performed with a 12 mm diameter pediatric
proctoscope. The speculum has an occluding stylet
As noted above, the vestibulum passes from the vulva
with a knob, which makes it easier to introduce and
steeply in the craniodorsal direction until near the
Suua uo eura aui u uoaus Aue suaaid ose
opening of the urethra it joins the vagina, which is
the vaginoscope.
initially horizontal and then slants down in a
 In exceptional cases sedation is required. The patient
cranioventral direction (Fig. 13.3). Caudally in the
stands during the examination and must be well
ventral wall of the vestibulum, about 2 cm cranial to
 supported under the abdomen. Sudden sitting during
the vulva, there is a fairly large blind pouch, the
vaginoscopy can result in injury.
clitoral fossa (Fig. 13.8). This is bordered on the upper
After the vulva has been cleansed and antiseptic
side by the clitoral fold and the clitoris. The transition
lubricant has been applied to the speculum, the
of vestibulum to vagina (at the level of the ischiadic
speculum is introduced into the vestibulum as close as
arch) is called the cingulum? and it is a narrowing of
possible to the dorsal commissure. Because of the
normal direction of the vestibulum, the speculum is
introduced as steeply as possible, almost vertically (Fig.
13.9, left). Introducing the speculum along the dorsal
wall of the vestibulum prevents it from entering the
clitoral fossa, which is extremely painful.
When the tip of the speculum is just under the level of
the anus, it is turned cranially (Fig. 13.9, right). With
light pressure and rotation, the speculum is pushed
cranially until greater resistance is felt. Here the stylet
is removed, the light is placed in the speculum, and
under visual guidance the speculum is gradually
retracted from the vagina. In the first part of proestrus
the speculum glides rapidly into the vagina but during
estrus it passes somewhat stiffly.
Fig. 13.8 Vulvar lips of a bitch spread apart to show the clitoral fossa.
 During vaginoscopic examination the cervix is almost
 in the ventral part of the vestibulum.
never well visualized. This is partly because of the
Fig. 13.9 Introducing a speculum into the vagina of a bitch. Note the angle of the speculum during passage through the vestibulum (left). When the
tip of the speculum is just below the level of the anus. it is turned cranially (right).
113
Chapter 13:
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
presence of a dorsomedial mucosal fold in the wall of
 and continues through the phase of preovulatory
the vagina. This fold extends from about 2-3 cm
luteinization and ovulation, when many
caudal to the cervix to the cervix itself.310 A speculum
longitudinal folds can be observed. During
introduced into the vagina usually passes no further
0ocyte maturation, shrinkage of the vaginal
than the caudal edge of this fold, except during
mucosa continues and increasing numbers of
parturition. A small diameter speculum (e.g, 6 mm)
sharp-edged summit profiles appear (Fig. 13.11).
can pass this fold and allow observation of the cervix.
At this stage the mucosa resembles crepe paper.
Such a speculum is also used for endoscopic artificial
 In the transition period from estrus to metestrus,
insemination, in which a catheter is introduced into the
the mucosa thins and the profiles become
cervical canal.11
rounded. At the start of metestrus, there is
 During vaginoscopic examination, attention is given,
a patchwork of red and white (Fig. 13.12).
insofar as possible, to:
The appearance in vaginitis is similar,
1 The mucosa of the vagina. Cyclic changes are
probably because vaginitis usually occurs
best observed on the dorsal medial fold in the
during metestrus.
 2 The presence of secretion and its nature.
 pink or a patchwork of red and white, neither
3 Neoplasia.
glossy nor swollen. There are shallow longitudinal
4 Lacerations. In the dog lacerations seldom occur in
folds in the caudal part but the proximal part is
the birth canal during parturition. There are
usually smooth. During the follicular phase the
occasionally lesions after mating. Perforations in
vaginal mucosal folds are pale, swollen, and
the cranial portion of the vagina result in an open 
smoothly rounded, resembling balloons (Fig.
connection with the abdominal cavity.
13.10). The increased concentrations of estradiol
5 An open cervix. As noted above, the cervix is
frequently cause hypertrophy of the floor of the
usually difficult to observe. Around the time of
 posterior vagina just cranial to the urethral
parturition it is possible to see whether the cervix
orifice and therefore folding over and covering it.
is open. When the cervix is partly or completely
At the end of the follicular phase, during the
open, fetal membranes are often visible. When
decline in estradiol and the rise in progesterone
the cervix is closed only the vaginal mucosa can be
concentrations in plasma, shrinkage begins in
seen.
response to reduced estradiol-dependent water
retention. These cyclic changes are most marked
A glove is worn for vaginal palpation. Antiseptic lubricant
is placed on the middle finger or forefinger and the finger is
in the dorsal median fold, and precede those of
the midvaginal mucosa. Shrinkage of the vaginal
introduced via the dorsal commissure through the
vestibulum to the vagina. Usually the cranial edge of the
mucosa begins midway in the follicular phase
pelvic floor can be reached, provided that the vulva and
the transition from vestibulum to vagina are not too
narrow. The cervix in the dog is located cranial to the
pelvic inlet and cannot be reached. During this
examination notice should be taken of:
 narrowing12 due to strictures and/or a septum
neoplasia
lacerations
 abnormal shape of the ventral part of the pelvic
inlet, which is so important for parturition
the urethra, normally a supple cord up to 8 mm
thick and palpable on the pelvic floor
the presence of a fetus in the pelvic canal or
palpable at the pelvic inlet and any abnormalities
in its posture or size
 foreign bodies
Rectol poipotion
 Rectal palpation is only performed:
to examine a tumor in the vagina, especially if
Fig. 13.10 Vaginoscopic appearance in a bitch during the early
located in the dorsal wall
follicular phase. Note the pale. swollen mucosal folds with smooth.
 when vaginal palpation is impossible because of
rounded surfaces resembling balloons. and the hemorrhagic fluid
between the folds
narrowing or tumor
114
Further examination
Fig. 13.11 Vaginoscopic appearance in a bitch at the time of ovulation (plasma progesterone concentration: 22 nmol/l). The shrinkage of the mucosa
 has led to longitudinal folds let). The close-up view on the right shows the shrinkage of the longitudinal folds of the dorsal median fold of the cranial
13.3 Further examination
Possibilities for further examination include:
blood examination (routine hematology and 
biochemistry)
pue sisousep Aoueugaud 1ot Audeisouose1
some gynecological abnormalities)
bacteriologic examination of vaginal secretion
cytology {vaginal smears to estimate the stage of
the cycle (Figs 13.5, 13.6, and 13.7)
hormone mea surements (plasma progesterone to
determine optimal time, e-g-, for mating {Fig.
13.2), plasma estradiol with GnRH stimulation to
detect ovarian tissue after incomplete
ovariectomy)
laparoscopy
radiography (to determine the number of fetuses)
Fig. 13.12 Vaginoscopic appearance in a bitch in metestrus. Note the
biopsy of a lesion or tumor
flattening of the folds and the patchwork appearance of alternating red
and white.
References
1 Naaktgeboren C. Taverne MAM. van der Weijden GC. De Geboorte
 5 Jochle W. Prolactin in canine and feline reproduction. Reprod
 biji de Hond (Birth in the dog). Naarden. NL: Strengholt: 2002.
Domest Anim 1997: 321:183.
 2 Concannon PW. Hansel W. Visek WJ. The ovarian cycle of the bitch:
6 Olson PN. Bowen RA. Behrendt MD. et al. Concentrations of
 plasma estrogen. LH and progesterone. Biol Reprod 1975: 13:112.
reproductive hormones in canine serum throughout late anestrus.
 3 Schaefers-Okkens AC. Ovaries. In: Rijnberk A. ed. Clinical
proestrus and estrus. Biol Reprod 1982: 27:1196.
endocrinology of dogs and cats. Dordrecht: Kluwer: 1996:131.
 7 Sokolowski JH. Stover DG. van Ravenswaay F. Seasonal incidence
 4 Christie DW. Bell ET. Changes in the dimensions of the uterus of the
of estrus and interestrous interval for bitches of seven breeds. J Am
 beagle bitch during the oestrous cycle. J Smmall Anim Pract1972: 13:97.
Vet Med Assoc 1977: 171:271.
115
Chapter 13:
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
 8 Jones EC. Joshua JO. Reproductive clinical problems in the dog.
 11 Wilson MS. Endoscopic transcervical insemination in the bitch. In:
Bristol/London: Wright: 1982.
Concannon Pw. England G. Verstegen J. et al. eds. Recent advances
 9 Pineda MH. Kainer RA. Faulkner LC. Dorsal median postcervical fold 
in small animal reproduction. Ithaca (NY): International Veterinary
 in the canine vagina. Am J Vet Res 1973: 34:1487.
Information Service: 2003:A1232.1203 (www.ivis.org).
10 Lindsay FEF. The normal endoscopic appearance of the caudal
12 Holt PE. Sayle B. Congenital vestibulovaginal stenosis in the bitch.
 reproductive tract of the cyclic and non-cyclic bitch: post-uterine
J Small Anim Pract 1981: 22:67.
endoscopy. J Small Anim Pract 1983: 24:1
116
14
Male reproductive tract
J. de Gier and F.J. van Sluijs
external examination of the scrotum, testes, epididymis,
Chapter contents
spermatic cord, prepuce, and penis, and, in the dog,
     
14.1  History 117
examination is completed with collection of semen, but
14.1.1  Libido 117
        
14.1.2 Fertility 117
uwas juaaid oi se ynu os oial ysuu aew ym
14.1.3 Living conditions 118
collection.
14.1.4  Past history 118
14.1 History
14.2 Physical examination 118
14.2.1  Libido 118
The general history is extended by asking specific
14.2.2 Scrotum 118
questions about the animal's libido and fertility, and
14.2.3 Testes 118
then questions about the animal's living conditions and
14.2.4 Epididymis 119
about previous disorders concerned with reproduction.
14.2.5 Prepuce 119
14.2.6 Penis 119
14.1.1 Libido
14.2.7 Accessory sex glands 120
The owner is asked whether the dog has shown signs
14.3 Collection of semen 121
 of pain during mating. Then questions are asked about
14.4 Further examination 121
the dog's behavior during mating and, if abnormalities 
14.4.1  Semen examination 121
are described, when these first appeared. If possible,
14.4.2 Ultrasonography 121
it is preferable to observe a mating and preferably in
14.4.3 Testicular biopsy 121
the male dog's own usual surroundings. For further
examination of pain occurring during mating, see
14.4.4 Hormone measurements 121
Chapters 17 and 18, concerning locomotion and the
nervous system, respectively. For examination with
regard to behavioral abnormalities during mating, see
Chapter 22.
The indication for examination of the male reproductive
tract is usually provided by a breeding problem or by
14.1.2 Fertility
signs that appear to arise from an abnormality of this 
system. It is also becoming more common that
Questions about fertility are related to the animal's age,
examination of the male's reproductive system and
semen is requested before the animal is used for
that are extremely young or extremely old.
breeding. Furthermore, examination of the reproductive
If the animal has already been used for breeding,
tract is imperative before semen is to be collected and
questions are asked to determine how often it has been
frozen for transport or for storage and later use.
used, what percentage of the matings resulted in
sui oi paioap suousanb Aq papuaixa st Aoisy au
pregnancy, and how large the litters were. A low
organ system. The physical examination includes an
 percentage of pregnancies or small litters are reasons
Chapter 14:
MALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
for asking how the time of mating has been chosen and
achievement of copulation can be used as a measure of
how often and at what intervals this male has been
libido. The male's perseverance in attempting to
mated with a given female during the same estrus.
copulate is also a measure. Sometimes it is necessary to
Information is also obtained about the females,
exclude from the area all persons unfamiliar to the
including age, parity, and results of previous matings.
male dog. This is even more important for the male cat.
14.1.3 Living conditions
14.2.2 Scrotum
      m   
In the male dog the scrotum is located between the
thighs and is clearly visible from behind. The skin is
infrequently have a lack of libido.' A male cat that is
thin, pigmented, and sparsely haired. The subcutis
transferred to new, unfamiliar surroundings can lose its
contains no fat. The scrotal septum forms a visible
libido for months.4 This may also happen when a male
raphe on the midline. The scrotum of the male cat is
cat is confined to a cage.
located just below the anus. It is furred and is not
pendulant, as is that of the male dog (Fig. 14.1).
14.1.4 Past history
The scrotum is carefully inspected and palpated to assess
 Information about previous disorders and treatments,
the presence, size, symmetry, and abnormalities of the 
  i i a a  
testes. The scrotum is small if the testes have not
the preparation used, the dosage, and the result) can
descended or are retracted, and it can be enlarged by
be very important for correct interpretation of the
pathologic changes. Thickening or other abnormalities
information.
of the scrotum can interfere with thermoregulation,
resulting in higher scrotal temperatures. This can lead to
14.2 Physical examination
degenerative changes in the testes and hence a reduction
14.2.1 Libido
more after the onset of the increase in temperature.
A successful mating requires first of all that the male has
adequate libido. Although it is difficult to measure this
14.2.3 Testes
objectively, in dogs there are a few useful indications.
For this examination it is preferable to bring the male
The testes are round to oval. Thermoregulation of the
into contact with a bitch in estrous in the male's normal
testes is determined by the following factors:2.6
surroundings. Within a short time, usually after a period
the absence of subcutaneous fat in the scrotum
of playing, copulation is initiated. The interval between 
-cooling of the arterial blood by cooler venous
bringing the two animals together and the start or
 blood in the pampiniform plexus
syhiun aun uaamag pateool 5! pue 5saley 5! wnpoun5 aun shop ul pasiey llel aun yhm (ubij ien ajew e pue (yal) bop alew e jo malA leay l'tl db
 s0 only the caudal part is visible. In cats the scrotum is furred and is located just below the anus
118
Physical examination
-the distance of the testes from the abdominal wall,
an orifice with thick edges and is directed caudally and
regulated by the cremaster muscle
located under the scrotum. During inspection of the
prepuce attention is given to the size of the orifice, the
Palpation is performed to determine the presence of both
 presence of discharge, and the appearance of the mucosa.
testes and their size, consistency, and painfulness. If
 The preputial orifice must be large enough to allow the
    h      
penis to emerge. Purulent discharge from the prepuce
have either not descended or are retracted, providing
occurs frequently in intact male dogs. Although not
that they have not been removed surgically. One can
normal, it is not considered a serious abnormality. The
attempt to confirm the latter by looking for a surgical
mucosa contains many lymph follicles and its normal
scar or by detecting a spermatic cord by palpation. In
most male dogs the testes can be palpated in the
appearance is light pink, glossy, and smooth.
scrotum by S-6 weeks of age.7& However, a definitive
14.2.6 Penis
diagnosis of cryptorchidism can only be made when
the animal is 6 months old. Until that age the inguinal
The penis of the dog is more or less cylindrical and
 canal is still open to allow testicular descent.9
contains two corpora cavernosa separated by a septum.
Retraction of the testes is attributed to a very effective
 Following birth the os penis develops in the distal part
cremaster reflex. Particularly in pups, it may be difficult
of the septum and can be as long as 11 cm in a large
dog. The caudal end of the os penis is thicker than
testes, but the latter can be massaged into the scrotum.^
the cranial part and is attached to the corpora
In the cat the testes are present in the scrotum at birth
cavernosa. The cranial end terminates in a tapered
but movement in and out of the inguinal canal is
fibrocartilaginous tip. The urethra lies in a groove on
possible for a few months. The testes are usually
the ventral side of the os penis and is surrounded by
permanently in the scrotum by the age of 12-14 weeks 
the tube-shaped corpus spongiosum penis.
and certainly by the age of 6 months.
The glans penis of the dog consists of a bulbus glandis
In the male dog the size of the testes depends on the
and a pars longa glandis (Fig. 14.2). The venous plexus of
breed, varying from 1.5 x 1.5 x 2 cm in the smallest
the glans penis is continuous with the spaces of the corpus
breeds to about 3 × 3 × 5 cm in the large breeds. The
spongiosum. The pars longa glandis surrounds the long
volume canbe estimatedwithanorchidometer
(calibrated ovoid beads; see § 4.2, Fig. 4.5).
terminal part of the os penis. The short, caudally
located bulbus glandis surrounds the wide caudal part
In the sexually mature male cat the diameter of the
of the os penis and projects mainly dorsally. The
testes is about 10 mm, but there are differences among
swelling of the glans penis and especially the bulbus
breeds. The normal consistency is similar to that of
 glandis occurs during copulation and results in the tying
rubber (firm and elastic). Palpation of the normal testes
together (copulatory lock) of the dog and the bitch.
does not cause pain. If one testis is found by palpation to
The erection of the penis is primarily a vascular
be abnormal in size and consistency, the spermatic cord
process. During sexual excitement the blood flow to
should be palpated to determine whether there is a
the penis is increased while at the same time the
efferent vessels are partly compressed. Aided by
the relaxation of the retractor penis muscle and the
14.2.4 Epididymis
drawing back of the prepuce, the penis is exposed and
The epididymis of the dog is firmly attached along the
extended and inserted into the vagina. Thereafter
dorsolateral surface of the testis and can be palpated
to assess its consistency, size, and temperature, and
to determine whether it is painful. Absence of the
is similar to that of hard rubber (slightly firmer than
the testis). The tail of the epididymis lies on the caudal
pole of the testis in the male dog and is relatively large
in comparison with that of other species.
In the male cat the epididymis is on the craniolateral
 aspect of the testis and the tail is dorsal. Palpation of the
 normal epididymis does not cause pain.
14.2.5 Prepuce
Fig. 14.2 The distal portion of the penis (glans penis) of the dog
The prepuce of the dog forms a complete sheath around
consists of an elongated cranial part (pars longa) and a round basal
the cranial end of the penis. In the cat the prepuce has
part (bulbus glandis). During erection both parts increase greatly in size.
119
Chapter 14:
MALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
Fig. 14.3 The cone-shaped penis of the male cat (left) has keratinized papillae. which disappear after castration (right)
pressure on the superficial veins, muscle contractions,
and pressure of the penis against the ischiatic arch
 res ult in further erection of the bul bus glandis penis.
The penis of the cat is ventral to the scrotum and is
directed posteriorly (Figs 14.1 and 14.4). The groove
8
on the ventral side of the os penis is more shallow than
in the dog. The glans penis is not divided and is
conical. On the cranial two-thirds of the penis there
are 100-200 keratinized spines (papillae), 0.75-1 mm
1
long and directed toward the base of the penis. They
   aa d i   a
10
have an important role in inducing the preovulatory
LH peak during mating.12
12 Castration causes them to
regress in S-6 weeks.
For examination the penis should be exposed as far as
possible, for which purpose the male dog should be
Fig. 14.4 Diagram of the urogenital system of the male cat. 1 testis.
lying on its back or on its side. The pelvis is tilted
d g suaaa s  siia jo l  siida jo peay 
 e   s a   g 
6 bulbourethral glands. 7 bladder. 8 ureter. 9 urethra. 10 penis.
 prepuce is retracted caudally. This exposes the penis
for examination with regard to shape and size. The
addition, the cat has two bulbourethral glands (Fig.
mucosa is inspected for trauma. In certain anatomical
14.4), located dorsolateral to the urethra proximal to the
abnormalities the penis is difficult or impossible to
base of the penis.
expose, as._ when t
there  is  a   persisting   penile
 In the dog the prostate is examined by rectal palpation
(§ 11.2.5 and § 12.2.2). The hand not being used for
in order to detect possible deformities.
palpation applies pressure to the ventral side of the
abdomen just before the entrance to the pelvic canal.
14.2.7 Accessory sex glands
This aids palpation of the prostate in larger breeds. The
size, surface, and consistency of both lobes are examined.
The prostate is the most important accessory sex gland in
Note should also be taken of any signs of pain caused by
the dog. The dog does have ampullae of the vas deferens 
 palpation of the prostate. The size varies according to the
but they are small and not all authors consider them to
 size of the dog. The surface of both lobes is quite smooth
be accessory sex glands. The canine prostate lies on the
and the consistency is similar to that of soft rubber.
cranial part of the pubic symphysis, about 1-2 cm caudal
 Palpation of the normal prostate does not cause pain.
to the neck of the bladder and surrounding the cranial
Examination of the prostate and bulbourethral glands is
part of the urethra. In older dogs the prostate sags
not performed routinely in the cat because rectal
cranioventrally out of the pelvic canal. It is divided into
 palpation is less well tolerated than in the dog. It can be
right and left lobes. In the cat the prostate does not cover
performed when indicated in exceptional cases, but
the ventral side of the urethra, as it does in the dog. In
 sedation is usually required.
120
Further examination
14.3 Collection of semen
14.4 Further examination
Semen can be collected by three methods.
14.4.1 Semen examination
 1  Manual ejaculation. The prepuce can be encircled
A logical sequel to the history and physical examination
by the hand and the penis lightly massaged. As soon
is laboratory examination of the collected semen.
as the penis begins to become erect the prepuce is
Piaq aq ueo suad aui reui os Allepneo pausnd
Macroscopic examination includes evaluation of the
volume, color, odor, viscosity, and any abnormal
between the thumb and forefinger just behind the
 additions, and is followed by microscopic examination in
bulbus glandis. The dog will quickly begin making
which the motility, concentration, and percentage of
copulating movements and develop a full erection.
abnormally formed spermatozoa are determined. The
Ejaculation then occurs. The ejaculate consists of
three fractions.14 Fraction 1 is secreted by the
pH, (
 osmolarity, and the concentration of alkaline
prostate, contains few cells, and has a small volume
 examination is also especially useful.18
(0.5-5.0 ml). Fraction 2 is the sperm-rich fraction
released from the tail of the epididymis and is also
small in volume (0.54.0 ml). The third fraction is
14.4.2 Ultrasonography
secreted by the prostate and contains few cells, but
 Ultrasonography of the testes, epididymides, and prostate
has a large volume {up to 80 ml). Each of the three
fractions is collected in a separate glass container,
may reveal nonpalpable neoplasms, abscesses, or cystic
changes.
14 Under guidance by ultrasonography, fine-
warmed to body temperature. Especially when the
male has little libido, it will be necessary to have a
needle aspiration biopsy can be performed.
bitch in estrus present. This method requires no
14.4.3 Testicular biopsy
 special equipment and is not difficult to perform,
and the semen does not come into contact with
In cases of oligospermia or azoospermia, biopsy of the
noxious substances.
testicle can be considered. In view of the invasive
2Ejaculation using an artificial vagina. After an
character of the procedure and the limited diagnostic
erection has begun to be aroused, as just described,
value of the findings, it is only performed in exceptional
an artificial vagina is placed over the penis. Then
cases. However, when a testicular neoplasm is suspected,
the penis does not have to be held with the hand.
fine-needle aspiration biopsy is the first step in
The artificial vagina is about 20 cm long and has a
diagnosis (see above).
diameter of about 6 cm. The temperature should
be about 40°C. Also with this method the presence
14.4.4 Hormone measurements
of a bitch in estrus can be helpful.
3 Electroejaculation. With the dog under anesthesia,
It is possible to measure FSH, LH, and testosterone.
rhythmic electrical stimuli can be applied per
rectum at the level of the prostate. This method is
less often successful and there is a great chance
in companion animals this has not yet been adequately
that urine will be added to the ejaculate. This
defined. If hormone measurements are to be performed,
 method is obviously not suitable for use in private
it is important to collect several samples, preferably
practice. In some European countries electro-
before and after stimulation (e.g., with GnRH). Plasma
ejaculation is prohibited by law.
hormone concentrations may fluctuate with time.19
References
 1 Antonov VV. Khananashvi MM. Significance of early individual
6 Hewitt D. Physiology and endocrinology of the male. In: Simpson G.
experience in the establishment of sexual behavior in male dogs. Zh
ed. Manual of small animal reproduction and neonatology.
Vyssh Nerv Deyat Pavlova 1973: 23:68.
Shurdington: British Small Animal Veterinary Association: 1998
2 Christiansen. IbJ. Reproduction in the dog and cat. London: Bailliere
7 Allen WE. Renton JP. Infertility in the dog and bitch. Br Vet J 1982:
Tindall: 1984
138:185.
3 Jones DE. Joshua JO. Reproductive clinical problems in the dog.
 8 Baumans V Dijkstra G. Wensing CJG. Testicular descent in the dog.
Bristol: Wright. PSG: 1982
Zbl Vet Med C 1981: 10:97.
4 Michael RP. Observations upon the sexual behavior of the domestic
9 Rhoades JD. Foley ChW. Cryptorchidism and intersexuality. Vet Clin
cat (Felix catus L.) under laboratory conditions. Behavior 1961: 18:1.
North Am 1977: 7:789.
5 Stein BS. The genital system. In: Catcott EJ. ed. Feline medicine and 
10 Pearson H. Kelly DF. Testicular torsion in the dog: a review of 13
 surgery. Santa Barbara: American Veterinary Publications Inc: 1973.
cases. Vet Rec 1975: 97:200.
121
Chapter 14:
MALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
 11 Copland MD. Maclachlan NJ. Aplasia of the epididymis and vas 
wy yo u ia was jeua aun jo uouex s uosuuor 9l
deferens in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 1976: 17: 443.
1981: 11:543.
12 Klug E. Die Fortpflanzung der Hauskatze (Felix domestica) unter
17 Stornelli A. Arauz M. Baschard H. De La Sota RL. Unilateral and 
 besonderer Berucksichtigung der instrumentellen 
bilateral vasectomy in the dog: alkaline phosphatase as an indicator
Samenubertragung. Thesis. Hannover: 1969.
of tubular patency. Reprod Domest Anim 2003: 38:1-4.
 13 Johnston SD. Root Kustritz MV. Olson PNS. Canine and feline
18 Schomer G. Zuchttauglichkeits-untersuchung beim Ruden. Kleintier 
 theriogenology. Philadelphia: Saunders: 2001.
Praxis 1978: 23:329.
 14 Keenan LRJ. The infertile male. In: Simpson G. ed. Manual of small
19 Shille VM. Olson PN. Dynamic testing in reproductive endocrinology.
In: Kirk RW. ed. Current veterinary therapy X. Philadelphia:
Animal Veterinary Association: 1998.
Saunders: 1989.
 15 Balke J. Persistent penile frenulum in a cocker spaniel. Vet Med
Small Anim Clin 1981: 76:988.
122
15
Skin, hair, and nails
M.A. Wisselink, J. Declercq, and T. Willemse
perceive temperature differences, pain, and touch. The
Chapter contents
skin is composed of two layers, the outer layer or
epidermis and the inner layer or dermis (Fig. 15.1).
15.1 Structure and function of the skin and
adnexa 123
15.1.1 Epidermis
15.11  Epidermis 123
15.1.2 Epidermal adnexa 124
The epidermis has five components, differing in thickness.
15.1.3 Dermis 125
The keratin layer or stratum corneum consists of flattened
15.1.4 Subcutis 125
cells without nuclei and is only a few cells thick. This layer,
consisting of keratin, is continuously replaced and thereby
15.2 History 125
removes noxious materials. At the same time it prevents
15.21 Symptoms 125
unnecessary loss of body fluid. The stratum lucidum
15.2.2 Living conditions 125
consists of a thin, compact layer of dead cells without
15.2.3 Past history 126
nuclei and is completely keratinized. In the dog and the
15.3 Physical examination 126
sped iooy aui jo us aun ui suasaud kiuo si ael sun ieo
15.3.1 Skin odor 126
and sometimes also the nasal plane. The stratum
15.3.2 Haircoat 126
 granulosum is mainly present in hairless areas of the skin
and is a few cells thick. The cells are flat, retain their
15.3.3 Skin 126
nuclei, and contain keratohyalin granules.
Primary lesions 127
The next layer is the stratum spinosum, formed by
Secondory lesions 128
the cells of the stratum basale. This layer consists of
Configuration of lesions 130
slightly rounded, more or less cuboidal, nucleated cells
Distribution of lesions 130
and is one to three cells thick. In the skin of the foot
15.3.4 Nails. foot pads. and nasal plane 130
pads and the nasal plane the intercellular connections,
the tonofibrils arising from the desmosomes in the cell
15.4 Notation 130
wall, are clearly visible. The cells in the stratum
15.5 Further examination 130
 spinosum produce keratin.
15.5.1  Skin scraping 130
The basal layer or stratum basale consists of a simple
15.5.2 Additional examinations 130
row of columnar or cuboidal cells on a basement
membrane and separates the epidermis from the
underlying dermis. The basal layer consists chiefly of
keratinocytes which continually divide and maintain the
15.1 Structure and function of the skin
keratinizing process of the skin, which progresses upward
until the keratinocytes are shed as dead keratinized cells.
exaupe pue
 In healthy dogs this process takes about 22 days.
The skin functions as an anatomic and physiologic barrier
Keratinocytes produce two kinds of keratin: soft
between the body and its surroundings. The skin offers
keratin which forms the keratin layer of the epidermis,
protection against physical, chemical, and microbiologic
and hard keratin which forms the nails and the outer
influences and also makes it possible for the animal to
layer of the hair. In the process of keratinization the
123
Chapter 15:
 SKIN, HAIR, AND NAILS
The synthesis of sebum is also under the influence of
hormones: androgens in low doses increase the
production and estrogens in high doses decrease it.
This fatty secretion contains chiefly cholesterol and
cholesterol esters, produced from waxes and residuals 
of fatty acids. The emulsion formed on the surface of
the skin keeps the skin supple, maintains optimal
hydration, gives gloss to the coat, and forms a
 chemical barrier against potential pathogens.
Apocrine sweat glands lie deep in the dermis and are
 part of the hair follicle complex. They are present in the
dermis on all parts of the body except the nasal plane.
Apocrine sweat is a protein-like material that is formed
continuously. It is released by myoepithelial contraction,
a process under the influence of the sympathetic
adrenergic system. On the surface of the skin it is mixed
with sebum and thereby contributes to the chemical and
physical barrier.
 Eccrine sweat glands occur only on the foot pads in
dogs and cats. They lie deep in the dermis at the
Fig. 15.1 The skin: A epidermis. B dermis. C subcutis. D primary hair.
junction with the subcutis but their excretory ducts
E secondary hair. F hair root. G sebaceous gland. H apocrine sweat
traverse the dermis to the surface of the foot pads. In
gland. I arrector pili muscle.
the dog and cat they have no thermoregulatory function.
The nails or claws are special structures which are
direct extensions of the epidermis and dermis. They
keratohyalin granules form an intercellular adhesive rich
originate from histologically typical epidermis at the
in lipoproteins but poor in sulfhydryl groups. This
side of the foot pad but consist entirely of a thick layer
intercellular substance, called glycocalix, provides the
of hard keratin (Fig. 15.2).
connection
between  the  keratinocytes 
via
the
tonofibrils and is the primary component of soft keratin.
The skin of dogs and cats is covered with hair except on the
Melanocytes are the second type of cells in the basal
nose, the foot pads, and the mucocutaneous junctions. A
layer. They occur in very small numbers in the normal
hair is composed of the shaft and the root. The hair shaft,
 jo us au u o o ka i a u ue sop
which reaches above the skin surface, consists of dead
material and can be divided into the cuticle, the cortex,
scrotum, the nipples, the prepuce, the circumanal
region, and the pinna. The melanocytes are stimulated
and the medulla. The cortex consists of keratin.
The development of the hair and the types of coats in
 to produce melanin-containing granules under influence
dogs are described in § 8.3.4. The coat of the cat can be
of sunlight, irritation, or inflammation.
the long-haired Persian type or the short-haired type.
The hairs of both dogs and cats exit in bundles
15.1.2 Epidermal adnexa
through the surface of the skin but the distance
The adnexa arise from the epidermis during embryonal
development and proliferate into the dermis. They
include the sebaceous glands, the apocrine and eccrine
sweat glands, the nails, and the hair follicles.
3
Sebaceous glands are simple alveolar holocrine glands 
usually associated with the hair follicles. In the cat they
se Aiaa aie inq uys pauu aui ui uasad kuo ane
on the dorsal aspect of the base of the tail (the
1
supracaudal organ or tail gland), on the lips, and in the
②
submental organ under the chin. In the dog they are
more numerous and larger in the area of the tail gland.
The secretion of the sebaceous glands (sebum) is
released by the complete disruption of the sebaceous
Testosterone causes hypertrophy of the glands and
Fig. 15.2 Sagittal section of the toe of the dog: 1 horny layer of the nail.
cortisol and estrogen can cause their involution.
 2 dermis. 3 skin. 4 epidermis of the foot pad. 5 joint cartilage.
124
History
inq saiads yioq ui ieo aut ui iaieaa si saipunq uaamia
since they may differ considerably from the original
especially in the dog, the coat is more thick and dense on
manifestations. In atopic {allergic) dermatitis the pruritus
the dorsal surface of the body than on the ventral
 may be confined to the head and legs initially, but often
surface. In the cat there are many more secondary than
 has become generalized by the time of examination.
primary hairs and they are thinner and have a thinner
Questions are then asked about the course of the skin
medullary space than do those in the dog.
problem, whether it has remained unchanged, or become
worse, or whether it is seasonal, as can be expected in
15.1.3 Dermis
atopic patients.
The dermis is of mesodermal origin and its primary
15.2.1 Symptoms
function is the support and nutrition of the epidermis.
The dermis consists of fibers, ground substance, and cells
If there is pruritus, its severity and distribution are
but it also contains the epidermal adnexa, the arrector
pili muscles, blood and lymph vessels, and nerve fibers.
with visible skin lesions. Pruritus is an irritating,
The fibers are collagenous, reticular, and elastic;
  si a un s in s n
about 90% are collagenous. The ground substance is
upper layer of the dermis and gives rise to scratching,
the major component of the dermis. It consists of a
rubbing, and licking. The mediators that induce pruritus
soluble mucous gel produced by fibroblasts and formed
 affect the finely branched network of nerve endings, the
from protoglycans, the most important components of
pruritus receptors, located at the transition from dermis
which are hyaluronic acid and chondroitin sulfates.
to epidermis.
The ground  substance  functions as an adhesive
Stimuli from the pruritus receptors are transmitted
between the cells and other structures in the dermis.
to the dorsal root of the spinal cord via nonmyelinated
Fibroblasts, mast cells, and histiocytes predominate
C-fibers, which have a diameter of 0.5 micron. The
in the dermis of the healthy animal. Fibroblasts are
signals cross via the ventrolateral spinothalamic tract
responsible for the production of tropocollagen fibrils
and the ventral posterior nucleus in the thalamus to
which are the precursors of the dermal collagen fibers.
terminate in the central posterior cortical gyrus.
The production of collagen and ground substance is
 Severe pruritus can be expected in scabies or allergic
mainly
y under endocrine regulation.
Cortisol
land
dermatitis. Pruritus does not usually
accompany
estrogens decrease the production (contributing to skin
endocrine skin changes, although it may develop later as
atrophy) and androgens increase it.
a result of secondary microbial infection. It is also
worth remembering that although pruritus is usually a
manifestation of a dermatologic problem, it can also be
15.1.4 Subcutis
the consequence of a neurological or behavioral problem.
The subcutis or hypodermis consists primarily of
Pruritus is an important iatrotropic problem. Other
lipocytes but also contains blood vessels, nerve fibers,
skin problems that may lead to veterinary consultation
include thinning of the hair coat, alopecia, a change in
and connective tissue.
In dogs and cats the fat deposits in the foot pads have
the color of the skin, and a disagreea ble skin odor.
a shock-breaking function. The subcutis provides for the
storage of fat and for heat insulation. Together with the
15.2.2 Living conditions
epidermis and the dermis, the subcutis also determines
the body contours.
The causes of several dermatologic problems can be found
in the milieu in which the animal lives and hence it is
15.2 History
conditions, including factors both inside and outside the
When there are indications of a skin problem, it is given
house. We must ask where the dog sleeps, what kinds of
specific attention in the history. The general history
materials are in its environment {the dog's bed and
(Chapter 6) is followed by detailed questions about the
blanket, furniture, the floor covering, food bowl), and
skin, coat, and nails.
what kind of cleaning agents and other household
The dermatological history begins with identifying the
materials are used. It is equally important to ask about
primary problerm, its initial location, and the age at
the outdoor area used by the animal and the associated
which it began. For example, scabies is associated with
vegetation. Because of the possibility of food allergy, the
intense pruritus, mainly on the head and the auricles of
'ue aul ot uaais snispooy le is ot paxse s laumo
young animals. In contrast, problems caused by fleas
taking into account that allergy may also develop for
occur mainly on the caudal part of the body. If the skin
food that the animal has received for a long time.
problems have been present for a long time, questions
With regard to the possibility of infectious etiology,
are asked about the current problems and their location,
 questions are asked about other animals in the house and
125
Chapter 15:
SKIN, HAIR, AND NAILS
possible contacts with either animals or persons having
15.3.2 Haircoat
pruritus or other skin problems. If the animal has been in
In the inspection of the coat attention is given to its
southern Europe, leishmaniasis should be considered.
thickness, stiffness, gloss, odor, composition (guard hairs
and undercoat), whether it appears dry or oily, and the
15.2.3 Past history
ease with which hairs can be plucked out. Occasionally
there are hairs with a sebum cuff around the shaft
Information about past disorders can be important in
("follicular casts'). This may indicate a keratinization
interpretation of the findings. This information should
include all diseases which the dog has had, including
defect. Also note whether there are broken hairs
(trichorrhexis), loose hairs, or hairless areas (alopecia),
those other than skin problems that do not at first
seem to be important. Some examples are lesions in the
or a change in the color of the coat.
Alopecia is the absence of hair in areas where it is
oral mucosa, which can occur in autoimmune diseases,
and such problems as conjunctivitis, rhinitis, and
normally present. Alopecia can be partial or complete,
diffuse or localized. A generalized partial alopecia is
*reverse sneezing' ($ 9.1.1), which can occur in atopy. It 
is also important to ask about disorders in the relatives
called hypotrichosis. An excess of hair (usually local) is
of the patient and to be aware of the skin disorders 
called hypertrichosis.
It is important to examine the hairs that are still
known to be associated with this breed.
 present. Broken hairs are usually the result of scratching
Finally,
questionsare
asked
about
previous
medications
and their effects.
Corticosteroids
may
and rubbing. In some endocrine disorders (see Chapter
completely mask the original manifestations and so if
  m aroe us p e si a i
apparent to the owner because of the gradual thinning
they are known to have been used it may be necessary
of the coat. Sometimes the first change noticed is that
to ask the client to return when their effects can be
shedding of hair has stopped. Gradually the coat
expected to have disappeared.
becomes thinner, until there are bald areas.
15.3 Physical examination
15.3.3 Skin
A general examination (Chapter 8) is performed prior to
Inspection of the skin is made much easier by using a
the dermatologic examination. For the examination of
forceps to lay the hairs to one side so that the
the dermatologic patient a room with sufficient light is
quite important. Although daylight is best, artificial
underlying skin can be seen more easily (§ 8.3.4, Fig. 8.8).
During the inspection take note of the color of
light can be used if it is clear and uniform. Before
beginning a detailed inspection of the abnormalities,
the skin and the presence of any lesions. Melanin is a
one should look at the patient from a distance, noting
dark pigment that is responsible for the naturally
occurring generalized or localized pigmentation of the
any abnormal odor or other abnormalities
which
skin and, with pheomelanin (pheo = brownish), it
immediately catch one's attention, and also noting the
determines the color of the hair. It is formed by
 general appearance of the coat.
melanocytes. In the melanosomes, the small pigment-
forming organelles in the melanocytes, tyrosine is
15.3.1 Skin odor
converted to dihydrophenylalanine by the enzyme
tyrosinase. Subsequent oxidative steps result in the
The skin of the normal dog or cat usua lly gives off an odor
formation of melanin.
that it is not unpleasant. The odor is determined by a
The pigmentation of the skin is determined by the
mixture of sebum, apocrine sweat, and products of
number, size, and 
ddistribution of melanosomes.
bacteria. On the healthy skin of the dog there are mainly
Collections of melanosomes form the melanin granules,
coagulase-negative staphylococci, aerobic micrococci,
which can also be transmitted to the keratinocytes via
alpha-hemolytic streptococci, and Acinetobacter sp. The
last three groups also occur on the skin of the cat. Under
an as yet unknown mechanism.
 Either hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation can
the influence of a great variety of factors, including
Occur As in other animals, melanocyte-stimulating
metabolic factors, allergens, ectoparasites, and altered
hormone (α-MSH), formed in the intermediate lobe of
living conditions, this bacterial fora can be partly
the pituitary, probably plays a role in regulation of the
replaced  by  coagulase-positive staphylococci.
The
function of the melanocytes. Local hyperpigmentation
production of sebum and its composition can change
can occur under the influence of ultraviolet light,
and there can be an increased epidermal turnover
chronic irritation, and inflammation.
(seborrhea). In patients with seborrhea the sebum
contains less esterified wax but greatly increased
The description of the lesion includes not only its
amounts of free fatty acids, which probably contribute
morphology but also its configuration and distribution,
most to the abnormal odor.
as well as whether it is primary or secondary. Primary
126
Physical examination
lesions develop spontaneously and directly reflect the
Plaques. An extensive, relatively flat elevation is
underlying disorder. Secondary lesions develop from
called a plaque.  It can be caused by confluence of
the primary lesions, but can also develop as artifacts
papules or it can be neoplastic.
induced by trauma or medications.
Nodules/nodes. A solid mass with a diameter of less
In chronic conditions the primary lesions may be
than 1 cm is called a nodule and one of larger size is
called a node.
They result from inflammation,
scratching. In addition, papules can change into
hyperplasia,
neoplasia，(
or
deposits of fibrin or
vesicles or pustules, either of which, because of their
Crystalline material.
fragility, may be short lived. Hence, they may be
Wheals (urticarial lesion). A wheal is a circumscribed
       n  
elevation with a flat surface, caused by edema in the
small numbers.
dermis due to an allergic reaction. Diffuse or peripheral
hyperemia may also be present.
Primory fesions
Vesicles. A vesicle is a circumscribed elevation filled
The following primary lesions are distinguished on the
with fluid. Vesicles can be intraepidermal as a result of
basis of their morphology (Figs 15.3 and 15.4):
hydropic degeneration, spongiosis, and acantholysis, or
they can be subepidermal as a result of edema and
Macules. A macule is a circumscribed area that is
degenerative changes in the stratum basale. Vesicles
not elevated but differs in color from the surrounding
 greater than 5 mm in diameter are called bullae.
skin. Macules result from accumulation of melanin,
Pustules. A pustule is a small, circumscribed elevation
depigmentation, hyperemia (erythema), or hemorrhage
filled with pus from infectious or sterile inflammation. An
(purpura ).
example of pustules due to sterile inflammation are those
Papules. A papule is a small, solid elevation with a
which occur in the autoimmune disease pemphigus
maximum diameter of 2.5 mm. It results from changes
foliaceus. Pustules can occur in both the epidermis and
the
epidermis
(hyperplasia,
edema)and/or
the dermis. They can develop from vesicles and their color
subepidermal reactions (infiltration with inflammatory
and association  with hairf
follicles depend on the
cells from an infectious or sterile process, tumor cells,
 pathogenesis. For example, in furunculosis there are often
metabolic deposits, or edema).
hemorrhagic pustules.
5
C
E
F
Fig. 15.3 A-F Morphology of skin lesions. A: papules caused by 1) dermal metabolic deposits. 2) dermal inflammatory infiltrates. 3) local epidermal
and/or dermal hyperplasia. B: plaque. C: urticarial wheal D: nodule of 4) dermal and/or subcutaneous origin. and 5) epidermal origin. E: pustule in
a follicular or 6) an epidermal location. F: vesicle in an intraepidermal location or 7) at the transition between dermis and epidermis.
127
Chapter 15:
SKIN, HAIR, AND NAILS
Fig. 15.4 Examples of primmary skin lesions. 1 Macules as manifestation of hypersensitivity to a drug. 2 Papules due to inflammation (coat has been
 partly clipped). 3 Plaque due to inflammatory infitrate with many eosinophils. as can occur in cats with allergic dermatitis (food allergy. atopy).
4 Nodules due to multiple tumors. 5 Widely-distributed wheals (urticarial lesions) due to an allergic reaction. 6 Vesicles on the tongue associated with
 an autoimmune dermatosis (pemphigus vulgaris). 7 Pustules occurring with a bacterial dermatitis.
Secondory lesions
Collarettes.A collarette is a circular collar of loosely
Secondary lesions (Fig. 15.5) include:
attached epidermal tissue around a skin defect. This
Scales (squamae). Scales are loose flakes of keratin on
collar is the remainder of the covering of a ruptured
the surface of the skin between the hairs.
vesicle or pustule, but is also seen in epidermal necrosis.
128
Physical examination
Fig. 15.5 Examples of secondary skin lesions. 1 Scales (squamae) from a parasitic infestation (cheyletiellosis). 2 Collarette the remnant of a ruptured
pustule. with inflammatory erythema in the center. 3 Crusts. On the right there is dried exudate. On the left and in the center there are skin defects
and hemopurulent exudate. 4 Comedones on the dorsum of the base of the tail. The dilated hair follicles are filled with sebum and keratin. 5 Ulcer
due to infammation of subcutaneous fat (panniculis). 6 Lichenification in the axilla. The thickening and folding of the skin are the result of chronic
129
Chapter 15:
 SKIN, HAIR, AND NAILS
Crusts. A crust consists of keratin mixed with dried
15.4 Notation
exudate. Hemorrhagic crusts, brown or dark red, are
 The distribution of alopecia and lesions can be sketched
seen in deep skin inflammation.
Comedones. A comedone is a plug of keratin and
on the drawings provided on the record forms. An
example is shown on the DVD.
sebum within the dilated orifice of a hair follicle.
Ulcer. An ulcer is a deep defect with loss of the
epidermis and involvement of the dermis. [
15.5 Further examination
More
superficial defects without disruption of the epidermis
15.5.1 Skin scraping
are called erosions or excoriations.
Lichenification. This is an extensive thickening of the
The collection of skin material for microscopic
skin in which the normal relief or surface profile
examination for the presence of parasites or fungi is
becomes much more visible. It is the result of chronic
performed with a curette (Fig. 4.7). Scraping with the
trauma or inflammation.
sharp edge of a curette several times over the surface of
Hyperpigmentation. Hyperpigmentation is a brown,
the skin obtains sufficient material. If a deep scraping
gray, or black coloring of the skin, often visible on
is necessary, curetting is continued until there is
areas where alopecia has developed. It can result from
capillary bleeding. The material obtained by scraping is
increased activity of the melanocytes in the epidermis
cleared in 10% KOH solution and then a smear is
or melanocytes and melanophages in the dermis.
made on a glass slide for microscopic examination.
If the skin is dry, it is helpful to clip hair at the site of
the scraping. A little oil on the curette will help to
Configurotion of lesions
adhere the sample.
Lesions can occur in a solitary, grouped, annular (ring-
shaped), linear, arciform (arch-shaped), or polycyclic
15.5.2 Additional examinations
(confluence  of  round   lesions)   configuration.
The
configuration can be characteristic of the disease: a
Depending on the problem, the examination can be
linear configuration is consistent with a scratching
extended to include:
lesion (excoriation) and a polycyclic configuration is
 mycological and bacteriological examination
often the result of confluence of several pustules.
microscopic examination of dust from the coat
and/or the animal's bed
Distribution of lesions
trichography: microscopic examination of
 In addition to gi ving the exact location of the abnormality,
depilated hairs
we can describe its distribution as being localized,
laboratory examination of blood and urine
cytological examination
asymmetrical.
 histological examination of biopsies of skin and
During palpation of the affected and unaffected
mucous mem brane
 allergy examination
turgor should be determined in an area of unaffected
 immunologic examination
skin.
There are two special methods of examining the skin
 1 Diascopy. Using a transparent flat object such
15.3.4 Nails, foot pads, and nasal plane
as a plastic spatula, slight pressure is applied to
erythematous skin. If the color changes to white,
The nasal plane and the foot pads are examined in the
the erythema is caused by vasodilatation. If the red
 same way as the skin; this examination includes the
color remains, it is due to cutaneous bleeding.
nails and the bordering cuticle. During inspection of
 2 Nikolsky's sign. A blunt instrument such as a
the nasal plane attention is given to the reticular
spatula or the upper part of a thumb forceps is used
pattern. It can disappear as a consequence of lupus
erythematosus or neoplastic epidermal infiltration.
bordering a vesicle or ulcer. If the most superficial
Two terms are used to describe specific abnormalities
layer of the skin is easily traumatized or can be
of the nails or claws: {1) onychomadesis, the complete
 pushed on edge, there is poor cellular cohesion,
loss of the horny structure of the nail, and (2)
which is an indication of an autoimmune disease,
onychorrhesis, the breaking down (crumbling) of the nail.
for example toxic epidermal necrolysis, or burns.
130
Further examination
References
 1 Scott DW. Miller WH. Griffin CE. Small animal dermatology. 6th edn.
in general medicine. 5th edn. New York: McGraw-Hill: 1999:
 Philadelphia: Saunders: 2001.
cha pter 42.
2 Fitzpatrick TB. Bernhard JD. Cropley TG. The structure of skin
4 Reedy LM. Miller WH. Willemse T. Allergic skin diseases of dogs
lesions and fundamentals of diagnosis. In: Freedberg IM. Eisen AZ.
and cats. 2nd edn. Philadelphia: Saunders: 1997.
Wolff K. et al. eds. Dermatology in general medicine. 5th edn. New 
5 Willemse T. Clinical dermatology of dogs and cats. 2nd edn.
York: McGraw-Hill: 1999:chapter 4.
Maarssen: Elsevier/Bunge: 1998.
 3 Greaves MW. Wall PD. Pathophysiology and clinical aspects of
 pruritus. In: Freedberg IM. Eisen AZ. Wolff K. et al. eds. Dermatology
131
16
Mammary glands
G.R. Rutteman and E. Teske
and has the owner observed a connection with the
 Chapter contents
estrous cycle, with administration of drugs to
prevent estrus, or with recent parturition and
16.1 History 132
lactation?
16.11  Symptoms 132
Is there secretion from the gland? If so, for how
16.1.2 Living conditions 132
long and is it related to reproduction? Is the
16.1.3 Past history 132
secretion from only one nipple or from more than
one? What is the nature of the secretion: clear
16.2 Physical examination 133
fluid, milky, hemorrhagic, purulent, or otherwise?
16.2.1 Introduction 133
Are there skin defects {ulcers)?
16.2.2 Technique 133
 Does the animal show signs of pain (licking/biting
16.3 Notation 134
at the mammary glands, pain during palpation, or
16.4 Further examination 134
when standing up or walking)?
When the history reveals an irregularity in the estrous
cycle, the nature of this should be determined {see
Chapter 13). When did the last estrus occur or, if estrus
For examination of the mammary glands the history
has been prevented, what drug was used and when was
with
it last administered? If the animal has been pregnant,
and  physical examination must be concerned
more than these glands alone. Both the form and the
the
number
of pregnancies and lactations should be
function of the mammary glands are very dependent on
moted, as well as when the last pregnancy occurred and
the stage of the estrous cycle and so this must also be
how it progressed.
taken into consideration. In addition, abnormalities of
Depending on answers to questions in the general
the mammary glands include neoplastic growth which
history, further questions are asked about the animal's
can spread and have far-reaching consequences.
endurance and the occurrence of coughing or of fever.
Also, in connection with systemic consequences
of
16.1 History
disorders of the mammary glands, questions must be
asked about the appetite, weight loss, change in size of
16.1.1 Symptoms
the abdomen, and problems in walking.
 o    a    
mammary glands is reported by the owner, we must
16.1.2 Living conditions
ask about the nature of the change:
 Does it concern one or more swellings in the
These questions are mainly concerned with whether the
glands? If so, how long ago was this first noticed
 animal is used for breeding.
by the owner?
Does it concern one or more than one gland/
16.1.3 Past history
 nipple, and are there signs that it is increasing (in
number/size) and changing (in form and
Especially if you are not very familiar with this patient,
consistency)? If so, how quickly has this occurred
questions must be asked to discover whether there have
132
Physical examination
been any previous problems with the mammary glands
node). There can at the same time be a connection with
and how these have been treated. If the animal has
the lymph node on the opposite (heterolateral) side.
been ovariohysterectomized, it is important to know
 From the superficial inguinal node(s) there is drainage to
nodes lying just cranial to the pelvic canal (deep inguinal 
the ovariohysterectomy.
node, sacral nodes, hypogastric nodes) and from there to
lymph nodes in the abdomen.
16.2 Physical examination
The two cranial glands (when there are four in total)
16.2.1 Introduction
or the three cranial glands (when there are five in total)
drain to the main axillary lymph node and to the
The mammary glands are arranged in two rows and are
accessory axillary node. In some dogs the cranial
identified by their nipples (Fig. 16.1). In the dog there
inguinal (fourth') gland drains to the axillary lymph
are usually five on each side: two thoracic, one
node(s). From these lymph nodes and in some dogs
abdominal, and two inguinal. Sometimes there are four
probably also directly from the three cranial glands
glands and then usually the abdominal gland is missing.
there is drainage to the sternal lymph node and
Occasionally there are more than five glands on each
side. The mammary tissue in the adult dog is unevenly
With regard to the blood supply, there can be venous
divided. The caudal glands are larger and the tissue of
      i so
the two most caudal glands is usually continuous.
the cranial and caudal epigastric veins.
In the cat there are four glands on each side, with
 In the course of the estrous cycle there are, especially in
the dog, clear influences on the development and activity
dog.1,2
of the mammary gland tissue. The long time that
Interpretation of abnormalities in the mammary
hormones (especially progesterone) can exert influence
glands requires familiarity with the lymphatic drainage
can result in a marked increase in volume, via which at
(Fig. 16.2). The three caudal glands, and in some
about eight to twelve weeks after the onset of estrus
dogs also the caudal thoracic ('second") gland, drain
there can also be secretion. This is a physiologic
to the superficial inguinal lymph node on the same
occurrence that sometimes causes a problem for the
(homolateral) side (sometimes called the supramammary
owner, particularly with the change in behavior which
 Occurs at the same time (pseudopregna ncy).
 In cats mammary gland development is also promoted
during the luteal phase but, in contrast to dogs, a corpus 
luteum develops only after mating, regardless of whether
the mating is fertile. Thus in cats enlargement of the
mammary glands occurs only after mating.
Drugs with progestin activity can promote the
development and activity of the mammary gland tissue
in both dogs and cats.
16.2.2 Technique
Depending on the shape and size of the animal and its
cooperation, the examination of the mammary glands 
Fig. 16.1 Ventral view of a bitch with five nipples on each side.
is carried out with the animal lying either on its side
(first completely examine one side, and then the other)
or on its back (Fig. 16.3). The mammary glands are
examined from cranial to caudal. Inspection and
palpation are used to determine the location (in which
gland) any abnormality is located. Then the position
within the gland located and described (see § 4.1.2).
The size of any lesion (nodule or cyst) is measured
in three dimensions with the help of calipers or a ruler.
The shape of the lesion is shown as well as possible in
a sketch. The consistency is described by use of an
Fig. 16.2 Superficial lymphatic drainage (). deep lymphatic drainage
ordinal scale, as explained in § 3.1.2. In addition to
Aossae e (→) uasaud sawawos aheuiep seydw pue (- -)
axillary lymph node. b axillary lymph node. c sternal lymph node.
information in the history about the painfulness of the
d superficial inguinal lymph node. e deep inguinal lymph node and
lesion(s), painfulness can be defined by inspection and
hypogastric lymph node.
palpation while observing the animal's reactions. The
133
Chapter 16:
MAMMARY GLANDS
Fig. 16.3 Ventral view of a bitch. showing the scar from removal of a
2
tumorous mammary gland and nipple on the right side and a tumor
2
with red discoloration of the skin on the left side.
3
2
4
moveability of the lesion in relation to the trunk is
5
evaluated, as well as whether the overlying skin is
6}
fixed or moveable. In defining the borders of the
lesion, it may be possible to determine the degree to
which an indistinct border is caused by secondary
changes
such
as
edema
and/or  inflammation.
 Inflammation may affect the color and temperature in
the area. If there are defects in the skin they are
described in terms of their type and extent. If
Fig. 16.4 Numbering of the mammary glands in the dog and the cat.
   a isl a  s
sometimes palpable as subcutaneous strings. Next, the
regional lymph nodes are examined. The lymph nodes
abnormalities that are found are sketched in the picture
in the pelvis and dorsal hypogastrium can be reached
on a form such as that on the DVD. Further description
by rectal palpation and palpation of the hypogastrium.
of the changes can be done by using the numbering
They are only palpable if they are markedly enlarged.
system. The use of the rows of boxes on the form has
 If fluid is being secreted from one or more nipples,
been described under Notation   for  the General
the color can be judged by milking a little of the fluid
Examination (§ 8.4).
By a systematic examination such as described in
§ 4.1.2, a picture of the abnormality is obtained
16.4 Further examination
without repeating the not completely harmless or
To be considered are:
 painless palpation procedure.
leukocyte count and differential
bacteriologic examination of secretion
16.3 Notation
 radiographic examination of the thorax
For a uniform notation the glands are numbered from
 ultra sonography of the abdomen
cranial to caudal (Fig. 16.4). If there are six glands
cytologic examination
 present, the most caudal gland is thus number 6. The
endocrinologic examination
References
1 Theilen GH. Madewell BR. Tumors of the mammary gland. In:
4 Weijer K. Hart AAM. Prognostic factors in feline mammary
Theilen GH. Madewell BR. eds. Veterinary cancer medicine. 2nd
carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983: 70:709.
edn. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger: 1987.
 5 Susaneck SJ. Alen TA. Hoopes J. et al. Inflammatory mammary
 2 Evans HE. Christensen GC. Miller's Anatomy of the dog. 2nd edn.
carcinoma in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1983: 19:971.
 Philadelphia: Saunders: 1979.
6 Johnston SD. Hayden DW. Non-neoplastic disorders of the
 3 Sautet JY. Ruberte J. Lopez C. et al. Lymphatic system of the
mammary glands. In: Kirk RW. ed. Current veterinary therapy VIll.
jo quawean leaibuns aup ot ypeoudde ue bop aut ui puejo Aiewweu
Philadelphia: Saunders: 1980:1224-1226.
malignant tumors. Canine Pract 1992: 17:30.
134
17
Locomotor system
H.A.W. Hazewinkel, B.P. Meij, L.F.H. Theyse, and B. van Rijssen
Chapter contents
Lower leg 146
Etbow joint 146
17.1 Introduction 136
Upper leg 146
17.2 History 136
Shouider joint 146
17.3 0bservation of stance and motion 136
Scopulo 148
17.3.1 Exammination at rest 137
Axilliory oreo 148
Technique 137
17.5.2 Rear limb 148
17.3.2 Examination during motion 137
Foot 148 
Technique 138
Tarsocrural joint 148 
Abnormalities in the goit 138
Lower leg 148
17.4 Examination of the standing animal 140
Stifle 148 
Inspection 140
Thigh 151
Potpotion 140
Hip joint 151
17.4.1  Front limb 140
Pelvis 152
Shoulder 140
17.6 Examination of the skull and the vertebral
Upper leg 141
column 152
Elbow 141
Obsenvation of stonce ond motion 152
Lower teg 141
Inspection 153
Carpus ond metacorpus 141
 Palpotion 154 
Toes 141
Percussion 154
17.4.2 Rear limb 141
Lumbosocrol pressure test 154
Pelvis 141
Possive movements 154
Upper leg 142
Rectot potpotion 156
Stifte joint 142
17.7 Further examination 156
Lower leg ond hock 143
17.8 Arthrocentesis 156
Torsocrurat joint 144
Introduction 156
Foot 144
Shoulder joint 157
 17.5 Examination of the recumbent animal 144
Eibow joint 157
Possive movements 144
Carpal joints 158
17.5.1 Front limb 145
Hip joint 158
Foot 145
Stifle joint 159
Corpus 145
Tarsocrural joint 159
135
 Chapter 17:
LOCOMOTOR SYSTeM
17.1 Introduction
examination of the spinal column includes inspection,
palpation, percussion, and passive movements that can
The locomotor system can be divided into an abaxial part
be performed while the animal is standing or lying
and an axial part. The abaxial part includes the
down. If necessary, rectal palpation can be performed
anatomical
structures of the extremities:
bones
and other examinations can be carried out. On the
(including diaphyses, epiphyses and apophyses, growth
basis of the results of all of these examinations, a plan
plates, metaphyses, sesamoid bones), joints (including
for further diagnostic studies can be made.
menisci), tendons, ligaments, and muscles. This part of
the locomotor system provides support and protection,
17.2 History
and offers the possibility of standing and moving
around. The axial part includes the vertebral bodies,
An effort is made to determine as accurately as possible
vertebral joints, intervertebral discs, ligaments, tendons,
when the problem started. The conditions at that time
and muscles. The vertebral column protects the spinal
(e.g., being struck by an automobile, playing, falling,
cord and forms a connection with the caudal extremities
etc.) must be dra wn out in the process of taking the history.
via the iliosacral joints.
It is often helpful to have the owner describe exactly
Examination of the locomotor system
the situations in which the locomotion problem is most
undertaken in the course of (1) a general physical
obvious (e.g., mainly after animal rises from its bed, or
examination, without locomotor abnormalities having
when it runs off, or while walking on a gravel path, or
been observed by the owner (e.g., certification of health
when jumping over a fence). This applies also to signs of
for sale or for breeding), (2) an abnormal locomotion,
pain: whether they occur during brushing the coat over
arising from an abnormality in the locomotor system,
the lumbar vertebrae, or while the animal is crawling
 
under a fence, just getting ready to jump, eating out of a
without lameness) that arises from an abnormality
 dish on the floor, stepping down from a sidewalk, or
outside the locomotor system (e.g., suspected endocrine
when it is raising its tail during defecation, etc.
disease or immune-mediated disease). Abnormalities of
An accurate description of the progression of the
the locomotor system can result in lameness and this
symptoms during the day (lame when getting up from
 can be the primary reason for the examination.1-8 The
bed,
better（
during walking, worse after excessive
vertebral column can be examined in connection with
exercise—versus an increase in severity of signs during
examination of the locomotor system or examination
a walk) can give an indication of the location and
of the nervous system. It should be obvious that
nature of the abnormality. This also applies to the
this examination, especially because of the direct
progression of the problem over a period of days or
involvement of the spinal cord in abnormalities of the
weeks. We can make the following distinctions:
vertebral column, requires extreme care.9
permanently present (always equally severe)
By means of the history and physical examination of
recurrently present (periods of recovery and then
the locomotor system, an attempt is made to obtain:
recurrence of problems)
 a functional diagnosis (mechanical limitation,
 intermittently present (alternating lameness and
 painful process)
normal locomotion)
 an anatomical diagnosis {location of the disease
progressive (worsening)
process)
migrating (changing from place to place or leg to leg)
 insight into the pathogenesis (congenital
abnormality, developmental disorder, trauma,
Questions are also asked about the living conditions
inflammation, abnormality of other organ systems,
(guide dog, guard dog, police dog, house pet), feeding
{an impression of the composition of food, including
neoplasia)
 supplements), therapeutic measures (general nursing or
The examination of the locomotor system described here
handling by the owner, training, medication by the
is directed above all at functional and anatomical
owner or another veterinarian, and results of these
diagnoses. When the general examination has led to
measures), similar problems in the parents, littermates,
formulation of a problem and a diagnostic plan that
or others of the same breed.
includes examination of part or all of the locomotor
 system, the history is explored further in this direction.
17.3 0bservation of stance and motion
The animal is observed moving in quiet surroundings
and then inspection, palpation, and manipulation are
Although in the General Impression (Chapter 7), the
performed  while the animal  is  standing
uo
the
animal was observed while standing and walking, this
examination table. Next follows inspection, palpation,
is repeated after taking the additional history but with
 passive movements, and specific manipulations while
another purpose and more specific observations. In
the animal is lying on its side or on its back. The
these observations the examiner tries to obtain an
136
Observation of stance and motion
impression of the degree and the nature of the locomotor
leash or leaning against the owner or the wall. The
disturbance and the limb(s) involved.
examiner observes the animal for a short time from all
sides, taking note of:
the stance of the limbs
17.3.1 Examination at rest
 the relative positions of the limbs, head, and
 In the examination at rest, attention is given to the stance
vertebral column
and the weight bearing of the extremities, and to the
the bearing of weight on the limbs
posture of the head, neck, and vertebral column. The
In addition to noting the degree, type, and location of the
stance of the extremities is determined by the structure
 or form of the limb and by the position the animal takes
abnormality while the dog is standing, we also observe
the dog for characteristic abnormalities in the way it
with the limbs. The structure or form of a limb can differ
stands (Fig. 17.1). A few characteristic abnormalities
ueo inq ll'l sihl paaq iad pue sarads iad Aipaxeu
which have consequences for the stance have been given
also be abnormal as a result of pathologic changes such
the following names:
as deformed growth, fractures, and muscle contractions.
The position is largely determined by the extent and
the median line, in the sagittal plane
painfulness of a process and/or the character of the
Am s au jo ied jo uaa inu ue rsn
animal. The bearing of weight by both front limbs and
from the median line, in the sagittal plane
       i    
in a normal position. About 60% of the body weight
The abnormalities are named according to the origin of
rests on the front feet and 40% on the rear feet.
the deviation: in animals whose hind legs form an X
In most dogs the lumbar and thoracic parts of the
there is varus from the hips and valgus from the knees,
vertebral column are either horizontal or slant slightly
 and in those whose hind legs form an O there is valgus
downward toward the sacrum. For the sacrum to be
from the hips and varus from the knees.
higher than the beginning of the thoracic part is
torsion: twisting of a part of the skeleton or a bone
considered abnormal.
on its long axis
endotorsion: turning inward (medially) of the distal
Technigue
part of a long bone
The animal should be standing in a quiet area,
Exotorsion: turning outward (laterally) of the distal
preferably on the floor, although small animals can be
part of a long bone
placed on the examination table. The animal can be on
There are a few characteristic abnormalities in the
a leash if necessary but it should not be pulling at the
positioning of the limb relative to the body which
affect the way in which the animal stands:
rotation: turning of a limb in a joint on its long axis
exorotatior: lateral turning of a limb or part of a
limb (Fig. 17.1)
endorotatior: medial turning of a limb or part of a
limb
abduction: entire limb moved sideways away from
the median line
adduction: entire limb moved sideways toward the
median line
Some abnormal forms of weigbt bearing by limbs are:
hyperextension: overstretching of joint(s)
byperflexion: overflexion (bending) of joint(s)
17.3.2 Examination during motion
jo juawaaou aiaduos aut si dais auo kq ugau s! ieu
one limb from one point in the movement cycle, through
Fig. 17.1 The Labrador and the dachshund illustrate breed differences
the cycle, and back to the same point. From the support
in the structure and shape of the front leg. as shown by the right front
phase (Fig. 17.2) and the take-off point, the foot goes
leg in this figure. The stance of the left front leg of each animal is
through the swing phase to the contact point. The step
abnormal: the Labrador's leg is in valgus position and the leg of the
dachshund is in varus position. Both rear legs of the dachshund are in a
should be square; the left and right limbs should each
French stance due to exorotation.
be brought forward in one plane. Some dogs with long
137
 Chapter 17:
LoComOTOr sySTeM
Fig. 17.2 The support phase of both the front leg and the rear leg is from the contact point to the takeoff point.
legs prefer to trot in a slightly angled movement,
The observation must be in a quiet area, on a hard
with one rear foot placed between and the other beside
but not slippery surface. For the dog a distance of 10
the front feet. Three types of movement can be
meters on a sidewalk or garden path is very suitable.
distinguished: walking, trotting, and galloping.
The examiner must give the owner clear instructions
about the tempo and distance. The dog is walked a few
 In walking, the body is supported by two or three limbs 
times toward and away from the examiner. This is
(Fig. 17.3). The walk should be strong and quick.
Depending on the body form of the animal, the steps
repeated at a relaxed trot. The animal is usually not
examined in a gallop because of the short phase of
can be large or small. In trotting, usually two feet that
 support by each foot. The observations can, however, 
are diagonal to each other are moved forward and put
be extended to include quick turns, stepping up and
down. Before this pair of feet is put down the other
KeM e yons ui dn xpoq aul yll Apeaule ueo iooy ieai
stepping down, and even climbing up and down stairs,
or other movements that might seem to be useful on
that for a moment the entire body is suspended, out
the basis of the history.
of contact with the ground (as in the suspended trot)
The examiner observes the movements of the animal
(Fig. 17.3). In some dogs the pacing gait can be
from the front, from the back, and from the side, and
observed, in which the body is supported by two feet
observes whether the movements are regular and
on one side and then the two feet on the other side,
strong, coordinated, and in harmony. At the same time,
sometimes interrupted by a suspended phase. In this
the examiner listens for the occurrence of abnormal
gait the center of gravity and thus also the head are
sounds.
displaced to the supported side, which gives the
impression that the animal is swaying from side to side.
Abnormofities in the goit
During the gallop the dog has one suspended phase in
 During the observation an impression is obtained of the
the normal gallop and two in the suspended gallop,
type, severity and location of the lameness at that
followed by support phases that are gone through
moment, and abnormal sounds can be heard. In order
rapidly. When an animal is running in this way, its
to reduce the load on a painful front limb, the animal
head is thrown high and the body leaves the ground as
will move the center of gravity caudally by raising its
the result of a simultaneous stretching of the back and
head during the weight-bearing phase on the affected
limb. When weight is borne on the unaffected limb, the
front legs equally but not always simultaneously.
head will be lowered: falling on the healthy limb'. To
reduce the load on both front limbs, both rear limbs
Technique
will be brought forward under the body, causing the
 In order to evaluate the gait, the dog is taken along by the
back to be arched (kyphosis).
owner on a leash of sufficient length that the dog neither
 In order to try to reduce the load on one rear limb,
pulls on nor is pulled by the leash. To evaluate the gait of
the head will be held down when the affected limb
a cat, the exa mination has to be adapted to the posibilities.
bears weight. Since there are always only two legs
138
Observation of stance and motion
Fig. 17.3 In walking the body is supported by two. three. or four legs (rows 1 and 2). In trotting (row 3) the body is alternately supported by the right
and left diagonal legs: only during suspended troting (middle in row 3) is there a brief suspended phase. In some dogs. pacing (row 4) can be
apis awes au uo 5hal oq Aq pauoddns Ajateuatje 5! Apoq aug yoium ul paAla5qo
bearing weight during trotting, the movement of the
An ordinal scale (§ 3.1.2) can be used to grade the
head is more pronounced during trotting than during
severity of the locomotor disturbance. Grading is
walking. When the animal is jumping, an irregularity
especially helpful in  following the progress of 
a
can be observed in the use of the rear legs during take-
lameness.12 This classification is particularly valuable
off and in the use of the front legs when the animal
in cases in which the course of the lameness is
lands on the ground again. Pain can also occur as a
observed for some time. The scale is as follows:
result of the stretching of the back.
grade I
barely disturbed locomotion
The type of lameness can be classified as permanent 
grade II
locomotion disturbed but limb(s) still
Or  intermittent, as decreasing or  increasing during
bearing weight
locomotion, and as resulting in sparing of the limb or
gradeIl
 lameness with limb(s) not always bearing
making normal use of the limb impossible.
weight
Locomotion can be divided into a support phase and a
grade IV  no weight bearing on limb(s)
suspended phase. Abnormalities in the support phase lead
to weight-bearing lameness, whereas those in the
The location is described as being on one side or on both
suspended phase lead to movement lameness. Usually no
sides, in the front or rear limb(s), and localized or
distinction is made between these two forms of lameness
migrating.
in companion animals because there is usually
an
Abnormal sounds, apart from the scraping of the
abnormality in both phases. In addition, the distinction
toenails on a hard surface, usually consist of a dry
 i an aq s als u  i
snapping sound during the weight-bearing phase of a
which the phases of locomotion follow one another.
 rear limb. This can only be heard in a quiet place.
139
Chapter 17:
LOCOMOTOR SYSTEM
Only a few tendons and ligaments can usually be
Table 17.1 A few characteristic abnormalities in the gait
examined by inspection in the dog and cat: the
hip-wagging gait, an increased lateral moverment in the lurmbar area
patellar ligament, the Achilles tendon, the tendon
lateral circumduction. a circular movement lateraly during the
of the triceps muscle, the tendon of the flexor carpi
suspended phase of a leg without flexion of the elbaw or stifle joint
ulnaris, the lateral collateral ligament of the elbow
 medial circumduction. a circular movement medially during the
joint, and the medial and lateral collateral
suspended phase of a rear leg
ligaments of the stifle and tarsocrural joints.
intermnittent loading of a rear leg. alternating with exoratation of the
In some cases, abnormal outlining and loss of
raised linb fron the knee
tension can be seen.
 Each bone has a characteristic form, which varies
among breeds. In adult animals the contour of the
bone, as far as uncovered by muscles, should have
A few examples of characteristic abnormal gaits are
a flowing line. In young animals the area of the
given in Table 17.1. None of these characteristic
 growth plate and the adjacent bone (epiphysis and
 abnormalities is, however, to be taken as pathognomonic.
metaphysis) can have the appearance of a local
If during walking, trotting, or especially during sudden
thickening.
turns, there is a suggestion of possible paresis and/or
 In dogs and cats only the contour of the elbow and
ataxia, a neurologic examination is performed.
knee joints and of the joints distal to these can be
Sometimes both an examination of the locomotor
inspected. The normal contour of a joint is
 t  a    
referred to as *dry'.
be necessary.
When the dog is standing the toenails should just
miss touching the table surface or floor. In the
standing cat the claws are usually not visible. The
17.4 Examination of the standing animal
length of the nails or claws and the way in which
If it is decided to proceed with examination of the
they are worn off on one foot can be compared
locomotor system, the animal is placed on the
with those aspects on the contralateral foot to give
examination table in standing position. The animal is
an impression of the degree and the way in which
the foot is used and bears weight in walking over
given some attention to help it to relax and the owner
is given an explanation of what is going to be done. It
hard surfaces.
is advisable to restrain the animal, the degree of
Polpotion
restraint depending on the character of the animal and
the expected reactions.
 Palpation is performed with both hands from proximal
Inspection, and later palpation, are carried out from
to distal, so that both limbs can be compared at the
proximal to distal. The reason for this is that decreased
same level. The following features are noted:
use of the leg results in muscle atrophy which is usually
 The muscles should have a flowing contour and no
most apparent proximally. This will quickly reveal which
 a bnormal temperature, consistency, or tonus.
limb is lame, an important finding if the animal was not
 Deeper palpation should not cause pain.
lame when observed in locomotion. Another reason is
The tendons and ligaments should have smooth
that the palpation from proximal to distal goes with the
contours without local pain, thickening,
direction of the hair, which is more pleasant for both the
interruptions, or loss of tension.
examiner and the animal than going against the hair.
The bones must have smooth contours without
swelling, crepitation, looseness, pain response to
inspection
palpation, or increased temperature.
The joints should have a normal temperature and
The two front limbs and the two rear limbs are inspected
a smooth contour, and palpation should not cause
at the same height by standing in front of and behind the
pa in.
animal respectively. The standing position affords good
comparison of left and right. Inspection may be
hampered by a long haircoat. The following points are
17.4.1 Front limb
noted:
Shouider
The contours of the muscles should be flowing and
continuous. The sizes of muscles depend on the
The most proximal edge of the scapula (scapular
age of the animal and on such factors as training.
cartilage), the scapular spine, and the acromion are
In breeds such as greyhounds the musculature can
examined by inspection and palpation. This is followed
be very well developed. No rhythmic contractions
by inspection and palpation of the supraspinatus and
(tremors or myoclonia) should be visible.
infraspinatus muscles. Then the examiner's forefinger is
140
Examination of the standing animal
Fig. 17.4 On the left and on the right the forefinger is placed on the
Fig. 17.5 The left hand shows how the width of the elbow joint is
acromion and the thumb is placed medial to the major tuberosity in
examined: the thumb is placed on the medial epicondyle while the
order to compare the distance.
forefinger feels the junction between the humerus and the radius on
the lateral side. The right hand shows how the elbow joint can be
examined for warmth. effusion. and painfulness. The forefinger is 
placed at the level of the anconeal muscle (insert.
placed on the acromion and the thumb is placed medial
Corpus and metacarpus
to the major tuberosity of the humerus, to compare the
The  carpus comprises  the antebrachiocarpal  joint
distance between these structures on the left with that
{radiocarpal and ulnocarpal), the intercarpal joints, and
on the right (Fig. 17.4).
uo! jedieo aui u aue aui shuio! ledieoiawode al
between the radius and the metacarpus is 185-190° in
Upper teg
the dog. Inspection and palpation of the various parts of
the carpal joint are mainly limited to the dorsal surface.
      
The accessory bone is palpated and its position and the
humerus at the major tuberosity and then proceed to
tension of the attached tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris
the muscles around the humerus, the tendon of the
muscle is evaluated. The metacarpal bones and their
triceps, and the olecranon.
joints are inspected and palpated.
Toes
Elbow
The distance between the lateral and medial epicondyles
The position of the toes is examined. The animal should
is determined by palpation. The forefinger is placed on
bend the toes when standing and the nails should not
the lateral epicondyle and the thumb on the medial
touch the surface of the table. The phalanges and their
(Fig. 17.5; left). Then the lateral side of the junction
joints are inspected and palpated. Then the metacarpal
bones of one foot are grasped and the foot is strongly
between the humerus and the radius is palpated.
The elbow joint can be inspected and palpated for
pressed on the table (Fig. 17.6), and any sign of pain is
effusion only at the level of the anconeal muscle, in a
noted.
straight line from the lateral condyle to the point of the
olecranon (Fig. 17.5; right).
17.4.2 Rear limb
Pelvis
Lower teg
The examination of the pelvic area includes inspection
The lower leg is inspected and palpated superficially
 and palpation of the iliac crests, gluteal muscles, greater
from proximal to distal; the ulna is mainly palpable
trochanter, and ischiadic tuberosity, giving attention to
proximal-laterally and the radius distal-medially. In
the symmetry of the triangle of the iliac crest, greater
young animals the examiner must consider whether the
trochanter, and ischiadic tuberosity. At the same time,
metaphysis is of normal or excessive width.
the thumb is placed between the major trochanter and
141
Chapter 17:
LOCOMOTOR SYSTEM
The iliopsoas muscles are examined by simultaneously
palpating the muscle belly, extending the hip joint, and
endorotating the femur. The iliopsoas muscle is a
fusion of two muscle bellies: the major psoas muscle
{origin: transverse processes of lumbar vertebra), and
the iliacus muscle (origin: ventral side of the ileum).
The iliopsoas muscle inserts on the minor trochanter
of the femur. The examiner stands on the contralateral
side of the dog, brings one hand over its back, and
grasps the muscle bellies proximally in the groin. The
other hand grasps the femur on its cranial side and lifts
the leg with backward extension and endorotation.
With the hip so extended and with deep palpation, the
psoas major muscle can be examined lateral to the
Fig. 17.6 The foot of the dog can have various forms: upper right: the
lumbar vertebral column, the iliacus muscle can be
so-called 'cat foot. lower right: the so-called rabbit foot. In neither of
examined on the ventral side of the ileum, and the
these cases should the nails touch the table surface. The metacarpus of
iliopsoas muscle can be examined at the level of its
 one foot is grasped in order to place the foot firmly on the table.
insertion on the minor trochanter. Attention is given to
possible pain and muscle contracture.
the ischiadic tuberosity on both sides to compare the
Upper teg
distances (Fig. 17.7). Both rear limbs are lifted up and
extended caudally while the thumbs continue to evaluate
The musculature around the femur is inspected and
this distance. Relatively heavy dogs must be supported by
palpated. The tail is held to one side so that the
a helper holding an arm under the abdomen. If there is no
adductors can be seen and compared.
assistant to provide this support, the examiner can grasp
both thighs or stifles, lift the dog, and extend both legs 
Stiffe joint
backwards, but this will not allow the distance to be
First the tibial crest is located to simplify location of the
checked with the thumbs. The length of the legs is
patellar tendon, which is attached to it. Effusion in the
compared by comparing the location of the calcanei or
stifle joint and/or thickening of the joint capsule is mainly
the large foot pads (Fig. 17.8). The comparison can be
detectable medial and lateral to the patellar tendon. The
quite erroneous if, unintentionally and unnoticed, the two
examiner stands behind the animal and palpates the
lim bs are not extended to the same degree.
tendon with the thumb and forefinger (Fig. 17.9).
Fig. 17.7 The thumbs are placed on both sides between the greater trochanter and the ischiadic tuberosity in order to compare the distances
142
Examination of the standing animal
examiner stands against the edge of the table behind
the dog and holds the dog with its ischiadic
tuberosities against himself. With the outer edge of the
hand, the tibia is pressed caudally at the level of the
tibial crest. At the same time the thumb and forefinger
carry out and evaluate the horizontal movements of the
patella.
 If the patella is already found to be luxated, then one
determines whether the stifle can be extended and the
patella replaced in the trochlea. If the patella is luxated
or can be luxated, laterally or medially, the shape and
depth of the trochlea are evaluated and attention is
given to the occurrence of crepitation. If the patella is
present in the trochlea, the edges of the trochlea are
palpated along their outlines, the thumb on the lateral
edge and the forefinger on the medial side.
By moving the thumb laterally and the forefinger
medially and both a little distally, the width of the
 o al al e  ia a uo as
tibial plateau and laterally at the level of the lateral
Fig. 17.8 Both rear limbs are lifted up and extended caudally. The
collateral ligament (between the lateral epicondyle of
thumbs remain in the same place. The length of the legs is
the femur and the head of the fibula).
mmpared on the basis of the position of the point of the calcaneus
and/or the metatarsal pad.
Lower leg ond hock
Over the entire length of its medial side the tibia is not
The patella is located by following the patellar tendon
covered by muscle and is therefore easily inspected and
proximally from the tibial crest. The stability of the
palpated. Part of the Achilles tendon is inserted on the
patella in the femoral-patellar joint is determined by
calcaneus and extends the hock, while another part
pushing the patella medially and laterally with the
runs as the superficial flexor tendon over the calcaneal
thumb and forefinger while the stifle is held extended.
tuber to the toes.
It should not be possible to push the patella over the 
The
examiner
stands behind the dog. The
edge of the trochlea and there should be no crepitation.
examination comprises inspection and palpation of the
The extension of the stifle is possible when the
tibia, cranial tibial muscle, Achilles tendon, and
Fig. 17.9 The patella can be located by following the patellar tendon proximally from the tibial crest (let. The patella is pushed medially with the
thumb while at the same time the stifle is overextended. in order to check for luxation (right!.
14.3
 Chapter 17:
LOCOMOTOR SYSTEM
calcaneus. The calcaneal tuber and the tendon cap of the
structures will have been done while the animal was
superficial flexor tendon are also palpated.
standing or can be carried out when the animal is
placed on its other side.
Torsocrurot joint
When lameness is unilateral the contralateral leg can
The tarsocrural joint comprises the joints between tibia/
be examined first, to accustom the animal to being
fibula and talus/calcaneus, the intertarsal joints, and the
 manipulated and to obtain an impression of its response
tarsometatarsal joints. Overfilling of this joint can be
to this. Palpation and manipulation of possibly painful 
detected cranial and caudal to the collateral ligaments.
processes is omitted initially, to avoid early pain
reactions and resistance.
or lateral malleolus. The latter is the distal extension of
The examination of the recumbent animal includes
the fibula. Sometimes an effusion is also palpable in
(1) inspection especially of the structures that could not
the space between the anterior side of the base of the
be seen easily before (e.g., the foot), (2) careful
calcaneus and the posterior side of the distal tibia. The
palpation of the limb while it is not bearing weight
and deep palpation of structures that are partly
thumb and forefinger of each hand are placed before
and behind the lateral collateral ligaments of the
superficial, such as long bones, and (3) the passive
tarsocrural joint.
movements of all joints.
 If necessary, both hands can be used to palpate before
Inspection, palpation, and passive movements are
and behind both collateral ligaments of one joint
carried out in the recumbent animal from distal to
simultaneously (Fig. 17.10). This can be used especially
proximal. The reason is that one can move the distal
to detect fluctuation due to effusion. All
joints without bringing the more proximal joints into
tarsal
movement. Here also, any
articulations are also inspected and palpated.
movements
sthatare
expected to be painful are delayed until last.
Foot
One must take care to limit deep palpation to the
specific structure to be examined: for example, in deep
The reader is referred to what has been described for the
palpation of a long bone with the thumb, the fingers 
front foot.
must not at the same time put pressure on the muscle
on the other side. The examination of the joints in the
17.5 Examination of the recumbent animal
recumbent animal includes:
The animal is placed on its side, so that the upper leg,
a uo ssse aun Aq Piau aq ho si 
Passive movements
examined thoroughly. In the same position, the foot
Active movement is the result of the animal's own muscle
and carpus or tarsus can be compared with that of the
contraction. Passive movement is the result of an external
contralateral leg. Comparison of the more proximal
passive movements of joints in different directions,
attention is given to:
1  range of motion (ROM)
 2 crepitation
3 signs of pain
Within physiologic limits the manipulation of a joint,
the passive movement, should proceed smoothly. The
movement should be neither hindered nor appear to be
possible in a direction that under normal conditions is
not possible. The passive movements are carried out
repeatedly in order to (1) eventually overcome muscular
resistance of the animal and (2) detect fine crepitation.
Neither in flexion or extension nor in hyperflexion
or hyperextension  should crepitation be observed.
Crepitation occurs when hard irregularities scrape along
each other. As it is easier felt than heard, the examiner
should place the fingers as close as possible to the site
being examined (joint, fracture). A single audible sound
during hyperextension (like stretching one's own fingers)
can be considered normal, especially in the shoulder joint.
Fig. 17.10 The forefingers are placed before and the thumbs behind
Other sounds that occur during passive movements are
the collateral ligaments of the tarsocrural joint.
abnormal.
144
Examination of the recumbent animal
The movement of the joint within physiologic limits
17.5.1 Front limb
should not result in pain. Pain will occur, however, if
Foot
hyperextension or hyperflexion results in excessive
stretching of joint ligaments and/or capsules, even under
If
present,
the first digit is also examined. The
normal conditions. Such examination is only justified if
examination is begun with inspection and palpation of
it can be expected to contribute to the correct diagnosis.
the nails, cuticles (lift the hair up!), foot pads {also the
Pain reactions are not always easy to interpret: there are
accessory), and the volar and dorsal interdigital skin.
species differences (dog and cat), breed and individual
Each toe is subjected to passive movements
differences, and changes with age. Manifestations of pain
separately.
Ifthiscausesabnormalmoveability
may include:
{increased or reduced), crepitation, and/or pain, this
aggression (with severe pain)
examination is intensified phalanx-by-phalanx.
vocalization (yelping in dogs and hissing in cats)
Extreme bending of the toes is usually painful and
holding breath or panting
unnecessary. Hyperextension must be carried out: with
licking and smacking lips (dogs)
the thumb and forefinger one toe is stretched
increased muscle tension
excessively while the thumb of the other hand is used
- pupil dilatation (increased sympathicotonus)
to place pressure over the location of the sesamoid
When a pain reaction is observed during palpation,
bones of this toe{Fig. 17.11). Attention is given to
signs of pain and local crepitation.
its reproducibility should be examined.
This must
The metacarpal bones are checked for pain and
be done carefully. If the pain reaction is not
crepitation by palpation and also for the presence of
reproducible, it should be regarded as false positive
 abnormal contours.
{see also § 3.1.5).
The examination of the joints in the recumbent animal
Carpus
includes:
The movements which are possible in the carpal joint,
 1 repeated bending, stretching, adduction,
and also largely in the antebrachiocarpal joint, are
abduction, and rotation in the direction
characteristic of the joint being examined
mainly extension and flexion and only to a small
extent rotation, abduction, and adduction.
2 slightly exaggerated repetition of the same
The degree of moveability is determined in part by
movements
the age of the animal. Excessive hyperflexion of the
3 maneuvers specifically developed for the relevant
carpus is usually painful and should be performed
joint, in which abnormal moveability, crepitation,
 and pain reactions can be considered abnormal if
ca utiously.
Extension and flexion are performed by using the
they appear to be reproducible
right hand to move the foot relative to the radius and
The following descriptions are applicable to the limbs on
ulna while at the same time palpating the carpus with
the right side. The examination of the left front and rear
the left hand. Hyperextension, rotation (pronation =
limbs is carried out in the same manner.
endorotation, and supination = exorotation of the
Fig. 17.11 The sesamoid bones. shown at the left, are located at the junctions of the metacarpal bones and phalanges. They are examined by
hyperextension of the toe and simultaneous palpation followed by pressure with the right thumb.
145
 Chapter 17:
LoComotor sysTem
foot), abduction, and adduction are evaluated. The
moveability of intercarpal and carpometacarpal joints
is checked by holding the antebrachiocarpal joint bent
 halfway and pushing the metacarpus forward parallel
to the table. This is a physiological drawer movement,
comparable to the pathological drawer movement of
the stifle joint, see § 17.5.2. The physiological drawer
movement should completely(
disappear when the
carpus is extended.  The 
position of the carpal
accessory bone is checked.
Lower leg
Superficial and then deep palpation of the radius and ulna
are carried out as follows in order to avoid simultaneous
palpation of the musculature. The radius is palpated
distally on the medial side with the fingertips, while the
heel of the thumb rests on the lateral surface of the leg
(Fig. 17.12). Subsequently the thumb of the other hand
Fig. 17.13 Passive movement of the elbow joint in the recumbent dog.
is used for deep palpation on the lateral side of the
in which the thumb is placed on the anconeal muscle to detect any
proximal part of the ulna, while the fingers, held flat,
crepitation.
support the lower arm (Fig. 17.12).
Etbow joint
The distal radius and ulna are encircled with one hand
while the thumb of the other hand is placed on the
anconeal muscle (Fig. 17.13). Flexion, extension,
hyperflexion,  and  a
single, carefully-controlled
hyperextension are performed. Then the radius and
ulna are exorotated in relation to the humerus, with
the elbow joint extended. This is done by pressing the
thumb against the olecranon and using the other hand
to grasp the radius and ulna distally and to exorotate
(Fig. 17.14). Endorotation and exorotation of the
elbow are evaluated further by holding the elbow and
carpal joints bent at 90e to supinate and pronate the
radius and ulna.
Fig. 17.14 Exorotation of radius and ulna with extended elbow joint is
carried out by pushing the thumb against the olecranon (straight 
arrow) and exorotating with the other hand holding radius and ulna
distally (curved arrow).
Upper teg
Only the most distal part of the humerus can be
palpated, and then only on the lateral side because the
ulnar nerve crosses the humerus on the medial side.
Palpation of the latter causes unnecessary pain {in
humans: “funny bone'). In addition, the major
tuberosity can be palpated.
The diaphysis of the distal humerus is palpated by
placing the thumb on the bone and keeping the fingers 
extended in order to support the humerus.
.The
musculature of the humerus is also examined.
Fig. 17.12 Palpation of the radius and ulna. The right hand demonstrates
deep palpation of the radius with the fingertips. during which the heel of 
Shouider joint
the thumb rests on the lateral surface of the bone. The left hand
demonstrates how the thumb is used to palpate the proximal part of the
The shoulder joint is not palpable through the muscles
ulna. while the extended fingers support the lower leg.
that surround it. Crepitation occurring during passive
146
Examination of the recumbent animal
Fig. 17.16 Hyperextension of the shoulder joint is achieved by placing
one hand against the front edge of the scapula in order to fix the
scapula in relation to the thoracic wall, while the leg is extended until the
spine of the scapula. the humerus. and the radius and ulna are in line.
Fig. 17.15 To detect crepitation in the shoulder joint during passive
and the radius/ulna form a straight line, or until the
movements. the fingers are placed on the proximolateral part of the
major tuberosity
 patient shows that this is painful (Fig. 17.16).
For hyperflexion of the right shoulder joint only the
right hand is moved, to the dorsal edge of the scapula, so
that the animal does not roll away when hyperflexion is
performed. The examiner stands ventral to the dog. The
movement of the joint can be felt on the major
elbow, which may not be bent more than 90°, is moved 
tuberosity, which is easily palpated (Fig. 17.15). The
in the direction of the spinal column (Fig. 17.17).
joint can be flexed and extended and also to some
extent
rotated,
adducted,
puB
abducted.
If
Finally, the tendon of the biceps muscle is examined for
hyperextension or hyperflexion is painful, the animal
tension and pain. The biceps begins on the scapular
will increase the muscle tension to fix the angle
tuberosity and inserts cranially and proximally on
leaig e si auaui pue snuawnu pue eindeos aun uaamiag
the radius and ulna. Examination thus includes
chance that the examiner will thus move the shoulder
simultaneous movements of the shoulder and elbow
blade in relation to the thoracic wall. As a result,
joint. Abnormalities {inflammation, rupture) of the
actual hyperextension or hyperflexion of the joint will
biceps tendon or its sheath result in pain when tension
not occur and the painfulness will be missed; the hands
on the tendon is increased. For examination of the
must be placed in a special way to prevent this.
au1 sdse pueu yal aui uopuai sdao uau
antebrachium. The humerus and radius/ulna are pulled
To examine the right shoulder joint the examiner stands
caudally until they are in line and parallel to the
ventral to the recumbent dog and places the fingers of
thoracic wall. Thus the elbow joint is extended and
the right hand on the major tuberosity while the left
the shoulder is flexed. At the same time, the fingers of
hand grasps the proximal radius and ulna.
To avoid causing pain, the left hand should not grasp
into musculature surrounding the humerus. With the left
hand the shoulder is flexed and extended and with the
right hand it is palpated (Fig. 17.15). The stability and
moveability of the shoulder joint can be assessed by
rotating the leg relative to the scapula, and by
 abduction and adduction.
After repeated flexion and extension, hyperextension
is performed. For this purpose only the right hand is
moved, to the cranial edge of the scapula, so that the
scapula remains fixed in relation to the thoracic wall.
The examiner stands in front of the dog on the ventral
Fig. 17.17 Hyperflexion of the shoulder joint is achieved by moving the
side. The radius and ulna are extended obliquely
elbow joint in the direction of the vertebral column while at the same
forward until the spine of the scapula, the humerus,
time fixing the dorsal edge of the scapula
147
Chapter 17:
LOCOMOTOR SYSTEM
the right hand are used to press (deep palpation) medial
to the proximal humerus and along the biceps tendon.
Scoputo
The acromion, spine, and dorsal edge are palpable, as
well as the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles.
The acromion, spine, and cartilage are examined by
palpation, manipulation, and pressure. Then
the
musculature is examined for consistency and tension.
The scapula can be slightly abducted by grasping its
 cranial and posterior borders with the fingertips.
Axillary greo
The axilla is palpated carefully to evaluate the form and
 outline of the first ribs and to detect possible thickening
Fig. 17.18 In order to detect crepitation in the tarsocrural joint during
 Or pain in the lymph nodes or brachial plexus. For this
passive movement in the recumbent dog. one thumb is held before
purpose the front leg is abducted. The proximal
and the other behind the lateral collateral ligament and the
axillary area can also be examined to some extent for
corresponding forefingers are held before and behind the medial
pain or swelling by moving the fingers caudally close
collater al ligament.
to the thoracic wall, medial to the front edge of the
scapula, and by moving cranially from the caudal edge
intertarsal and tarso-metatarsal joints. The Achilles
Of the scapula. When in doubt about what is felt, it is
helpful to compare with the contralateral side.
 On the calcaneus.
17.5.2 Rear limb
Lowerteg
The examiner stands behind {caudal to) the animal,
 Deep palpation is easily performed on the medial side of
the tibia. The examiner must take care not to palpate
which lies in lateral recumbency with the side to be
examined facing upward.
the cranial tibial muscle at the same time. The tibia is
palpated in the same manner as described for the radius
and is checked for abnormal moveability. In young
Foot
animals the proximal apophysis of the tibia is checked
The examination includes inspection and palpation of the
with regard to location, moveability, and painfulness.
nails, cuticles, food pads, and interdigital skin, as well as
The surrounding musculature is also palpated.
passive movements of the toes and simultaneous
palpation of the sesamoid bones and examination of the
Stifle
metatarsal bones. See the description of the examination
of the front foot (§ 17.s.1).
The patella is a sesamoid bone lying in the tendon of the
stifle that inserts on the tibial crest. When the leg is
Torsocrurof joint
extended (with relaxed quadriceps muscle) the patella
can be displaced only very slightly medially and
The greatest moveability in the tarsocrural joint is in the
 a a    s 
joint formed by the tibia/fibula and the talus/calcaneus.
retinaculum that passes from the patella to the fabella
The remaining moveability is in the intertarsal and
and by the joint capsule medial and lateral to the patella
tarsometatarsal joints. The tarsocrural joint can only be
(Fig. 17.19). The fabellae, which are the sesamoid bones
maximally flexed and extended, without simultaneously
of the heads of the gastrocnemius muscle, are located on
moving the stifle, if the stifle is held in maximal flexion.
the caudal side, lateral and medial to the femoral
One thumb is held before and the other behind the
condyles at the height of the patella.
lateral collateral ligament of the tarsocrural joint, with
the forefingers on the medial side in front of and behind 
The cranial cruciate ligament passes “like a hand in the
the medial collateral ligament (Fig. 17.18). By means of
pants pocket (from caudolateral to craniomedial), and
abduction and adduction and during rotation of the foot
the posterior cruciate ligament crosses it (Fig. 17.19).
in relation to the tibia, the collateral ligaments and
The cranial cruciate  ligament prevents  forward
 malleoli can be examined. The joint is hyperextended.
 displacement of the tibia in relation to the femur and
Then the plantar contours of the tarsus are palpated. The
also limits endorotation of the tibia. The caudal
examiner checks the stability, in other words the
 cruciate ligament prevents caudal displacement of the
normally very small moveability, of the different
tibia. The lateral collateral band, which passes from
148
Examination of the recumbent animal
fexed and note is taken of the range of motion,
crepitation, signs of pain, and the possible occurrence
of a snapping sound. Local thickening, crepitation, and
painfulness between the patella and the lateral fabella,
just lateral to the edge of the trochlea, may indicate
avulsion of the insertion of the long digital extensor
muscle. Finally, the stifle is fully flexed (hyperflexion)
and extended (hyperextension).
Next the examiner places the right hand around the
metatarsus with the thumb medial to the calcaneus.
The left thumb is placed on the lateral edge of the
patella of the extended stifle. While the right hand
exorotates the calcaneus and thereby endorotates the
Fig. 17.19 The patella. which is the sesamoid bone of the stifle tendon.
tibia in relation to the femur, the left thumb presses the
is stabilized in the transverse direction by the joint capsule and the
patella in the medial direction (Fig. 17.20). The patella
medial and lateral retinaculum that passes from the patella to the
should remain in the trochlea and the endorotation
fabellae. which are the sesamoid bones of the gastrocnemius muscle.
The drawing on the left shows that the medial meniscus is attached to
should cause no evidence of pain. Then the thumb of
the medial collateral ligament (which passes from the femur to the
the right hand is placed lateral to the calcaneus and the
tibia). The drawing on the right shows the path of both cruciate
forefinger of the left hand is hooked around medially
jaynod sjued aun ui puey aut ayll huiss ed quawehil ieueuo aun :sjuaweb
behind the patella. While the right hand exorotates the
from caudolateral to craniomedial. and the caudal ligament crossing the
tibia in relation to the femur, the forefinger pulls on
cranial one. The lateral collateral ligament passes from the femur to
the head of the fibula.
the patella while the stifle is still extended (Fig. 17.20).
In healthy animals the patella remains in the trochlea
the femur to the fibula, prevents adduction of the tibia in
and there is no sign of pain. If the patella is luxated,
relation to the femur. The medial collateral ligament
the depth of the trochlea is determined.
passes from the tibia to the femur and prevents
Then the examiner checks whether the cranial cruciate
abduction of the tibia. Hyperflexion, hyperextension,
ligament is intact. There are two manual maneuvers for
endorotation, and exorotation should not be painful.
this, both of which are based on checking the forward
The menisci give relief to the tibial plateau and
moveability of the tibia in relation to the femur: {1) the
function as shock absorbers. The medial meniscus is
drawer movement and (2) the tibial compression test.
firmly attached to the medial collateral ligament.
For the first of these, the examiner places the left
 In the examination of the right stifle the right hand is
forefinger on the patella, the left thumb behind the
used to grasp the distal tibia and the left hand is placed
lateral fabella, the right forefinger on the tibial crest, and
Fig. 17.20 With the stifle held in extension. the patella is pressed medially and the tibial crest is endorotated. while the calcaneus is exorotated and
the foot is endorotated (left). Then the patella is pulled laterally with the forefinger and the tibial crest is exorotated. while the calcaneus is endorotated
and the foot is exorotated (right). In both of these maneuvers. the patella should not luxate but remain in the trochlea
149
Chapter 17:
LOCOMOTOR SYSTEM
Fig. 17.21 The drawer phenomenon is tested by grasping the bony
structures of the upper and lower leg. The left forefinger is placed on
Fig. 17.22 The tibial compression test. Hyperflexion of the tarsocrural
the patella with the thumb behind the lateral fabella. while the right
joint with the stifle held extended causes a forward movement of the
forefinger is anchored on the tibial crest with the thumb behind the
proximal tibia if the cranial cruciate ligament is ruptured
head of the fibula. With this thumb the tibia is pushed several times
frmly forward relative to the femur.
tibia. The metatarsus is grasped from below by the
right hand and the forefinger of the left hand is placed
the right thumb behind the head of the fibula. With the
Over the patella, patellar ligament, and proximal end
stifle extended, half flexed (45°), and then flexed, the
of the tibial crest (Fig. 17.22). This forefinger should
examiner pushes the right thumb forward in the direction
detect no forward movement of the tibial crest if the
of the right forefinger; the left hand is not moved and
hock is bent while the stifle is kept extended.
serves as the reference point {Fig. 17.21). This movement
is performed repeatedly, rapidly, and with appropriate
To check the collateral ligaments, the stifle is held almost
strength. During this process the stifle is neither extended
fully extended (15°). The thumb of the left hand is placed
nor flexed and the tibia is not rotated, but rather an
on the lateral collateral ligament (Fig. 17.19), while the
fingers of this hand support the stifle. The right hand is
attempt is made to move the tibia forward parallel to
itself. Sometimes the tibia is found to be permanently
used to grasp the middle of the tibia and to adduct the
displaced forward and it must first be moved caudally
tibia in relation to the femur (Fig. 17.23). This should not
and then again cranially in order to produce the drawer
cause any widening of the lateral side of the joint space.
movement. The hand grip is such that only bony
To check the medial collateral ligament the forefinger of
 structures are grasped, so that a displacement of the right
hand in relation to the left must represent a displacement
of the tibia in relation to the femur. Attention is given to
evidence of pain and to forward displacement and/or
endorotation of the tibia in relation to the femur.
Following this, with the stifle extended, half-flexed and
then flexed, an attempt is made to displace the right
forefinger in the direction of the right thumb, to check
the posterior cruciate ligament. Attention is given to
evidence of pain and to caudal displacement of the
tibia in relation to the femur. Testing for the drawer
movement can be difficult in strongly muscled dogs
which resist the examination and in such cases must be
repeated under sedation or anesthesia.
A second test for damage to the cranial cruciate
ligament is the tibial compression test (TCT).11 If the
Fig. 17.23 The lateral collateral ligament can be tested by holding the
hock is bent while the stifle is extended, the anterior
left thumb slightly proximal to the head of the fibula. while the tibia is
cruciate ligament prevents cranial displacement of the
adducted with the right hand.
150
Examination of the recumbent animal
A
B
Fig. 17.24 A By using the right hand to abduct the tibia in relation to the femur. the tensing of the medial collateral ligament can be felt. B By
palpating on and directly caudal to the medial collateral ligament. swelling and painfulness can be detected if there is a lesion of the medial meniscus.
the left hand is placed on the maximal medial protrusion of
the tibial plateau. While the right hand, still in the same
position, abducts the tibia, the left forefinger is used to
feel whether there is displacement of the tibia and
widening of the joint space (Fig. 17.24a).
Finally, the medial meniscus is checked for damage by
pressing on it strongly with the forefinger directly
caudal to the medial collateral ligament (Fig. 17.24b),
taking note of any swelling and evidence of pain.
A snapping sound as a result of contact between the
femur and tibia in certain meniscal lesions can have
been observed earlier in the examination {during
extension and flexion).
Thigh
The greater trochanter of the femur can be palpated
proximally and laterally. Otherwise the femur is only
palpable (medially and laterally) at its distal end. The
thigh is palpated superficially and deeply and checked
for abnormal moveability and crepitation. Following
this the easily palpated muscles are examined.
Hip joint
Fig. 17.25 Passive movement of the hip joint is performed with the hand
The hip joint is a ball and socket joint which is covered
that holds the stifle. while the fingers of the other hand maintain contact
with the major trochanter. The degree of movement. painfulness.
by the surrounding structures. The femur is held in the
crepitation, and abnormal movement in the hip joint are detected by
 acetabulum by, among other things, the teres ligament 
extension. flexion., abduction. adduction. and rotation of the femur
and the tensed joint capsule. Painful processes in the
hip joint can be associated with contraction (and later
is pressed medially in order to feel whether the femoral
fibrosis) of the pectineus muscle.
head can be displaced medially in the acetabulum
The greater trochanter is palpated to detect possible
relative to its resting position. If it can, there could be
swelling and painfulness. The right hand is used to
insufficient connection in a hip joint enlarged by
grasp the stifle and the fingers of the left hand are
placed on the greater trochanter. Flexion, extension,
effusion (*floating hip').
abduction, and adduction are carried out, with
The next step is to check whether the femoral head
attention to the range of motion, painfulness,
makes a good connection in the acetabulum or whether
crepitation, and stability. The femur is also rotated on
the joint is loose (hip laxity). The test is performed in
its long axis in various positions, with attention to
two phases: first the femur is adducted and then it is
possible crepitation (Fig. 17.25). The greater trochanter
abducted.
151
 Chapter 17:
LOCOMOTOR SYSTEM
Adduction of the femur. With the animal in lateral
demonstration of the Ortolani sign during the same
recumbency, the left stifle is taken in the palm of the
session increases the reliability of the result.
hand, with the fingers supporting the femur. The fingers
 The test can also be performed with the animal in dorsal
of the right hand are placed over the major trochanter to
uoy sh! jo yoq supioq Aq pauoddns si i Xouaqunoa
evaluate the connection of the femoral head in the
legs, with the owner standing by its head to give
acetabulum. The femur is adducted with the left hand
reassurance. The examiner places the left hand on the
by moving the stifle downward toward the table.
greater trochanter to detect possible luxation/subluxation
Simultaneously, axial force is exerted on the femur in the
or reduction of the femoral head while, starting with the
direction of the hip joint. In this maneuver the femur
femur perpendicular to the table, the right hand moves
must not be allowed to be extended but must remain
the stifle into adduction (Fig. 17.27a), neutral position,
perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pelvis. If
and abduction (Fig. 17.27b). The angle at which
the connection between the femur and acetabulum is
luxation or reduction occurs is the angle between the
loose, the femoral head may luxate {Fig. 17.26a). This
position of the femur and a line perpendicular to the
can be felt with the right hand as a dorsolateral
table.
movement of the major trochanter, called a positive
Finally, the tensing of the left and right pectineus
   is   ris 
muscles is checked by placing the femurs perpendicular to
subluxation of the femoral head. The angle between the
the table surface and then abducting them to the
femur and the table at the time the Barlow sign occurs is
transverse level (Fig. 17.28). In this maneuver the stifles
the angle of luxation.
may not be moved cranially. It should be possible to
abduct the femurs adequately and the pectineus muscle
Abduction of the femur. The femur is abducted while force
 should not be palpable as a cord too early in the abduction.
is applied axially. If the connection of the femoral head in
the acetabulum is loose, at some stage of abduction the
Pelvis
 subluxated femoral head will suddenly fall back into the
The ilium, ischium, and pubis form the pelvis, which
acetabulum. The examiner will notice a ‘snap' or 'plop',
which is recorded as a positive Ortolani sign (Fig. 17.26b).
forms a cylinder and via the iliosacral joints provides a
The Ortolani sign indicates reduction of the femoral head.
firm attachment between the rear limbs and the
The angle of the femur when the positive sign occurs is
vertebral column. Following examination of the pelvis
called the angle of reduction. With the right hand on the
in the standing animal, the ilium and ischium are
trochanter, the examiner gives special attention to possible
manipulated to determine whether there is any
crepitation, which indicates cartilage lesions on the dorsal
insta bility, crepitation, or pain.
edge of the acetabulum. If the Ortolani sign does not
Occur, the test is recorded as negative.
17.6 Examination of the skull
Note that pain reactions during this test do not
and the vertebral column
constitute a positive result. There is usually less pain
when the animal is in dorsal recumbency (see below), but
Observotion of stonce ond motion
when the test causes too much pain and/or muscle
 During the observation of stance and motion attention is
tension, making the test unreliable or impossible, the
given to:
animal should be sedated or anesthetized. Sometimes the
 changes in posture or position, such as standing
Ortolani sign does not occur when the femur is
up, sitting or lying down, walking around and
perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pelvis
wagging the tail, all of which should be supple
but only when it is extended slightly. Repeated
movements and certainly not stiff or painful
B
Fig. 17.26 Ortolani test in lateral recumbency. A Adduction. B Abduction.
152
Examination of the skull and the vertebral column
Fig. 17.27 Ortolani test in dorsal recumbency. A Adduction. B Abduction.
ssnw snauaad aun jo uoisuan aun pue Ageao jiaun yaun o aueid asasue au ui snway aun jo uonpge snoaunwi l i
knuckling over of a foot while standing still, or
neurocranium) and the musculature (masticatory
straddle-legged, or in a low elbow position, or
muscles), as well as the closure of the mouth
with a front or hind leg lifted, may indicate a
the outline of the entire vertebral column, which
radiating pain from a nerve root (root signature)
should be a smoothly flowing line
coordination during walking and trotting, during
the carriage of the head, neck, and tail, and the
which abnormalities related to the vertebral
posture of the back
column can include excessive lateral swinging,
ataxia, paresis, or foot dragging
The carriage of the tail depends upon the tonus, possible
painfulness, the breed, whether or not the tail has been
docked, and the mood of the animal. Some of the
Inspection
abnormalities in posture include kyphosis fback curved
 During inspection attention is given to:
dorsally), lordosis (back curved ventrally), scoliosis
contours of the skull with special attention to the
 o     r )
outlines of the bones (maxilla, mandible,
neck on the spinal axis).3,9,10
153
 Chapter 17:
LOCOMOTOR SYSTEM
Patpation
from head to tail. Then, beginning cranially, the wings of
the atlas are palpated and then the spinal process of the
The examiner stands before, beside, and behind the
animal to palpate, cranial-to-caudal, the skull and the
axis and the transverse processes of the other cervical
entire vertebral column, including the tail. Palpation is
vertebra. Then using the thumb and forefinger of one
at first superficial (hence not firm), after which deep
hand, the spinal processes of the thoracic and the lumbar
aq ol sieadde l J! pawuoad aq ueo uoedied
vertebrae and the sacrum are palpated. Following this,
deep palpation is carried out, using the thumb and
necessary and at the same time not harmful.
Attention is given to the symmetry and smooth
forefinger to press firmly on both sides of each spinal
 process of the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae.
outline of the skull bones. If there is an abnormal
outline, its consistency is also evaluated (tumor).
Percussion
Palpation of the skull bones should not elicit pain.
The masticatory muscles are palpated for possible
 Because muscles cover the cervical vertebrae, percussion
asymmetry and/or pain. The temporomandibular joint
is limited to the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. Each of
is examined on both sides.
these vertebrae is percussed independently to determine
Among points to be noted is whether the spinal
whether pain is elicited.
 processes of the thoracic, lumbar, and sacral vertebrae
 The examiner stands beside the animal and uses the
lie in one line without lateral or dorsoventral
thumb and forefinger to locate each dorsal spinal
deviations. In dogs and cats there are seven cervical
process individually, beginning with the first thoracic
vertebrae, 13 thoracic vertebrae, and seven lumbar
vertebra. At the same time, a percussion or reflex
vertebrae. Three fused vertebrae form the sacrum. The
hammer is used to percuss the process a few times with
number of coccygeal vertebrae varies. The wings of the
slightly increasing force.
first cervical vertebra (atlas) can be palpated. The
dorsal outline of the broad spinal process of the second
Lumbosocrol pressure test
cervical vertebra (axis) can be palpated in the median
line. Very litle can be palpated on the remaining
The examiner stands behind the animal. First, the tail is
cervical vertebra because they lie deep under the
overextended with one hand while the thumb of the
muscles. Only in dogs and cats with supple muscles
other hand presses down on the lumbosacral transition
(Fig. 17.29a). Next, the fingers of both hands are
can the transverse processes be palpated, especially the
placed over the iliac crests, with the thumbs in the dip
pronounced transverse process of the sixth cervical
at the lumbosacral transition (Fig. 17.29b). Then both
vertebra.
 The spinal processes of the 13 thoracic vertebrae are
thumbs exert pressure. A healthy animal tends to
close together and easily palpated. A slight but distinct
respond by sitting down. Attention is given to possible
dip in the profile at the 11th thoracic vertebra is a
pain reaction and to resistance. If the animal sits before
very much pressure has been applied, the examiner can
normal anatomical feature and is a very useful point
of reference. This vertebra is also called the anticlinal
support the animal with the left hand under its
abdomen while applying strong pressure in the dip
vertebra. It has a relatively short and almost vertical
with the thumb of the right hand.
spinal process. The spinal processes cranial to it are
directed caudally and those caudal to it are directed
cranially. The last rib articulates with the
Passive movements
13th
thoracic vertebra, thus caudal to the dip, and caudal
Passive movements of the skull are confined to the
to the dip the spinal processes diverge and are more
temporomandibular joint, which functions as a hinge
pronounced.
joint but also allows some lateral movement of the
The spinal process of the seventh lumbar vertebra is
mandibles. The joint is examined for moveability
located between the ilial crests. Deep palpation is
{opening and closing the mouth), crepitation, and pain.
required because it is smaller than the spinal processes
 Of the other lurmbar vertebrae, e.g., that of L6. Here a
behind or beside the patient and placing the fingers at
second dip can be palpated, marking the transition
the base of the zygomatic arch on each side. The
from the last lumbar vertebra to the sacrum. Caudal to
assistant or owner opens and closes the dog's mouth
the serrated spinal process of the sacrum the vertebral
and then moves the mandible from side to side.
column continues as the coccygeal vertebrae or tail.
Sedation
anesthesia is needed for further
The entire tail is palpated, from the root to the tip,
examination, and even for this part of the examination
giving attention to tonus and moveability, as well as
if the animal is excited or aggressive.
 possible thickenings, abnormal contours, or pain.
 Passive movements of the vertebral column are only
Before the vertebral column is palpated, it is carefully
carried out if careful palpation and percussion have
brushed with the hands on both sides simultaneously
revealed no abnormalities. Passive movements have the
154
Examination of the skull and the vertebral column
C
0
Fig. 17.29 A Extension of the tail with pressure on the lumbosacral transition.
B Lumbosacral pressure test.
C Extension of the lumbar part of the vertebral column in the standing dog by raising both femurs to a horizontal position. which forces lordosis.
D Separate extension of a hind leg with simultaneous pressure on the lumbosacral part of the vertebral column.
danger of causing lasting damage to the spinal cord. The
In both cases the examiner stands behind the animal and
animal's resistance to passive movements sometimes
raises it by grasping the proximal femurs (small animals)
make the response difficult to interpret. Attention is
 Or the distal femurs (large animals). Then the hind legs
 given to moveability, crepitation, and/or pain.
are slowly raised to a horizontal position, thus forcing a
The examiner stands on the left side of the animal
lordosis (Fig. 17.29c). This movement extends first the
and uses the left hand to grasp the muzzle {first tied
hip joints and then the lumbosacral area. An assistant
securely if necessary), while the right hand fixes the
presses down first on the lumbosacral transition and
neck just caudal to the second cervical vertebra (the
then on the thoracolumbar transition. Attention is given
axis). The head is now moved in the dorsoventral
to resistance and any pain reaction. Animals with a
direction (nodding 'yes'). The head can also be moved
painful process in the caudal part of the back will not
laterally (shaking the head 'no'), or rotated.
allow this type of extension and will already resist when
The examiner now places the right hand on the spine at
it is begun. The lateralization of the pain (left or right)
the level of the scapulas and then moves the head
can be examined by alternately extending the legs (Fig.
downward (flexion) and upwards (extension), slowly
17.29d). Painful processes in the hip joints and pelvis
and carefully! Then the head and neck are moved
may obviously hamper interpretation of the observation.
laterally until each cheek touches the corresponding
Next in the standing animal the vertebral examination
thoracic wall.
is extended again and the examiner rotates the dog on the
The thoracic vertebral column is rigid, primarily
axis of the spinal column, first right and then left. The rear
J hd s a  an  usod l jo a
limbs are also moved in both lateral directions. In these
the vertebral column cannot be examined by passive
movements it is helpful if an assistant supports the dog
movements.
beneath the thoracolumbar area. The dog is turned to
Passive movements of the lumbar vertebral column
the left and to the right.
and the lumbosacral area can be performed in small and
 Finally, the caudal part of the spinal column must still
medium-sized dogs and in cats on the examination table,
be bent in the dorsoventral direction {flexion). Only
while large dogs are examined standing on the floor.
in small animals is this carried out with the animal
155
Chapter 17:
LOCOMOTOR SYSTEM
B
Fig. 17.30 A In dogs in lateral recumbency the vertebral column can be extended by placing the palm of the left hand on different lumbar vertebrae
puey auo y puemdn buissaud Aq shop mews pue ahuel yroq u! paxay aq ueo uwnjos leuqajan leqwnl aul 8 papuaixa aue shal puy ynog alu
under the abdomen and simultaneously pressing downward with the other hand at the base of the tail.
standing. The examiner brings the left hand under the
for pain or reflexes, and in cases of vertebral
abdomen, just caudal to the costal arch, and places the
trauma, examination under anesthesia should be
right hand over the base of the tail. Now the dog is
performed with great care (stabilizing muscle
Aq d si sis pe  hl u m 
pushing the pelvis ventrally.
the spinal cord
 In heavy dogs the flexion and extension of the spinal
 radiographic examination: plain and contrast, as a
column are performed while the dog is in left lateral
rule in two directions and, if necessary, in projection
recumbency, with the examiner standing beside its
and/or under stress, with sedation or anesthesia
back. The examiner places the palm of the left hand on
routine blood and urine examination and tests for
the last lumbar vertebra while the right hand curves
rheumatoid factors
around both of the animal's stifles and moves them
synovial fluid examination (§ 17.8): cytology,
caudally. The pelvis now tilts at the lumbosacral
bacteriology, analysis for rheumatoid factors and
junction. The left hand is then moved cranially one
antibodies, biochemistry
vertebra at a time and the stretching of the stifles
fine-needle aspiration biopsy from masses for
aul xaaday o "(eoe'2l il paieadau si Aeneo
cytology and bacteriology
spinal column, the left hand is held against the animal's
surgical biopsy of bone or muscle for histology
abdomen while the right hand, placed over the base of
 and bacteriology
the tail, tilts the pelvis ventrally (Fig. 17.30b).
 bone marrow aspiration for cytology and
bacteriology
Rectol poipotion
electromyography (EMG), electrostimulation and
Rectal palpation is performed if indicated by the clinical
evoked potentials (EP)
signs and/or abnormalities. Of special interest in this
 bone scintigraphy to detect increased bone activity
regard are the palpable pelvic bones and the roof of
 surgical exploration
arthroscopy
the pelvic canal formed by the ventral side of the sacral
vertebrae and the first vertebrae of the tail. In a few
imaging techniques such as computed tomography
(CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), single-
cases the last lumbar vertebrae can also be felt.
Attention is given to the outline, consistency, and
 photon emission computed tomography (SPECT),
and ultrasonography
 painfulness of the palpable bones.
17.7 Further examination
17.8 Arthrocentesis
The following possibilities exist for further examination:
Introduction
 repeated examination together with neurological
Arthrocentesis is a relatively quick and simple diagnostic
examination
and therapeutic procedure. Cytological, biochemical,
 repeated examination under sedation or general or
andbacteriologicalexamination of the synovialfluid
lumbar anesthesia, although this prevents checking
can be used for diagnosis. Therapeutic arthrocentesis is
156
Arthrocentesis
performed to decompress joints enlarged by effusion and
most often aspirated are those of the shoulder, elbow,
for intra-articular administration of drugs. The patient is
carpus, hip, stifle, and tarsus. If there is severe joint
restrained firmly and the leg of the joint to be punctured
effusion, aspiration can be performed at the site of
is also held firmly, for especially the penetration of the
maximal bulging. When there is less pronounced joint
joint capsule is painful. The patient is sedated if not
effusion, the following guidelines can be used.
cooperative. The area is prepared aseptically (clipping,
scrubbing, and disinfection) and sterile gloves are
Shoulder joint
worn. Usually an 18-22G needle (see § 25.2.2), 3-6 cm
The patient is in lateral recumbency with the joint to be
long, is used with a 5- or 10-ml syringe. After insertion
of the needl into the joint, the plunger is drawn back
punctured on the upper side and the leg partly flexed.
The acromion of the scapula and the greater tubercle
2-3 ml and synovia slowly enters the syringe. It may be 
 of the humerus are the reference points. The shoulder
necessary to rotate the needle or to move it slightly
back and forth to obtain the synovia. Traction on the
joint is entered from the craniolateral direction with a
plunger is released before the needle and syringe are
sufficiently long needle {Fig. 17.31). The needle passes
the supraglenoid tuberosity caudolaterally, the greater
withdrawn. The fluid is evaluated for volume, color,
tubercle proximolaterally, and the acromion ventrally.
transpa rency, and viscosity.
It enters the joint between the distolateral edge of the
The volume of the synovia varies considerably per
glenoid cavity of the scapula and the proximolateral
joint. In healthy animals it is practically colorless,
side of the humeral head.
transparent, and viscous. Abnormal synovia is colored
(e.g-, yellow or red), opaque (cells or fibrin), and
watery (less viscous). Abnormal synovia may indicate
Eibow joint
the presence of inflammation, which can be septic or
The patient is in lateral recumbency with the joint to be
aseptic. If blood is aspirated as soon as the joint is
 punctured on the upper side and the leg partly flexed.
penetrated, there is bleeding in the joint (hemarthrosis).
The lateral epicondyle of the humerus, the anconeal
A small string of blood in the aspirated fluid indicates
muscle (lateral), and the olecranon are the reference
iatrogenic mixing and damage to a small vessel, and
points. The joint is entered from the caudolateral
may hamper the cytological interpretation. The joints
direction above the line between the lateral epicondyle
Fig. 17.31 Landmarks for aspiration of the shoulder joint A.
the elbow joint B. and the carpal joint C.
157
 Chapter 17:
LOCOMOTOR SYSTEM
of the humerus and the olecranon (Fig. 17.31b). The
Hip joint
needle is inserted craniomedially, passing the olecranon
The hip joint can be entered from either the dorsal or the
laterally and the lateral humeral epicondyle medially,
ventral side. For the dorsal approach the patient is in
in the direction of the anconeal process.
lateral recumbency with the joint to be punctured
upward. The reference point is the major trochanter
Corpof joints
of the femur. The stifle is grasped to slightly abduct and
The carpal joints  comprise the  antebrachiocarpal
exorotate the femur. The needle is inserted proximal and
(radiocarpal and ulnocarpal) joints, the intercarpal
cranial to the major trochanter and then moved caudally
joints, and the carpometacarpal joints. Of these the
in the direction of the hip joint (Fig. 17.32a).
radiocarpal joint is aspirated most frequently. A short
 For the ventral approach to the hip joint the patient is
needle is sufficient. All carpal joints are entered from the
in dorsal recumbency and the femur is abducted as far as
dorsal side (Fig. 17.31). The patient may be in dorsal or 
possible and held perpendicular to the longitudinal axis
lateral recumbency, with the carpus flexed. In order to
of the body. The easily palpated belly of the pectineus
avoid damage to blood vessels, tendons, and nerves, the 
muscle is the reference point. The ventral part of the
radiocarpal joint is entered just medial or just lateral to
hip joint is dorsal to it and the needle is inserted just
the midsagittal articular surface. The radiocarpal joint
caudal to it and moved from caudal to cranial into the
does not communicate with the intercarpal and
hip joint, lateral to the ventral edge of the acetabulum
carpometacarpal joints. The latter compartment is
and medial to the head of the femur. If inserted further,
entered separately, between the radiocarpal bone and the
the needle will meet resistance from the ligament of the
second and third carpal bones (intercarpal).
head of the femur.
A
Fig. 17.32 Landmarks for aspiration of the
hip joint A. the stifle joint B. and the 
tarsocrural joint C.
158
Arthrocentesis
Stiffe joint
Torsocrurol joint
The stifle joint is the joint most often and most easily
The tarsocrural joint can be punctured from either the
aspirated. The patient is in lateral recumbency with the
dorsal or the plantar surface, as well as medially or
stifle joint held flexed at an angle of 90°, which is the
a o s e ads is a a
best position for observing bulging of the joint as a
proximal lateroplantar joint sac (Fig. 17.32c). The
result of overfilling. The patella, patellar ligament, and
patient is in lateral recumbency with the joint upward.
tibial tuberosity are the reference points. The needle is
The distal fibula {lateral malleolus), the distal tibia
inserted halfway between the patella and the tibial
(lateral), and the calcaneus are the reference points. The
tuberosity, either medial or lateral to the patellar
space between the lateral malleolus and the distal tibia
ligament (Fig. 17.32b). Then the needle is moved in the
is palpated while the tarsocrural joint is flexed. The
needle is directed dorsomedially and distally, more or
femur. The needle must pass through the large amount
less parallel to the calcaneus. In the dorsal approach to
of fat that separates the patellar ligament from the
the joint, the needle is inserted in the plantar direction
joint capsule and thus in a large dog it may need to be
between the tibia and the talus, lateral to the extensor
inserted fully.
tendons.
References
1 Arnoczky SP. Tarvin GB. Physical examination ofthe musculoskeletal
7 Johnson AL. Hulse DA. Fundamentals of orthopedic surgery and
system. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1981: 3:575-593
fracture treatment. In: Fossum TW. ed. Small animal surgery. 2nd
2 Piermattei D. Flo G. DeCamp C. Brinker. Piermattei and Flo's
edn. St. Louis: Mosby: 2002:chapter 33.
Handbook of small animmal orthopedics and fracture repair. 4th edn.
8 Barr ARS. Houlton JEF. Clinical investigation of the lame dog.
Philadelphia: Saunders: 2006.
J Small Anim Pract 1988: 29:695-703.
 3 Schrader SC. Prieur WD. Bruse S. Diagnosis: historical. physical.
9 Chrisman CL. Problems in small animal neurology. 2nd edn.
and ancillary examinations. In: Olmstedad ML. ed. Small animal 
 Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger: 1991.
orthopedics. St. Louis: Mosby: 1995.
10 van Rens ThJG. Handleiding bij orthopedisch onderzoek (Manual for
 4 Newton CD. Nunamaker DM. Textbook of small animal orthopedics.
orthopedic examination). Utrecht/Antwerp: Bohn. Scheltema & 
 Phila delphia: Lippincott: 1985:chapter 6.
Holkema: 1987.
5 Brunnberg L. Lahmheitsdiagnostik beim Hund. Untersuchung.
11 Henderson RA. Milton JL. The tibial compression mechanism:
Diagnose. Therapiehinweise. Gifhorn: Voigt: 1998.
a diagnostic aid in stifle injuries. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1978:
 6 Sumner-Smith G. Decision making in small animal orthopedic
14:474-479.
surgery. Toronto: Decker: 1988.
159
18
Nervous system
J.J. van Nes, B.P. Meij, and L. van Ham
 Chapter contents
introduction 169
Knuckling-over reflex (Fig. 18.2) 169
18.1 History 161
Hopping (Fig. 18.3) 170
Eoting ond swollowing problems 161
Plocing reoctions (Fig. 18.4) 170
Altered vocolizotion (dysphonio) 161
18.2.6 Spinal reflexes 171
Disturbed tocomotion 161
Introduction 171
Changed habits or movements 162
Potelior ligoment reflex (Fig. 18.5) 171
Supplement to the history 163
Flexor reflex (Fig. 18.6) 171
18.2 Neurological examination 163
Reflex of the m. extensor corpi radialis
18.2.1 Introduction 163
(Fig. 18.5) 172
18.2.2 Behavior and the level of
Anol/Perineol reflex 172
consciousness 163
Pathologicat reflexes 172
Behovior 163
Evoluotion of the spinol reflexes 172
Levet of consciousness 163
18.2.7 Pain perception 172
18.2.3 Locomotion and posture 163
Introduction 172
Locomotion 163
Anatomy 172
 Posture 165
 Exomination of poin perception (Fig. 18.7) 173
18.2.4 Head 166
18.3 Notation 173
Inspection 166
18.4 Further examination 173
Heod in toto' 166
Eors 166
 Chewing muscles 167
The nervous system is a complex measuring and regulating
Fociat muscies 167
system that receives information via sensory components
 Eyes. eyelids. ond paipebral fissures 167
 and then stores and processes this information (integration
Pupils 167
   s  i 
Lower jow 167
functions as a powerful i
interactive communication
Poipotion of the heod 168
network that influences almost all organ systems and
Tongue 168
contributes to the regulation of the internal milieu. It
Cerebrol reflexes 168
enables the organism to maintain itself in the environment.
Vision 169
The intrinsic functions of the nervous system
Hearing (vestibulocochlear nerve. Vll) 169
{reception, conduction, transmission of signals) cannot
The sense of smell (olfctory nenve. I) 169
be observed by physical examination, but the end
18.2.5 Postural reactions 169
effect of the neuronal activity, the specific motor
ativity, can be observed quite well. Spontaneous
160
History
motor activity (behavior, locomotion, posture, eye
drinking, etc., can have a disturbance of the motor
 
function of the tongue, the facial muscles, and/or the
reactions) provide an impression of the function of the
masticatory muscles.
nervous system. Together with the results of other parts
Swallowing problems (dysphagia) can be shown by the
of the physical examination, they usually make it
observation that the animal eats with slow swallowing
 possible to localize an observed dysfunction.
actions (sometimes with the neck extended), coughing
The morphology of the nervous system can only be
hard to clear its throat, and gagging. There can also
examined by diagnostic imaging, but the clinical value of 
be abnormal swallowing, sometimes with eructation
imaging techniques strongly depends upon the quality
of swallowed air. Such a clinical picture is consistent
of both the history and the physical examination, as well
with a pharyngeal problem.
as on the interpretation of the findings. An effectively
Not only abnormalities in the functioning of the
oriented additional examination is not possible when
muscles that are directly involved in the taking in of
         
food but also abnormalities in the spinal column and/
Conversely, the results of diagnostic imaging are difficult
or extremities can hinder food intake. Examples are
to interpret when the history and physical examination
neck pain, which can cause problems in eating from
have not been carried out carefully. It is then difficult
a pan on the floor, or generalized muscle weakness,
to make a causal connection between the observed
which may cause the animal to lie down in order to
    
eat from a pan on the floor.
defined functional disturbance.
As pointed out in § 2.5, the information provided by
Altered vocofizotion (dysphonio)
the signalment, history, and general impression leads to
formulation of the iatrotropic problems (§ 3.1.1). These
Owners rarely report spontaneously that the animal's
problems are the basis for deciding upon further
vocalization has changed, but directed questions may
physical examination. When this concerns neurological
reveal a well-defined problem (dysphonia) and
examination, its purpose will be to provide answers to
consequently lead to appropriate differential diagnoses.
the following questions:
Apart from local lesions of the laryngeal muscles or
Is there a functional disturbance of the nervous
a regional disturbance in innervation, a systemic
system?
disease such as myasthenia gravis, polyneuropathy, or
Where is this disturbance localized?
polymyositis can hamper the function of the vocal cords.
-What are the differential diagnoses?
At this stage it is often possible to say something about
Disturbed focomotion
the prognosis (with and without treatment), and to
Especially when there are less impressive locomotion
draw up a diagnostic and/or therapeutic plan.
disorders, additional questions must be asked in order
to obtain a picture of the type of disturbance (lameness,
18.1 History
paresis, ataxia). This often occurs in the interplay of the 
general impression and the history, in which the owner
As the foregoing suggests, the symptoms of neurological
explains or shows what the problem is. Something that
disturbances are often characterized by abnormal
  a  sm u a on  s
motor activity {abnormal behavior, seizures, disturbed
immediately by observing how the dog walks, for
locomotion). The onset and course of the symptoms
example: “Look, you can see it now. There, that's what
should be elucidated (acute or insidious onset, gradually
I mean! It may prove useful to ask the owner for a
and continuously worsening or with varying intensity,
description that allows the veterinarian to see it: *Please
occurring periodically or in attacks).
try to give a description so that I can see it through
The most important symptoms resulting from a
your eyes'.
dysfunction of the nervous system are described below,
 In order to differentiate between neurogenic, myogenic,
together with some suggestions for additional questions
and orthopedic disorders of locomotion, the following
to further define the problem.
 guidelines can be of help:
 Neurogenic/myogenic causes are in general
Eoting ond swollowing probtems
continuously present, without marked changes in
Additional questions are asked to try to differentiate
intensity.
between problems in the use of the jaws, teeth, and
 Increa sing intensity during exertion and then
tongue, as opposed to problems in swallowing. As an
e nosnuonau e sisaains isau bia juawaaoidu
example, an animal that makes a mess of eating, lets
problem.
food fall out of its mouth, salivates excessively while
A locomotion disturbance affecting only one leg is
trying to eat and drink, splashes water all over while
usually of orthopedic origin.
161
Chapter 18:
NERVOUS SYSTEM
 Definite signs of pain with a locomotion
don't want to walk very far and soon stop to sit or
disturbance make a primary neurogenic
lie down. Cats with muscle weakness (paresis) of
involvement unlikely.
the hind legs may try to pull themselves forward or
 Shifting localization of the locomotion disturbance
upward with the front legs.
strongly indicates an orthopedic problem.
These guidelines should obviously be used with some
Chonged hobits or movements
care, but in the absence of more objective information,
With additional questions we try to classify the signs as
     o    
1 seizures, 2 fainting spells, or 3 abnormal behavior.
as the basis for formulating the problem and choosing
These
symptoms
usually  occur periodically
Or
between an orthopedic and a neurological examination.
paroxysmally (in attacks), and therefore quite specific
 If the results of the chosen examination then seem to
lapro ui aunid iea e uio ot papeau are susnb
conflict with the guidelines, the problem formulation
to define the problem.
must be revised.
1   Epileptic seizures can usually be recognized clearly
in the history. Crying and howling are very
The differentiation between ataxia and paresis can also
be very difficult, especially when the signs are not very
uncommon during an epileptic seizure and point
prominent and are not continuous. Additional history
instead to an episode of pain. Additional questions
can give a decisive answer and thereby sharpen the
about the position of the head and about the
 development of the cramps can make this clear.
problem formulation. The questions have a strongly
 2  Fainting spells are characterized by attacks of
searching character:
collapsing or sagging down. In contrast to
 In search of signs pointing to ataxia, questions are
asked about differences between walking on a
epileptic seizures, no twitching occurs and no
cramps are seen, but a fainting spell can also
smooth surface and walking on a rough surface.
Dragging the nails on the floor is a strong
sometimes progress to a seizure.
Owners often have difficulty knowing whether or
indication of disturbed proprioception and thus
not the animal is unconscious during a seizure or
ataxia. Animals with ataxia very easily lose their
fainting spell. Simply asking *Was the animal
footing on a smooth surface and their feet slide out
unconscious?? does not always produce an answer
from under them. Other movements, which make
demands upon good coordination (rapid turning,
that accurately describes the situation, e.g., 'No,
certainly not, because he was looking at me while he
 jumping up in enthusiastic greeting, trying to
quickly recover from stumbling) may not always be
was twitching'. It is important to ask owners for
fully successful. The animal may thus fall down, or
their observations and not for their interpretation.
3 For the history in patients with problem behavior,
fly straight ahead when trying to turn suddenly, or
such as forms of aggression and anxiety, the reader
even make a complete somersault. When shaking
itself or shaking its head, the animal must
is referred to Chapter 22. The differentiation
between problerm behavior and abnormal behavior
sometimes make one or more corrective steps in
can often be made on the basis of the following
order to remain standing. Walking in a straight line
definitions:
is not always possible; the animal has a tendency to
- Problem behavior is the normal behavior for
drift off the track. As one owner aptly expressed it,
this kind of animal that is, however, a
the animal had become ‘very sensitive to side
hindrance, damaging, and/or dangerous.
winds'. Sometimes affected animals seek some
Abnormal behavior is behavior that is not
support and so walk along leaning against the wall.
Symptoms of ataxia do not always have to be
related to an objective, is markedly increased or
decreased in frequency, or is characterized by
manifest during walking; animals with static ataxia
abnormal motor activity.
wobble or shake the head, or sometimes these
 movements are more like trembling.
To ask whether the patient beha ves normally often results
 In search of signs of paresis {muscle weakness), we
in an answer that has no informative value {see also
ask questions to learn about the animal's muscular
§ 6.1.3). Instead, it is often helpful to sketch in a few
strength. This may lead the owner to report that
words possible situations that can reveal whether there is
the animal has difficulty standing up, can only
abnormal behavior, such as compulsive movements
climb stairs with difficulty or not at all, and is less
(pressing,
,compulsive walking, circling movements,
able to jump (over a hedge, into the car, onto a
insufficient recognition of the surroundings and owner,
chair or sofa). When jumping off again, the animal
i.e-,
disorientation), and
deterioration(
of
learned
sometimes falls through its front legs and
behavior {urinating in the house, not responding to
sometimes the rear legs also. Such animals often
rattling of the leash or the food bowl). These behavioral
162
Neurological examination
changes occur very slowly, mostly in elderly dogs, and
Sometimes abnormal behavior is observed during
therefore they may be regarded by the owners as part of
the examination itself, e.g-, disorientation, compulsive
aging. Specific questions with examples may bring help:
movements (pushing against the wall, walking in
*Do you sometimes see him just standing there as though
circles), or convulsions.
he is dreaming? Is it sometimes difficult to make contact
with him? Does he wander aimlessly around the room?
Level of consciousness
Does he still show enthusiasm when visitors arrive?" As
Consciousness is being aware of the surroundings and
always, these questions should be geared to the mood
of oneself. The philosophical concept ‘oneself” is not
 and the perception of the owner.
applicable to dogs or cats. Being aware of the
surroundings can only be determined by a subjective
Supplement to the history
interpretation of the animal's behavior. The following
When the history does not sufficiently clarify the
levels of consciousness can be distinguished:
patient's symptoms and when the patient does not
- Attentive, alert (responding to the surroundings).
exhibit them during the examination, the owner might
 If asleep, can be awakened with minimal stimuli.
be asked to make a video recording of them at home.
The state of being awake persists for a longer time.
This may clarify the locomotion disturbance and
Sopor (depression, somnolence). Can be awakened
ena ble formulation of the problem.
by light stimuli but in the absence of these stimuli,
quickly falls back into the original state.
18.2 Neurological examination
Stupor. Can only be awakened by strong stimuli.
18.2.1 Introduction
Corma. Cannot be awakened.
 In order to evaluate the reproducibility of the response to a
The completeness of the examination may vary with the
given stimulus, it is necessary to carefully describe the
problem. In some cases a selected part of the
stimulus as well as the response: duration, intensity, and
neurological examination will suffice. For example, in
character of the stimuli; nature and duration of the
a patient with perfect locomotion it is not very useful
response.
to examine postural reactions and spinal reflexes. In a
Examples:
patient presented solely
because of seizures, the
 1 Stimulus: a few loud hand-claps. Reaction: the dog
examination can be confined to the head. But such a
raises its head, points it ears, and turns its head in
selection obviously depends on a well-defined problem
the direction from which the sound is coming.
that is beyond doubt.
 This reaction remains for a few seconds and then
The order in which the different parts of the
the dog again 'goes to sleep'.
examination are completed is mainly determined by the
2 Stimulus: using a hemostat to clamp very strongly
degree of cooperation of the patient, which usually
on the cuticle at the base of the toenail. Reaction:
improves as the examination progresses.
that leg is quickly flexed. The dog opens its eyes
Trying to perform the examination in spite of strong
and very briefly raises its head a few centimeters.
resistance by the patient, or by use of force or coercion,
makes both the observations and their interpretation
In both examples we must describe the level of
difficult. Gaining the cooperation of the owner and the
consciousness as stupor. The examples point out that the
 patient will add much to the diagnostic process.
difference between levels is rather artificial and that
The necessary instruments consist of (1) a reflex hammer
within levels of consciousness there can be large
(Taylor type), (2) a strong hemostat {arterial clamp), and
differences in intensity (ordinal scale,  3.1.2). The second
(3) a small, bright penlight ($ 4.2). The performance of the
d a m u r aun in sus adxa
neurological examination is described below point by
responds must fulfil certain conditions. The flexor reflex
point. The anatomical and physiological background is
is a spinal reflex and provides no information about the 
summarized and a few abnormalities are explained.
cerebral functions! However, the fact that the dog also
Interpretation of the results is given only brief attention.
responds by opening its eyes and raising its head indicates
that there is also conscious pain perception (§ 18.2.7).
18.2.2 Behavior and the level of
consciousness
18.2.3 Locomotion and posture
Behovior
Locomotion
The evaluation of abnormal behavior is not possible if
Normal locomotion can be described as the supple,
it occurs paroxysmally or consists of subtle changes. In
symmetrical, and well-coordinated movement of the
sumo an uon padap is uo aua sas as
head, trunk, and extremities that results in effective
descriptions.
propulsion of the body. Evaluation of locomotion must
163
 Chapter 18:
NERVOUS SYSTEM
 be undertaken in a spacious area with a rough floor or
Centralmotorsystem
 ground surface.
 Disturbed locomotion can be caused by:
1 reduced strength
2  reduced coordination
3 mechanical interference
Peripheral motor system
Reflex arc
4involuntary movements or additional movements
In their pure forms these causes result in characteristic
locomotive abnormalities. Often, however, the disturbed
locomotion is the result of a combination of causes.
Fig. 18.1 Central motor system (CMS) and peripheral motor
system (PMS)
1 Strength. The strength necessary to overcome gravity
 and to propel and control the movements of the body is
axons run in the descending motor tracts of the spinal
cord. These axons carry the information to the neurons
 provided by the striated muscles. This potential strength
can only become operational if the motor nervous 
of the peripheral motor system.
The PMS has its cell bodies in the ventral column of
system receives the correct integrated information,
the gray matter in the spinal cord. The axons run in
transmits it, and then transfers it to the muscles.
the ventral roots and the spinal nerves with the
Paresis and paralysis refer to the decrease and the
peripheral nerves to the skeletal muscles. Functional
absence of voluntary force or movement. In animals it is
not possi ble to determine whether the exertion of force or
disorders of both systems are associated with reduction
movement is under the influence of *will. Thus it is better 
in muscle strength.
to speak of meaningful movements. Especially when there
2 Coordination. The coordination of locomotion is
is doubt about the presence of severe tetraparesis or
largely a function of the sensory nervous system. The
tetraparalysis, it is necessary to verify whether meaningful
movements are made. This may be very difficult: a dog
accent lies mainly on the reception and integration of
information. The impulses from receptors in the skin,
may make weak pedaling movements,
strongly
mimicking attempts to crawl forward. When pedaling
muscles, tendons, and ligaments, as well as visual,
vestibular, and olfactory impulses, are integrated into a
movements can be provoked by tempting the animal with
，the movements are
       ,
some food,
purposeful
 and
for
the voluntary muscles. In the integration
 consequently there is tetraparesis. When these movements
of
information the cerebellum and the vestibular nuclei
 Occur spontaneously {unrelated to external stimuli) and
are more or less continuously present, they are not
play a central role. Functional disturbances of the
sensors, the peripheral sensory nerves, the ascending
 purposeful and the term tetraparalysis is applied.
tracts in the spinal cord, and the integration centers 
A frequent misconception is that the presence of
increased muscle tone means that there is paresis
can cause ataxia or incoordination.
rather than complete paralysis. The degree of hyper- or
Ataxia or incoordination can be shown by:
abnormal position or relation of head,trunk,or
hypotonicity does not play a role in the differentiation
limbs: legs wide apart, unstable, continually
between paresis and paralysis. Rather, it is the presence
making corrective movements, not able to keep the
or absence of meaningful use of the two rear limbs that
head still, tendency to fall down
determines whether there is paresis or paralysis.
disturbed locomotion: staggering, swaying,
 Depending on the extremities involved, the following
walking with feet wide apart, stepping on its own
terms are used:
monoparesisfparalysis: one limb
toes, stumbling in front and rear legs in different
rhythms, falling down when turning or only
hemiparesis/paralysis: one lateral half of the body
paraparesis/paralysis: rear limbs
preventing this by great corrective movements
intention ataxia: tremor of the head occurring and/
tetraparesis/paralysis: all limbs
The term 'plegia', as in hemiplegia, is also used in place
or worsening during the animal's attempts to
of paralysis but mainly to indicate the very sudden
position its head in a certain direction; this
development of paralysis.
“focusing' can be directed toward an auditory,
For clinical purposes, the motor nervous system is 
visual, or olfactory stimulus. This form of ataxia
divided into two systems (Fig. 18.1): the central motor
is very characteristic of a cerebellar dysfunction.
dysmetria: an abnormality in the fine control of
system (CMS) and the peripheral motor system (PMS).
movements, causing them to go in all directions
The CMS is a component of the central nervous system.
beyond the target
The cell bodies are located in the motor cortex, basal
hypermetria: continual overshooting of the goal of
ganglia, and nuclei of the midbrain and medulla. The
the movement in one direction, in the sagittal plane
164
Neurological examination
3 Mechanicat defects. In these locomotion problems
Head: see § 18.2.4 and § 17.6.
there is an underlying functional disorder of the
Spinal column: see also § 17.6. Superficial palpation
supporting system (muscles, tendons, ligaments, joints,
is performed by standing beside the animal and
skeletonj. Also, the pain which occurs with movement
beginning directly caudal to the head. With the entire
causes a mechanical limitation of movement!
palmar surface of the hands, contact with the body
All of these are better described as lamenesses (§ 17.3.2).
surface is maintained while letting the spinal column
The difference between a mechanical and a neurological
 pass under the hands. Attention is given to its form 
cause of a locomotion disturbance cannot always be
and to any signs of pain.
determined  from  the  locomotion  itself.
Moreover,
Deep palpation proceeds in the same direction, not in
combinations are not unusual. To differentiate it is
spuu aui sul aq inq uoou snonuo qoows e
necessary to examine both the locomotive system and the
skip from place to place, pinching and pressing deeply.
nervous system.
The various palpable parts of the skeleton must be
examined in turn: the wings of the atlas and the other
4 Invotuntary
movements. These
vertebral processes in the neck (particularly of C6) and
movement
 u u    s
the thoracic and lumbar parts of the spinal column.
There they indicate a functional disturbance of the
The spinal processes and the spaces between these
extrapyramidal system. Various terms and names of
processes are palpated deeply; they can also be tapped
with the reflex hammer. Attention is given to signs of
clear meaning. Some of these also appear, according to
pain, muscular tension, and crepitation.
the fashion of the moment, in the veterinary literature.
Limbs (see also Chapter 17). Palpation of the limbs
Although some of these abnormal movements in the
also proceeds in two phases, superficial and deep, and
from proximal to distal. Superficial and deep palpation
dog and cat seem to outwardly resemble those of
extrapyramidal disorders in man, they seldom have an
are carried out with the animal standing. The examiner
extrapyramidal cause.
stands in front of the animal to palpate the front legs
The following are a few of the most commonly used
 from proximal to distal, especially taking note of changes
terms in veterinary neurology.
in form and consistency of the muscles (hypertrophy,
Tremor: rhythmic trembling of antagonistic muscle
atrophy). Sometimes temperature changes are noted. By
deep palpation of the muscles an impression can be
groups
 si s  i e ro 
Tic: nonrhythmic contractions of certain muscle
 groups, especially the facial muscles
pain). The rear legs are examined by standing behind the
Myoclonia: strong rhythmic contractions of a muscle
animal and palpating from proximal to distal,
or a muscle group
symmetrically.
If there is doubt about the findings it is advisable to
repeat the examination with the animal lying on its
Posture
side (before testing the spinal reflexes).
Inspection. Normal posture is (
characterized  by
symmetrical and equal bearing of weight by all limbs,
Passive movements (see olso § 17.6). In this
together with symmetrical positioning of the head,
examination the clinician moves the parts of the body
neck, trunk, and tail as appropriate for the breed. All
of the passive patient. The passive movement of the
visually observable abnormalities in posture must be
head, neck, and vertebral column is performed
further described in terms of location, direction, and time:
routinely in the orthopedic examination but in the
- back curved dorsally (kyphosis)
neurological examination only in selected cases, namely,
back curved ventrally (lordosis)
if there is suspicion of a spinal problem. During passive
back curved laterally, left or right (scoliosis)
movements of the vertebral column attention is given to
 head tilted, to left or right 
moveability, pain, and crepitation.
- head bent down (periodically, paroxysmally)
It should be realized that:
tail hanging down, instead of in the usual raised
1
 Observations are only reliable when repeatable.
position
2  Passive movements should be carried out carefully
etcetera!
and are contraindicated if there is suspicion of
instability, luxation, or a fracture.
Patpation ond percussion. Palpation of the head,
3 Careful performance of palpation and percussion
spinal column, and limbs is, unfortunately, an often
usually makes passive movements unnecessary.
neglected part of the neurologicalé
examination,
although it is simple to perform and, if it reveals
Passive movement of the bead and neck. The head can
abnormalities, it can make an important contribution
be moved ventrally and dorsally in relation to the
to the diagnosis.
cervical vertebrae. The head can also be rotated in
165
Chapter 18:
NERVOUS SYSTEM
relation to the neck. While performing these movements,
The loss of this inhibiting influence {as in a spinal cord
One should try to fix the vertebrae caudal to C2.
lesion) thus leads to hypertonia of the extensors of the
For passive movement of the cervical vertebrae
 front legs (hyperextension) and paralysis of the hind legs.
l i at  a ai  a o a
cervical vertebrae are fixed. The neck can then be
18.2.4 Head
 moved in both vertical and horizontal directions.
Passive movement of the back. The examiner stands
This examination consists of inspection, palpation,
behind the animal and uses both hands to grasp the hind
testing of the cerebral reflexes, and examination of
legs proximal to the stifle joints. In the standing animal
vision, hearing, and the sense of smell.
the lumbar and lumbosacral segments of the vertebral
column can then be moved dorsally and ventrally. In
inspection
large dogs this is performed more easily in lateral
We can think of the head as being built up of the skull
recumbency. In the standing animal the caudal part of
chewing muscles, facial muscles, ears, eyes, skin, lower
the vertebral column can also be bent laterally and
jaw, and upper jaw. Careful inspection, while standing
turned around its axis. For a more detailed description of
directly in front of the patient with its head resting on
the passive movements of the vertebral column, see § 17.6.
your hand, can reveal abnormalities in position, form,
and movement.
Muscle tonus. The resistance that is revealed by passive
The inspection of the head “in toto’ and of its
movement of the limbs can give an impression of the tonus
component parts will be discussed, with some anatomical
 Of the skeletal muscles involved. This exa mination must be
information. The abnormalities will be discussed in terms
 performed both while the animal is standing and while it is 
of position, form, and movement, and occasionally a
lying down. With the animal standing, each foot is grasped
cause will be mentioned. Inspection and palpation are
individually and moved in the direction of the trunk. If this
discussed separately, although they sometimes overlap.
results in passive bending and no active flexing, a
continual slight resistance will be felt due to muscle
Heod 'in toto
tonus. After the foot is released from this position, its
Position. Various abnormal positions of the head in
"fall' will be slightly slowed. When the animal is lying on
relation to the neck and/or trunk can be distinguished.
its side, only the upper two limbs are examined.
The direction, the degree of abnormality, and the
The degree to which muscle tonus can vary can be
 progress of the abnormality with time must be described:
described as follows:
tilted on the longitudinal axis: right or left, 30°,
- normotony: normal tonus
90°,etc.
atony: no tonus
extended: continuous or episodic
 hypotonia: reduced tonus
flexed
 hypertonia: increased tonus (spastic, rigid)
- turned laterally: left or right in a horizontal plane
clasp-knife phenomenon: sudden change from
hypertonia to hypotonia
Shape. The shape of the head is mainly determined by
The variation in muscle tonus in healthy dogs is so great
the skull and the chewing muscles. Abnormalities can
that only very clear symmetrical abnormalities or
be classified as:
asymmetry can be described as pathologic changes. The
 symmetrical changes (congenital hydrocephalus,
clinical significance of abnormalities in muscle tonus is
edema, bilateral atrophy of chewing muscles)
vague and therefore very small.
 asymmetrical changes (neoplasia, hematoma,
This is not true for the Schiff-Sherrington phenomenon,
fracture, unilateral atrophy of the chewing muscles)
 a combination of hypertonia of the front legs and posterior
paralysis. The presence of the Schiff-Sherrington
Mobility. Reduced mobility is often associated with one
phenomenon indicates a lesion in the spinal cord caudal
of the abnormal positions. Disturbed or just increased
to the second thoracic vertebra (T2) and almost always
mobility is seen in ataxia of the head or in myoclonias
cranial to the third lumbar spinal segment (most often at
of the neck muscles.
the level of the third lumbar vertebra, L3).
In the gray matter of the spinal cord from L2 to L6
Eors
there are integration cells which use information from
Form. See Chapter 20.
the proprioceptive organs of the rear limbs to bring
Position. This is determined by the cartilage of the
about—via the ascending tracts in the spinal cord—a
 pinna and the tonus of the auricular musculature
retarding effect on the peripheral motor system of the  (n. facialis, VIl). A unilaterally drooping ear can be the
front legs. The effect is mainly on muscles whose
result of atony of the dorsal auricular muscles due to,
function is to resist gravity, in other words, the extensors.
for example, paralysis of n. facialis.
166
Neurological examination
Chewing muscies
Mobility. Nystagmus is a usually rhythmic movement
of one or both eyes. Different types of nystagmus can be
Anatomy. Involved are:
- m. temporalis, m. masseter
distinguished by:
-n. mandibularis (n. trigeminus, V)
speed of the oscillating movements
● In pendular nystagmus the movements in both
Form. Either hypertrophy or atrophy can occur on one
 directions are at the same speed.
● Phasic nystagmus consists of a slow movement
or both sides.
in one direction followed by a rapid return
Motility. Rhythmic or nonrhythmic contractions of
the chewing muscles can occur episodically. These
movement in the opposite direction. Since the
myoclonia can be seen at the onset as well as during an
rapid phase is easiest to evaluate, it determines
the naming of the direction of the nystagmus.
epileptic seizure, but also unrelated to a seizure. The
direction: horizontal, vertical, rotating
muscle contractions can be associated with movements
of the lower jaw.
time of occurrence
● Spontaneous nystagmus is present continuously.
Position. Sagging of the lower jaw can be the result
of paralysis of the chewing muscles. Palpation and
● Positional nystagmus occurs only when the head
passive movement of the lower jaw can give
is in certain fixed positions.
● Positional-change nystagmus occurs directly
information a bout this.
after changes in the position of the head and
Focial muscles
then gradually disappears.
● Photokinetic nystagmus is physiological and occurs
Anatomy. The superficial muscles of the head, lips,
when the eyes follow rapidly passing objects.
cheeks (muscles of expression), ears, and eyelids are
innervated by n. facialis. The exception is m. levator
Atactic eye movements are a special form of nystagmus.
palpebrae
superioris,
whichis
innervated
by
They vary nonrhythmically in speed and direction.
The movements of the eye are easiest to evaluate by
n. oculomotorius, II.
 Position. Changes in muscle tone cause positional
lifting the upper eyelid to visualize the white sclera.
changes and a change in the facial expression. If these
Pupils
The owner can sometimes say something about this, if
Anatomy. Involved are:
asked specifically about it.
 mm. sphincter pupillae; parasympathetic (II1),
Hypertonia can occur in tetanus, causing wrinkling of
narrowing
the skin between the ears and a so-ca lled ‘sardonic grin'
 mm. dilator pupillae; sympathetic, widening
in which the corners of the mouth are retracted caudally,
the eyelids are slit-shaped, and the expression is rigid.
Form. (see Chapter 19).
Hypotonia can be symmetrical or asymmetrical. The
Position:
head acquires a flat, sad, expressionless appearance.
miosis = narrowing of the pupil without widening
Motility. Myoclonia can also develop in the facial
in darkness
muscles.
mydriasis = dilation of the pupil, with or without
an intact pupil reflex
Eyes, eyetids, ond poipebrol fissures
Horner's syndrome = combination of unilateral
Anatomy. Involved are:
miosis, protrusion of the nictitating membrane,
m. orbicularis oculi; closing of the eyelids, n. facialis
and ptosis (drooping of the upper eyelid), as the
 m. levator palpebrae superioris; raising upper
result of loss of sympathetic innervation
eyelid, n. oculomotorius
 anisocoria = unequal size of the pupils
 smooth muscle fiber, present in the m. levator and in
the nictitating membrane (sympathetic innervation)
Mobility. The pupillary reflex is described with cerebral
reflexes (see Chapter 19).
Form. See Chapter 19.
Position of the eye. The position of the eye depends
Lower jow
on the tonus of the muscles of the eye and retrobulbar
Anatomy. Involved are:
structures. Strabismus is an abnormal position of the
chewing muscles: m. masseter, m. temporalis,
eye and it can be present continuously, independent of
 m. pterigoideus, m. digastricus
the position of the head, or only during certain
n. mandibularis (n. trigeminus, V).
positions or after changes in position. Strabismus can
occur in one or both eyes. The direction in which the
Position. Sagging lower jaw in paresis or paralysis of
position is abnormal can also vary.
the n. mandibularis.
167
 Chapter 18:
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Mobility. Clonic contractions of the chewing muscles 
 reflex is important in the neurological examination.
can cause rhythmic movement of the lower jaw. Limited Asymmetry of the reactions is certainly abnormal. Even
or painful movement of the lower jaw can result from
1 the slightest narrowing of the pupil is enough to say
spasm of the chewing muscles due to tetanus, myositis
that the reflex is present. When there is doubt, the
of the chewing muscles, retrobulbar abscess, and
conditions of the test should be optimized: darker
abnormalities in the mandibular joints {luxation,
surroundings and a stronger light source (see § 19.4.11).
fracture, arthrosis).
Anatomy. Retina → n. opticus → tractus opticus
 pretectum → nucleus Edinger- Westphal (parasympathetic)
Polpotion of the heod
the
parasympathetic 
fibers pass
with
the
This consists of superficial and deep palpation of the
n. oculomotorius (ll) to the periorbital area where
bones and soft tissues of the head, such as the nuchal
switching from pre- to postganglionic fibers occurs in the
crest, sagittal crest, zygomatic arch, frontal bone,
ciliary ganglion. The nn. ciliaris innervate the mm.
bridge of the nose, upper jaw, lower jaw, edge of the 
 sphincter pupillae.
orbit, and the muscles that cover the skull.
During this part of the examination the mouth must
Eyetid reffex. Technique. Tapping the skin of the head
(sensory innervation by the trigeminal nerve) results in a
possible, whether there is appropriate muscle resistance
temporary closure (blinking) of the eyelids of both eyes.
(tonus), and whether there is pain, abnormal mobility,
To prevent a threat reflex from occurring, the finger or
or crepitation. The tongue can be examined and the
 o io iay aq isw ea ai det ot asn awsu
swallowing reflex can be tested (see Cerebral reflexes).
field of vision, by tapping above the orbit, at the back
of the nose, on the upper lip, or around the nostrils. The
Tongue
medial canthus is the most sensitive, but it is just here
 Anatomy. Involved is the n. hypoglossus, XIl.
that tapping can elicit a threat reflex by approaching the
Form. Hypertrophy of the tongue occurs in some
corner of the eye. Hence the medial canthus is only used
muscular diseases. Atrophy of the tongue is difficult to
 in animals in a coma or under anesthesia.
recognize if it is bilateral. Atrophy of the muscles
Anatomy. Afferent: n. trigeminus (V); efferent: n.
causes wrinkling of the mucosa.
facialis (VII).
Position. Unilateral atrophy causes displacement of
the tongue to the abnormal side when at rest and to
Menoce reffex. Technique. An abrupt movement of
the contralateral side when the tongue is extended.
the forefinger toward the eye should be followed
A decrease or loss of tonus in the retractor muscles
immediately by blinking of the eyelids. Air movement
results in the tongue hanging out of the mouth.
that can stimulate the cornea and thereby evoke the
Mobiity. The spontaneous movements can best be
corneal reflex must be avoided. Thus a sufficient
evaluated by examining the function of the tongue for
distance from the cornea must be maintained.
which it is intended: intake of food and fluid. It is
Anatomy. Retina
→n. opticus (II)
chiasma
difficult to grasp the tongue in healthy dogs but it is
'dy s a ro d ls t o
easier when there is paresis. In the latter case, traction
tectum, quadrigeminal bodies) → nucleus n. facialis -
on the tongue results in little retraction.
n. facialis → m. orbicularis oculi.
Explanation. This reflex can be influenced by the
Cerebrol reffexes
cerebral cortex and hence the absence of the reflex is
The integration centers for the cerebral reflexes lie in the
'ab s uaed aut j ina 'ieoiooued aiuessaou iou
brain and chiefly in the brainstem. The various reflexes
relaxed, and not distracted, then the absence of the
are discussed here with a short description of the reflex
reflex must be considered abnormal.
  s   se    
cerebral cortex (e.g, threat reflex).
Swallowing ond coughing reflexes. Technique. Firmly
but carefully compressing the pharynx between the
Pupillory reflex. Technique. After the eyelids have
thumb and fingers usually  causes swallowing.
been closed for a short time, a strong light stimulus
Stimulation of the coughing reflex is usually possible
will cause narrowing of the pupil. This occurs in the
by palpating the trachea and/or larynx (see also
eye into which the light shines as well as in the eye
§ 9.2.3). It is not always possible to stimulate the
that is still being held closed {direct and consensual
coughing reflex in healthy dogs. The stimulation of
pupillary reflexes, respectively). The reflex should be
the swallowing reflex is always possible, certainly by
tested from right to left and from left to right. The 
 touching the back of the tongue.
degree and speed of pupillary contraction is dependent 
Anatomy. Afferent and efferent: n. vagus (X) and
on many factors. Only the presence or absence of the
n. glossopharyngeus {IX).
168
Neurological examination
Vision
of testing, pathological. The bilateral presence of slow
There are various methods to test vision.
 responses can be pathological!
Afrequentmistakeinthisexaminationisthe
1 History. Specific questions about actions that
inadequate stressing Orloading ofthelimbbeing
above all require visual ability can give useful
information: meeting or catching an object thrown
examined.
toward the animal, running into objects in
Knuckling-0ver reffex (Fig. 18.2)
unfamiliar surroundings (in the light or dark), etc.
 2 Visual placing reaction. This reaction is absent in
Technique. While the animal is standing, a foot is lifted
severe visual disturbances and also when the
and then placed down again but with its dorsal surface
efferent part of the reflex arc is not functioning.
contacting the table or floor. A rapid correction to the
3 Obstacle test. Evaluation of the behavior of the
 original position is a normal reaction. Although there
dog when an obstacle such as a stick is placed in
are great individual differences, the speed of the
its way is a dependable means of detecting severe
correction should be the same on the left and the right
visual disturbances.
sides and for the front and rear feet. The pressure on
4 Falling cotton test. A fluff of cotton falling within
each foot should be equal, because the speed of the
 reaction is partly dependent upon the degree of loading.
the visual field of the patient causes the head and
eye to move simultaneously with the slowly falling
Anatormy. The proprioceptive receptors in muscles,
cotton. The vision of each eye can be tested in this
tendons,
，and ligaments,  and possibly also the
way without the usually difficult use of a
exteroceptive receptors in the skin, detect the
blindfold. This method is especially suitable for
information concerning the position of the limbs. This
detecting a unilateral visual disturbance.
information is transmitted via the afferent nerves, the
dorsal roots, and the spinal ganglion, to the ascending
Note! The results of the menace reflex and the pupillary
tracts in the spinal cord. In the medulla oblongata the
reflex are not decisive with regard to the presence or
information is transferred to various nuclei and tracts.
absence of blindness. The optical cortex is not involved
Part goes to the thalamus and cortex, but the
in these reflexes. Thus both reflexes can be present in
cerebellum, being most important in proprioceptive
cortical blindness and they can be absent if there is a
integration, receives the most. After processing, the
peripheral motor defect of the facial nerve and/or the
information is transferred to important motor nuclei in
oculomotor nerve, while vision is intact.
the brainstem. Via the descending spinal tracts (central
motor system), signals are transferred to the motor cell
Heoring (vestibufocochfeor nerve, Villt)
bodies in the ventral column of the gray matter
The absence of any response to a strong sound stimulus
(peripheral motor system). Via the motor axons in the
(a whistle) in the presence of an undisturbed level of
neuromuscular synapse, the muscle is then activated.
consciousness strongly indicates a severe loss of
hearing. Abnormal reactions to sound stimuli are
difficult to interpret (see Chapter 20).
The sense of smell (otfoctory nerve, I)
Observation of the behavior and specific questions in the
history give an impression of the ability to smell.
Anosmia {loss of this ability) can be determined with
aromatic substances. Compounds with a strong
stimulatory effect on the olfactory nerves also stimulate
the sensory nerves of the n. trigeminus.
18.2.5 Postural reactions
Introduction
 Postural reactions or correction reactions are stimulated
by placing the body or parts of the body in abnormal
postures. A large part of the nervous system is brought
into action by the development of the reactions to the
abnormal posture, which is why these reactions are of
clinical importance. The absence of these reactions or
Fig. 18.2 Knuckling-over reflex in the dog. Technique and the nerves
their asymmetrical presence is, if confirmed by repetition
involved.
169
 Chapter 18:
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Note: If the results of knuckling-over are inconclusive
original position. The distance of correction depends
 and/or insufficiently repeatable, hopping and, if necessary,
 on the size of the dog and the weight borne on the leg,
tactile placing can also be tested. If the results of
but it also varies among healthy dogs of equal size.
knuckling-over are unequivocal, the testing of hopping
Clear asymmetry in the response can be interpreted
and tactile placing adds no useful information.
objectively.
 a i i  i     
Placing reactions (Fig. 18.4)
test their proprioception by hopping.
Toctile plocing. Technique. The patient is held in the
horizontal position, with one hand covering its eyes,
Hopping (Fig. 18.3)
and is moved so that the dorsal side of the front feet
Technique. The animal must be supported in a horizontal
touches the object. This should cause slight bending of
position in such a way that one limb touches the surface of
the front legs and then forward placement of them at a
the table and at the same time bears a large part of the
slant. Tactile placement of the rear feet is less reliable.
body weight. The displacement of the center of gravity of
This reaction is tested with both legs simultaneously or
the patient laterally causes a hopping movement. This 
one by one.
can be tested in all limbs independently.
Anatomy. As for the knuckling-over: peripheral
Anatomy. The tracts along which this reaction pass
a fferent
nerves,
roots,
ascending
tracts,
are the same as for the knuckling-over reflex.
cerebellum, central motor and peripheral motor systems.
Explanation. The absence of this reaction in one or
more limbs must always be considered abnormal. Each
Optical placing. Technique. This is done in the same
asymmetry is also certainly abnormal. Especially in large
way but without shielding the eyes. Under normal
dogs, the test is difficult to perform and requires not only
conditions the front limbs are stretched out toward the
the patient's cooperation but also the examiner's skill. In
edge of the table even before contact is made.
 general, the test is easily performed in cats.
The hopping test cannot be performed if the patient is
too heavy to lift. The ‘paper-slide test” can be used
instead. With the dog standing on the floor (not on the
table), a sheet of paper or a newspaper is placed under
one foot so that the dog is standing on it. Then the
paper is slowly moved laterally. If proprioception is
adequate, the dog will lift the foot and return it to its
Tactile
Optical
Fig. 18.4 Tactile and optical placing reactions in a dog. Technique and
Fig. 18.3 Hopping test in the dog. Technique and the nerves involved.
nerves involved.
170
Neurological examination
Anatomy. The afferent part of the reflex is formed in
 u uo ia pu i do a kq ase si
visual cortex, commands are transmitted to the motor
nuclei, possibly with participation of the cerebellum.
If this reaction is present, it may also be concluded that
vision is not severely disturbed.
Explanation. The two reactions are not always easy to
test, not only because the patient may be difficult to handle
but also because these reactions are sometimes difficult to
arouse. Probably the reaction can be suppressed by the
cerebral cortex. This means that absence of the reaction
is not necessarily abnormal. Since the optical reaction
 appears to be less under the influence of the cortex, it is 
more reliable than the tactile placing reaction.
The patient's weight and lack of cooperation are
limiting factors. Cats usually strongly resist having
their eyes shielded.
18.2.6 Spinal reflexes
Introduction
Spinal reflexes are reflexes for which the integration center
is located in the gray matter of the spinal cord. The
Fig. 18.5 Patellar ligament refex and reflex of the m. extensor carpi
presence of these reflexes is ontly dependent on the
radialis in the dog. Technique and refex arc.
functional integrity of the components of the reflex
arc: (1) receptor, (2) afferent neurons, (3) switching
integration cells, (4) efferent motor neurons, and (5)
effector. The manner in which the reflex is tested will be
described, together with essential anatomical information.
All spinal reflexes are in principle examined in the
upper legs while the animal is lying on its side, and then
the animal is turned over to allow the other side to be
examined. Very large dogs may resist being placed on
the examination table, but the examination can usually
be performed quite easily while the animal is lying on
its side on the floor. Some dogs of dwarf breeds do not
easily allow examination in lateral recumbency. In such
cases the front leg reflexes can be tested with the dog in
Cats are a separate problem. Most will resist lying on
the side. Holding the cat up under the axillae in a
vertical position facing the examiner is sometimes
effective.
Potellor figoment reffex (Fig. 18.5)
Technique. A light percussion on the patellar ligament
Fig. 18.6 Flexor reflex of the front and rear legs in the dog. Technique
with the leg slightly lifted and the knee joint slightly
and reflex arc.
bent causes extension of the knee.
Anatomy. Involved are:
causes flexing of all joints of the leg. The pressure is
 m. quadriceps
applied with the fingers or with a hemostat, but just
n. femoralis; spinal segments L3-LS (L6)
touching the bottom of the foot is often enough to
evoke the reflex. If so, pinching the toe or using a
Flexor reflex (Fig. 18.6)
hemostat is an unnecessary torment. However,
Technique. Rapidly increased pressure on the cuticle of
avoiding the use of this maximal stimulation when in
the nail (or adjacent skin or skin between the toes)
doubt about the absence of the flexor reflex is a mistake!
171
Chapter 18:
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Anatomy. Involved are:
there can be flexion of a rear leg of long duration,
 front leg: sensory and motor: brachial plexus;
sometimes combined  with alternating extension and
C6-T1 (T2); all flexors
flexion or bizarre contractions, which can spread to the
 rear leg: sensory and motor: n. ischiadicus, L5-S1;
contralateral leg, tail, and anus. There can also be a
all flexors
series of rhythmic contractions (cloni) in both limbs.
Caution: the presence of the flexor reflex does not allow
Explanation. The presence of such mass reactions to a
any conclusions with regard to the conscious (cortical)
local stimulus indicates a severe functional disturbance in
the spinal cord cranial to the lumbosacral plexus.
 perception of the applied stimulus.
Postreflex clornus. This is simply the repeated
Reflex of the m. extensor corpi rodiofis (Fig. 18.5)
occurrence of a normal reflex response even when only
Technique. This muscle is easily palpated among the
one stimulus has been administered.
other extensors on the craniolateral side of the radius
directly distal to the elbow. Percussion of the belly of
Evoluotion of the spinol reflexes
the muscle with the leg slightly lifted up and the joints
 During the tests of the spinal reflexes, an evaluation is
slightly flexed results in extension of the foot.
Anatomy. Involved are:
made of the quality of the reflex as well as of its
 m. extensor carpi radialis
presence or absence. For the qualitative characteristics
-n radialis; C7, C8, T1 (T2)
the following ordinal scale is used:
-absent
0
Anol/Perineol reflex
- present
1
Tecbnique. Stimulation of the area of the anus and
- increased
2
perineum results in contraction of the m. sphincter ani
- pathological reflex
3
and flexion of the tail. The stimulus can be applied by
The reliability of the observations depends on the
percussion of the perineum with the reflex hammer.
experience of the clinician and the degree of
Anatomy. Involved are:
cooperation of the patient. Reliability can be increased
 m. sphincter ani and flexors of the tail
if the examination is performed by more than one
n. pudendus; S1, S2, S3
time and/or under different conditions.
Pathological reflexes
Arousing the following reactions requires no special
18.2.7 Pain perception
manipulation; they can occur during testing of the
spinal reflexes. They are not observed in healthy
Introduction
animals in lateral recumbency. Their presence indicates
Receptors can be divided into four groups on the basis of
a functional disorder in the spinal cord.
their properties:
 special senses: vision, hearing, smell, balance
Crossed extensor reflex. Technique. This reflex is
exteroceptive receptors: pressure, touch, pain,
elicited in the same way as the flexor reflex. In
temperature
addition to flexion of the leg being examined, there is
interoceptive receptors: blood pressure, central
simultaneous extension of the contralateral leg.
temperature
Anatomy. Involved are:
 proprioceptive receptors: stretching of muscles,
extensors of the contralateral leg
tendons, and ligaments
 brachial plexus or lumbosacral plexus
Several of these sensory functions are tested during the
Explanation. If this reaction occurs while the dog or cat
neurological examination. In this section we consider
is not resisting, it must be considered abnormal. This
s u i  e u d oe i xa
position, which makes it possible to lift up one leg
Anatomy
without the contralateral leg collapsing. In a healthy
The exteroceptive receptors are located in the skin and
animal that is lying down, this reflex is absent because
subcutis or in deep structures, and are sensitive to
of labyrinthine, optical, and sensory impulses which
mechanical stimuli, among other things. Stimulation of
have a damping effect on spinal switching neurons.
these mechanoreceptors causes a nerve action potential.
The information is transferred via the afferent neurons and
Mass response. Technique. This concerns an abnormality
the dorsal root to the interneurons in the dorsal column of
of the flexor reflex in the rear leg. The picture can vary:
the spinal cord. From here two paths are followed.
172
Further examination
1 Spinal reflex pathway. This passes to the motor
neurons in the ventral gray column of the same
segment and a few adjacent segments. There is no
crossing over. The reaction is expressed by the
peripheral motor system (e.g-, contraction of the
muscular ring of the anus, bending of a leg).
约
2 Cortical pathuways. These pass to the ascending tracts
and via the thalamus to the cortex. At the spinal level,
crossing over occurs regularly! Conscious apprehension
of the stimulus thus occurs in the thalamus or the
somatic cortex.
We recall from anatomy that two types of reaction can
occur following a mechanical stimulus to the skin:
OUCH!
1 Some reactions occur with participation of the
conscious centers (cortex, thalamus). These
cortical reactions include crying, whining, lifting
the head, looking at an object, biting, dilation of
the pupils, etc.
2  Other reactions occur without participation of the
cerebrum. These are reflexes or local/segmental
reactions: flexor reflex, cutaneous muscle
contraction.
The reactions can quite naturally occur in sequence, so
that the reflex activity occurs first and then the cortical
perception can be seen.
Examination of poin perception (Fig. 18.7)
Provided that it is strong enough, each mechanical
Fig. 18.7 Examination of pain perception in the dog. showing method
stimulus can arouse a cortical reaction. In the dog we
and reflex arc
Deep pain perception. For this purpose not only the
18.3 Notation
superficial but also the deep receptors under the skin
There is a form on the DVD for recording the history
are stimulated.
Technique. With the fingers or with a hemostat, an
and physical examination of the nervous system. On
this form a few abbreviations are used. For example, to
 abrupt pressure is applied to the rim of a nail, a toe, or
record a drooping and thickened left ear, the following
a fold of skin. In the healthy dog and cat, this always
causes a strong cortical reaction. Testing of deep pain
will be filled in:
sensation is, however, only necessary in case of severe
ears L/RP
paresis or paralysis.
Superficial pain perception. Only the skin receptors are
18.4 Further examination
stimulated.
Technique. The skin is pricked with
a pencil,
Apart from blood examinations, the following more
ballpoint, or similar object (but not sharp, such as an
 specific examinations may be necessary:
injection needle).
 ophthalmological examination (funduscopy)
It has long been known that it is not always possible to
 cytological, bacteriological, and biochemical
 u sop Aueau an un uon ieo e asno
examination of cerebrospinal fluid
manner. It is also not always possible with a sharp
diagnostic imaging (radiography, ultrasonography,
needle. However, local, segmental reflexes are stimulated!
CT, MRI)
Note: Testing of conscious pain perception
by
electrophysiological examination
superficial pricking of the skin is not always dependable.
(electromyography [EMG], evoked potentials [EP).
Sometimes it is the sensory innervation of the skin that
tissue biopsy for histological examination (muscle,
is tested in this manner.
nerve)
173
 Chapter 18:
NERVOUS SYSTEM
References
1 Fenner WR. The neurological examination. In: Etinger SJ. Feldman
 3 DeLahunta A. Veterinary neuroanatomy and clinical neurology. 2nd
 EC. eds. Textbook of veterinary internal medicine. Philadelphia:
edn. Philadelphia: Saunders: 1983.
Saunders: 2000.
4 Oliver JE. Lorenz MD. Handbook of veterinary neurology. 2nd edn.
 2 Braund KG. Neurological examination. In: Clinical syndromes in 
 Philadelphia: Saunders: 1993.
veterinary neurology. 2nd edn. St Louis: Mosby: 1994.
174
19
M.H. Boeve, F.c. Stades, and S.C. Djajadiningrat-Laanen
Chapter contents
19.4 Examination of the eye and adnexa 179
19.4.1 Head and skull 179
19.1 History 176
Position in spoce 179
19.11  Symptoms 176
Mondibulor tymph nodes 179
19.12 Living conditions 177
Chewing muscles ond opening of the
19.1.3 Past history 177
mouth 179
Bony ports of the orbits. sinuses, ond nasol
19.2 Location and conditions for the
examination 177
covity 179
19.4.2 Surroundings of the eye 179
19.2.1 Light 177
Soft pornts of the orbit oround the globe 179
Focot light 177
Trichiasis: folds of skin on the nose ond
Dorkness 177
heod 180
19.2.2 Position of the patient during the 
Teor stripe 180
examination 177
Dog 177
Wet lower eyelid 180
 Pekingese, Shih Tzu (and other short-nosed 
19.4.3 Tear flm and tear production 180
19.4.4 Ocular discharge 182
breeds) 178
Dry cotton swob 182
Cot 178
Moist cotton swob 182
19.3 Instruments and aids (see also § 4.2) 178
19.4.5 Eyelids (palpebrae) (Fig. 19.7) 182
Penlight 178
Function 182
Slit lomp 178
Polpebrol fissure 183
Blue filter 178
Outer surfoce of the eyelid 183
Ophtholmoscope (direct) 178
The morgin of the eyelid 183
Fixation forceps 178
 Position of the eyelid 183
Schirmer teor test (ST7) 178
Entropion test (Fig. 19.11) 183
Culture tubes 178
19.4.6 Conjunctiva and nictitating membrane 184
Eye spotulo 178
Inspection ond polpotion 185
Cytobrush 178
Nictitoting membrone (plico semilunonis
Eye curette 178
conjunctivoe. third eyelid) 185
Fluorescein 178
Sclerat conjunctivo 186
Mydriatic (short-octing) 178
19.4.7 Globe (bulbus oculi) 186
Locol onesthetic 179
Position 186
175
Chapter 19:
EYES
Enophthaimos 186
 Optical placing reaction 199
Exophthalmos 186
Falling object test 199
Retrobutbor pressure (retropuision) 186
Falling off test 199
Size 186
 Menace reaction 199
Intraocutar pressure/tension 187
Ophthalmoscopy 199
Bilateral meosurement of tension by
Ophthalmoscope 199
polpotion 187
The ophthaimoscopic exominotion 199
Unilaterat measurement of tension by
Inspection 199
polpotion 187
19.5 Notation 200
19.4.8 Sclera 188
19.6 Further examination 200
Color 188
Voscutor injection 188
Thickening 188
Animals with eye problems are usually presented quite
19.4.9 Cornea 188
specifically for these problems and without many other
Reflectivity 188
problems. It is often apparent that an eye problem is
 Curvature (sphericality) 188
involved as soon as the history is being taken. In the
Tronsporency 189
signalment, special attention is given to the breed
Slit lomp (microscope) 189
because many eye diseases are known to have a breed
Sensitivity 189
predisposition or to be hereditary. Several ophthalmic
 a bnormalities are related to the brachycephalic skull type.
Diagnostic stoining 189
Sodium fluorescein 189
19.1 History
Passoge through the tear drainage system
(Fig. 19.18) 190
 If the iatrotropic problem appears to be ophthalmologic,
Corneal defects (Fig. 19.19) 190
the history, following the general history, is directed to
this problem. Is it a problem of the right eye (oculus
Rose bengot (not routine) 191
dexter, OD) or of the left eye {oculus sinister, OS), or has
19.4.10 Anterior chamber 191
it been from the beginning bilateral (ODS)? It is
 Shape ond depth 191
important that there be no misunderstanding about the
Clority 191
meaning of “left' and 'right'.
19.4.11 Pupil 191
Shope ond position 191
19.1.1 Symptoms
Reflexes 192
 Rubbing or scraping along the eye, frequent blinking, and
19.4.12 Iris 192
holding the eyelids tightly closed (blepharospasm) are the
Color 192
result of reflexes and reactions that can arise from
Surfoce 192
stimulation of the eyelids, conjunctiva, and anterior
Thickness 193
segment of the globe (from the cornea to and including
Defects 193
the ciliary body). Pain in the ciliary body can also result
Embryonic remnants 193
in the avoidance of light (photophobia). The flow of
Resting position 193
tears (epiphora) can also be a noticea ble sign. The causes 
of this are excessive production of tears due to the
Transillumination 193
stimuli just mentioned, or reduced passage of tears
19.4.13 Posterior chamber 194
through the tear drainage system, or a combination of
19.4.14 Lens 194
the two. If there is inflammation, with or without
Clarity 196
infection, exudate can also flow out of the conjunctival
Size ond shope 196
sac. If such an exudate is noted, its type {mucoid or
Lentidonesis 196
purulent) and amount should be determined.
Locotion 196
A reduced ability to see (reduced vision) can lead to a
19.4.15 Vitreous 197
fairly large variety of changes in behavior, such as a loss
of orientation, lifting the feet too high ('walking like
19.4.16 Fundus (retina and choroid) 197
a rooster"), uncertainty, anxiety, and (as a result)
Exomination of vision 198
 sometimes aggression. In addition, actually walking into
Obstocie test 198
or bumping obstacles is a striking sign. The conditions
176
Location and conditions for the examination
under which these signs occur, such as in a well-lighted or
pedigree analysis  or genetic investigation  can be
shaded area, on familiar or unfamiliar terrain, must be
performed.
taken into account in the evaluation.
 In some cases the occurrence of changes such as signs
19.2 Location and conditions for
of pain during specific forms of behavior, such as
the examination
yawning, chewing, barking, or when biting food are
19.2.1 Light
important in diagnosis, in view of the anatomic relation
between the orbits and the mandi bles (see § 19.4.1).
 For general inspection of the structures surrounding the
The owner may report that the affected eye is “too
eye, comparing left and right, and evaluating the color
spherical. It is, however, naturally more or less
of the conjunctiva, sclera (yellow under neon light),
spherical in shape. In the history and especially in the
and iris, either diffuse daylight or artificial light is
examination that follows, one must differentiate
satisfactory. The examination should preferably be
between an eye that is too far rostral (exophthalmos),
carried out in an area in which no direct sunlight falls.
one that is enlarged (buphthalmos), and one in which
there is a change in color of the cornea or lens. When
Focol fight
the eye gives the impression of being “too small', it is
Sunlight is too strong, contains UV radiation (very
possible that it is indeed too small (microphthalmus),
damaging to the retina), and can cause problerms
but it could also simply be positioned deeper in the
during use of a loupe because of the concentration of
orbit (enophthalmus). This differentiation is of great
infrared radiation. Two useful forms of light are an
importance for the diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy.
easily-positioned spotlight and a lamp mounted in a
holder on the examiner's forehead (*miner's lamp'). A
19.1.2 Living conditions
halogen lamp with smoothly adjustable light intensity
is optimal. An ordinary flashlight has the disadvantage
Especially in connection with tra uma, it is important to
that it leaves only one hand free for other purposes
know whether a dog is used for hunting or is a guide
 and the amount of light it provides is less adequate.
dog or is in training as a watchdog or guard dog. A
disturbance in vision will in principle make an animal
Darkness
with a specific vision-dependent task unsuited for that
work. For a dog or cat kept as a household
It must be possible to darken the room used for eye
Ipet,
bilateral blindness is usually less of a handicap.
The
examinations. This is necessary for the use of a slit
house in which the animal is kept plays an important
lamp or an ophthalmoscope. It must also be possible to
role: walking up or down stairs (to an apartment, or
evaluate the patient's vision in semidarkness, but
upstairs in a house) is an additional problem for a dog
pupillary reflexes can only be evaluated in a completely
darkened room.
that is blind; a roomy area in which to walk, without
many differences in level, such as a lawn without a
pond, makes life easier for the dog. The composition of
19.2.2 Position of the patient during
the family is also important. Small children moving
the examination
about without supervision can presumably be a menace
to a blind dog. If either a child or an adult suddenly
Dog
comes within the ‘individual space” of the animal,
The examiner sits on a stool at the head of the
 aggression born out of anxiety can be the result.
examination table. The dog is placed on the table and
If visual disorders are associated with problems in
the person who restrains the dog stands at its left side.
perception involving the other senses (smell, hearing)
By a command and by pressing down on the lumbar
or with a decreased sense of direction, then the
area, the dog is brought into a sitting position. With
functioning of the animal also as a “household pet’ can
the right arm reaching over the dog, the right hand is
 give rise to problems.
used to extend the dog's right front leg, and the left
hand is used to extend its left front leg so that the dog
19.1.3 Past history
is in a ‘sphinx position". The front feet are allowed to
hang over the edge of the table (up to the carpus).
It is important to learn whether the same problem has
Then the left hand is used to hold the dog's muzzle
occurred previously in the same or the contralateral
from below, with the left elbow placed on the table for
eye. In view of the fact that a considerable number of
support. The right hand is placed on the dog's right
eye disorders have a clearly inheritable character or are
shoulder with as little traction as possible on the skin,
familial in occurrence, it is useful to inquire whether 
to avoid affecting the position and closure of the
similar problems have occurred in the immediate
 eyelids. If the dog sags down in the front or rear legs 
family of the patient. For further examination, a
into a lateral position, the examination is made
177
Chapter 19:
EYES
difficult because of the asymmetry, deeper position of
glasses, for the ophthalmoscope can be adjusted to
the eyes, protrusion of the nictitating membrane,
 compensate for them.
difficulty in examining with an ophthalmoscope, etc.
A direct ophthalmoscope should also contain a slit
 Dogs that are difficult to restrain and/or are aggressive
lamp, a keratoscope for evaluating the corneal
should be muzzled (s 24.2.2). Sedation generally causes
curvature, and a cobalt blue filter, so that a separate
enophthalmus and protrusion of the nictitating
slit lamp is unnecessary. Most ophthalmoscopes can
membrane and thus makes the examination difficult.
also be converted for use as an otoscope and a
vaginoscope.
Pekingese, Shih Tzu (ond other short-nosed
breeds)
Fixation forceps
Insofar as possible, it is the owner who must restrain an
Von Graefe's forceps are necessary for inspection of the
animal of these breeds, because of the risk of luxation of
conjunctiva, including the nictitating membrane.
the globe. The dog should be placed close to the edge of
the examination table. It should be restrained by the
Schirmer teor test (S77)
owner's making a ring with both hands around its neck
Tear production is measured with the STT by use of
 in a way that does not hinder its respiration too much
sterile strips of filter paper that are standardized and
and with the least possible caudal traction on the skin.
calibrated.
103
Cufture tubes
The cat is restrained in a sphinx position in the same
A sterile dry cotton swab, supplied in a culture tube, is
way as the dog, with extra attention to both the front
used to collect material for microbiological culture. If
and rear feet. If sedation is necessary, medetomedine
there is likely to be a long interval between collection
interferes very little with the diagnostic ophthalmic
and inoculation of the culture media, as may occur in
examination.
practice, it is better to use a 'moist' swab in transport
medium. For special diagnostic procedures, such as
19.3 Instruments and aids (see also § 4.2)
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for herpes virus,
the laboratory should be consulted in advance about the
Pentight
 method of sample collection and the media to be used.
This is a focal light source that provides a small beam of
light. It is used to examine the most anterior parts of the
Eye spotulo
globe and to test the pupillary reflexes.
This is used to collect exudate for microbiological
examination or superficial epithelial cells
for
Slit tomp
cytological examination.
This gives a slit-shaped beam of light, 0.5-1 mm wide
and 5-15 mm high. With this beam optical slices are
Cytobrush
made through the eye. Densities are illuminated in the
Material for cytological or microbiological examination
beam (Tyndall effect, § 4.1.1) and the outlines of the
can also be collected efficiently with a small brush
different anatomical structures of the anterior segment
developed for this purpose.2
of the eye can be seen.
Eye curette
Blue filter
A curette with a diameter of about 3 mm is used to
Cobalt blue light can be useful for intensifying the
collect material for microbiologicalor cytological
fluorescence of minimal corneal defects, after these
examination as well as for freshening a corneal ulcer or
have been stained with fluorescein (§ 19.4.9).
curetting a chalazion.
Ophthaimoscope (direct)
Fluorescein
This is a light source with a lens system. The fundus can
Fluorescein-impregnated paper strips? are used to stain
be inspected with the 0 or -1D lens. Other lenses can be
corneal defects and fluorescein drops are used to check
selected to inspect parts that are less deep: between
 0 and +8D for the vitreous, +8D for the posterior lens
the patency of the tear drainage system.
capsule, +8 to +12D for the lens contents, +12D for
the anterior lens capsule, +12 to +20D for the anterior
Mydriatic (short-octing)
chamber, and +20D for the cornea. The examiner
Tropicamide (0.5%) produces brief widening of the
should perform ophthalmoscopy  without  wearing
pupil {mydriasis) of short duration, via which good
178
Examination of the eye and adnexa
inspection of the retropupillary area is made possible.4
 In pups younger than 4 months, atropine (1%) can be
used as the mydriatic.
Locot onesthetic
Lidocaine (4%) and tetracaine (0.5%) are drugs that,
after a brief discomfort, induce a short period of
anesthesia of the conjunctiva and the cornea, enabling
local inspection or minor procedures such as tonometry
or removal of a foreign body. They may only be used
for diagnostic purposes. Their repeated ‘therapeutic"
use retards the healing of epithelial defects in the
cornea and they can increase the pain (neuritis
Fig. 19.1 The retrobulbar structures. When the mouth is opened. the
dolorosa) by overstimulation.
 coronoid process is moved toward the eye.
19.4 Examination of the eye and adnexa
Chewing muscies ond opening of the mouth
The chewing muscles provide important support for the
As noted in S 4.1.1, the examination of the eyess-8 is
globe ventrally and caudally. They form part of the soft 
carriedout largely
by inspection, which
in
floor of the orbit. When the muscles are swollen the
principle proceeds “from outside to inside", with the
globe is pressed forward (exophthalmos), and when they
exception of the “lacrimal apparatus’ and the globe
as a whole. For the eye and adnexa, the location
The coronoid process of the mandible is just behind
i ih  a a  i s e 
the eye (Fig. 19.1). In the ophthalmic examination the
(rostral) and posterior
{aboral/caudal), (2)
nasal
mouth is opened as described in § 11.2.1. If there is a
(medial) and temporal (lateral), and (3) dorsal
space-occupying process (hemorrhage, inflammation,
(superior) and ventral (inferior). The radial locations
abscess, neoplasia) between the globe and the coronoid
of structures in or on the cornea, anterior chamber,
process, limited movement and/or pain may be observed
iris, and lens are indicated by means of the hours of
when the mouth is opened. The area around the eye, the
the clock. For the required stability, the ophthalmic
musculature, the skin, and the temporomandibular joint
examination is performed with the animal in the
 are inspected and palpated for swelling, atrophy, hard or
sitting position.
soft
areas,
pain,
temperature  differences,
and
asymmetry. The tonsils and the maxillary mucosa caudal
19.4.1 Head and skull
to the second molar (dog), the soft floor of the orbit, are
inspected and palpated.
Position in spoce
Bony ports of the orbits, sinuses, ond nosaf covity
the animal quietly and to restrain it as little as possible
 In the dog, the rostral part of the bony orbit is formed by
and only if absolutely necessary. The eyelids, the skin
the zygomatic bone, lacrimal bone, maxillary bone,
around the eye, the lips, cheeks, and ears should hang
sphenoid bone, palate bone, and frontal bone.? On the
or stand symmetrically and have adequate tonus (see
medial (nasal) side the orbit is formed by the frontal
also Chapter 18).
  ) al   
 In visual disturbances, as well as neurological or oral
zygomatic process and connects to the frontal process of
abnormalities, the head may be held in an abnormal-
the zygomatic bone by a bridge of connective tissue. The
usually too low—position. Severe pain, associated with
awuas ioy paiedied pue paiadsu aue shed Auoq
tight closure of the eyelids (blepharospasm) can also
Rostral and dorsomedial to the orbit lie the maxillary
lead to an abnormal position of the head. The patient
sinus, the nasal cavity, and the frontal sinus, respectively.
usually moves carefully and insecurely and lifts its feet
 Disorders here can have consequences for the orbits and
too high (like a rooster).
their contents. The examination of these spaces is
described in Chapter 9.
Mondibuior lymph nodes
These are the most important of the palpable regional
19.4.2 Surroundings of the eye
lymph nodes related to the eyes. In cases in which the
'aa aul on kiaisnxa pul aq ot radde suaqoid
Soft ports of the orbit oround the globe
these nodes are still included in the examination (see
Swelling can occur just within the bony parts of the orbit
Cha pter 8).
due to space-occupying processes around and/or behind
179
Chapter 19:
EYES
Fig. 19.2 Trichiasis. Hairs in a normal location which cause irritation of
the conjunctiva and/or cornea because of their abnormal placement.
e.g.. hairs on the nasal fold or on the lateral part of the upper eyelid.
Fig. 19.3 Tear stripe caused by overflow of tears (epiphora) under the
 medial canthus. due to hindrance to drainage and/or overproduction.
The adhesion line is also visible for explanation. see Fig. 19.4).
the globe. Swelling may occur within the bony parts of
the orbit due to trauma, inflammation, or neoplasia.
In dogs with nasal folds of skin there is also frequently
au po sapa Auoq aui yioq pue panadsui si eare siu
inflammation in the persistently moist area of skin
orbit and the soft tissue lying just within the edge are
between the folds (intertrigo). This area is thus
palpated.
inspected and palpated for the presence of a tear stripe,
discoloration, or thickening. Occasionally the opening
Trichiosis: foids of skin on the nose ond heod
of a fistula can be found in this area and it almost
always arises from inflammation of the root of the 4th
Trichiasis is the term used to describe hairs which,
 although in a normal location around a body opening
premolar and only very seldom from the tear drainage
apparatus. Note that the nasolacrimal duct does not
such as the eye, cause irritation because of their
pass through the subcutaneous space but through the
abnormal placement or direction of growth (Fig. 19.2).
lacrimal bone (hence from the orbit) to the nasal cavity.
Thus the long, fairly stiff hairs on the folds of skin
on the nose can irritate the eye. The extremely
Wet fower eyefid
brachycephalic animals in particular suffer from this.
The opening of the lids causes the tear fluid to be spread
Sometimes it is especially the long hairs on the lateral
into a very thin, uniform, film over the cornea. Between
part of the upper eyelid, combined with entropion of
the palpebral conjunctiva and the globe the tear film
the lid margin (see § 19.4.5), which irritate the ventral
remains intact because of the capillary action between
conjunctiva and the cornea because of their abnormal
the two layers. The meibomian glands and glands of
 placement. These parts of the skin are inspected with
 Zeis and Moll in the edge of the eyelids secrete sebum
as little influence as possible being exerted on the
which keeps the edges slightly oily. Because of this
position of the skin of the head by the manner in
hydrophobic layer on the edges and the adhesion of the
which the animal is restrained. There is trichiasis if
tear film on the cornea and conjunctiva, excess tear fluid
the hairs are wet and after eversion of the edge of the
does not run over the edge of the lid but is drained
upper lid they still come back into contact with the
medially when the lids close during blinking, which
cornea or the conjunctival sac. Such hairs often lead to
resembles the closure of a zipper, from lateral to medial.
irritation, vessel ingrowth, and pigmentation of the
Wet lower eyelids occur especially in abnormalities that
cornea in the area of irritation, or to ulceration or
disturb the function of the lower lid margin, such as
sometimes even perforation. When there is excessive
distichiasis (see § 19.4.5) and in disturbed eyelid function
head skin (bloodhound, Shar-Pei) or folds of head skin
caused by an abnormal position fentropion, and extreme
(chow chow), the hanging folds of skin, often in
exophthalmos including luxation of the globe).
combination with entropion of the border of the upper
Wetness on both the upper and the lower eyelid is
eyelid, can severely irritate the globe.
almost always the consequence of severe blepharospasm,
such as may be caused by entropion or a corneal ulcer.
Teor stripe
If the spasm is of long duration, there can be brown
Overproduction and/or decreased drainage of tears leads
discoloration, or even alopecia of the eyelids.
to overflow over the skin, usually from the medial
canthus. This causes a tear stripe {Fig. 19.3), which is a
19.4.3 Tear film and tear production
gradual discoloration of the hair to dark brown. The
aul 0l snueiedde aeuieup au yanouul sieat jo aarssed
The order in which this examination proceeds does not
nose can be checked with fluorescein (see § 19.4.9).
completely follow the obvious order of the anatomical
180
Examination of the eye and adnexa
the Schirmer tear test (STT). Each package contains
two standardized strips of filter paper containing a
blue dye; they are sterile and usually calibrated
(Fig. 19.5). At the place where their edges are notched,
the strips are bent at an angle of about 135° while still
in the package. The package is opened at the opposite
end and a strip is grasped there with dry forceps.
The strip should not be touched with the fingers, for
this breaks sterility and affects the speed with which
the paper takes up fluid. The lower eyelid is everted
slightly with the fingers of the other hand. The
rounded tip of the strip is placed in the ventral
Fig. 19.4 Inspection of the tear film. There should be a sharply outlined
conjunctival sac at about one-third the distance from
reflection image (△) that is only distorted by the curvature of the cornea
the lateral canthus (with the bent end pointing
[curved mirror). and an adhesion line between the eyelid or third eyelid
 and the cornea or conjunctiva [arrow: also see Fig. 19.3).
downward) and the lower eyelid and test strip are
released. After 1 minute {not S minutes, as in humans),
the strips are removed and read immediately. The
structures of the eye. First the tear film and tear
length of the part that is moist (and colored blue)
production are checked, before they can be influenced
above the notch is a measure of the tear production.
by other procedures. When the tear film is normal
An intermediate value could be found if there is
(Fig. 19.4), an intact, reflecting, and clear fluid line is
inadequate stability or continuity of the tear film. This
visible between the free border of the lid margin and
can lead to rapid breakup of the tear film, via which
the cornea and/or the edge of the nictitating membrane
 and the cornea. There is also a normal reflected image
small areas of the cornea dry out a little. The
consequence is earlier death of the superficial epithelial
on the tear film over the cornea. On the normal tear
cells. These intact but not vital cells can be shown by
film over the spherical surface of a normally shaped
 means of rose bengal staining (see & 19.4.9).10
cornea, the image of the window or a lamp will be
 Because an eye that is too dry can develop serious
reflected perfectly.
problems, it is the lower limit, 9 mm for the dog and
Fluorescent
t lighting and glistening, reflecting,
6 mm for the cat, that is of importance. Only in the
or
shadow-producing objects including hairs can also
cause false reflections in the tear film which are
sometimes incorrectly interpreted as corneal defects or
 Box 19.1 Reference values10-13
even lens luxation! If inspection reveals little or no
reflection or if there is only a dull rather than a glossy
6op
13-25 mm: in keratoconjunctivitis
image, the tear film may be interrupted, not intact, or
sicca (KCS) ≤ 9 mm
even absent.
10-20 mm: in keratoconjunctivitis
If there is the least doubt concerning the integrity of
ww 9  e3315
the tear film, or if mucus or mucopurulent discharge is
intermediate values
suspect
rabbit
5.3 ± 29 (SD) in 1 minute
present, the tear production is measured by means of
一
A
Fig. 19.5 The Schirmer tear test. The rounded end of the strip is inserted to the level of the notch in the side of the strip. at an angle of about 135°
The eyelid is slightly everted by a finger. The test strip is inserted in the conjunctival sac at about one-third of the distance from the lateral canthus
and after 1 minute it is removed and read. The calibration and the blue dye facilitate the reading.
181
Chapter 19:
EYES
case of very clear overproduction can the STT be
19.4.5 Eyelids (palpebrae) (Fig. 19.7)
omitted. When there is mucopurulent discharge, even if
the eye glistens and reflects the mucus or pus, the STT
Function
is always done. For further evaluation of the reflection
The closure of the lid should be regular and smooth, so
image, see § 19.4.9.
that a good tear film continues to be maintained. In
birds it is primarily the nictitating membrane that has
this function. Lid closure should be evaluated by means
19.4.4 0cular discharge
of the eyelid reflex, preferably without touching the
When there is mucopurulent discharge (with a normal
head. This reflex can also be stimulated by tapping the
skin in the medial canthus. The animal's inability to
STT) or other signs characteristic of an infection,
material is collected for culture. Only after this has
been done is the discharge rinsed away with sterile,
hand-warm 0.9% NaCl solution.
Dry cotton swob
With the eyelids held apart with two fingers of one hand,
the swab is held in the other hand and used to approach
the eye from the lateral side to obtain material from the
conjunctival sac in the medial canthus (Fig. 19.6a).
Thus the sample is obtained between the palpebral
conjunctiva and the third eyelid. Care should be taken
that neither the sterile cotton swab nor its stick nor the
sterile part of the top are contaminated by hair or by
one's own fingers. The swab should be used to inoculate
culture media before it dries out.
Moist cotton swab
 Since transport to the laboratory may take some time, it
is better to use a culture tube containing a cotton swab
in bouillon or a transport medium. This does not dry
out and thus more often results in a positive culture. It
is, however, less suitable for demonstrating fungi.
After these examinations any ocular discharge that is
present can be removed by rinsing the cornea and
conjunctival sac with lukewarm 0.9% NaCl solution.
Performance (Fig. 19.6b). The back of one hand
Fig. 19.7 Cross-section of the eyelids and the conjunctival sac.
holds an absorbing paper tissue against the nose of the
1 eyelash-like hairs on the lateral part of the upper eyelid. 2 glands of
Zeis and Moll. 3 meibomian glands (sebaceous). 4 goblet cells. 5 fornix.
patient while the thumb and index finger of the same
6 superficial gland of the nictitating membrane. 7 scleral or bulbar
hand spread the eyelids.
conjunctiva. 8 m. orbicularis oculi 9 goblet cells.
A
 Fig. 19.6 A Material is collected for microbiological culture from the conjunctival sac in the medial canthus. B The eye is rinsed from the lateral side
with lukewarm O.9% NaCl solution. The tip of the bottle should not make contact with the patient.
182
Examination of the eye and adnexa
completely close the eyelids (e.g, due to disturbed
innervation or exophthalmos) is called lagophthalmos.
The patient's inability to fully open the upper eyelid,
due to disturbed innervation or swelling or neoplasia,
is called ptosis.
Polpebrol fissure
The palpebral fissure should be related to the size of the
globe. With a normal fissure length the cornea is
leaving the sclera hardly visible, in contrast to humans.
The examiner compares the length of the fissure of the
two eyes. In dogs the length of the palpebral fissure
when stretched varies from 27.8 (± 2.7) to 32.1
(± 4.7) mm.15 In some breeds the fissure is much too
wide, so that a diamond-shaped opening and the
combination of entropion and ectropion may develop.
In dogs with an oversized fissure the length is usually
more than 40 mm. Finally, “the eye", that is to say, the
palpebral fissure, should also be kept open without
difficulty. With even slight irritation of the conjunctiva
Fig. 19.8 Distichiasis: Hairs on the free rim of the margin of the eyelid.
or the rostral segment of the globe, the eyelids 
sare
1 hair folicles in a meibomian gland. 2 in the glands of Zeis and Moll 
more or less closed. When the pain is more severe, the
and elsewhere in the free rim of the eyelid. 3 ectopic cilia emerging in
eye is kept tightly closed (blepharospasm), especially
the conjunctival sac.
when the pain originates from the cornea, the iris, or
the ciliary muscle. This gives the impression of a short
palpebral fissure.  Congenital   shortening
ofthe
the edge of the eyelid, one should also note whether
palpebral fissure is encountered occasionally, often in
there are congenital defects such as palpebral aplasia
association with entropion of the upper eyelid.
(or coloboma), and acquired defects or swellings due to
trauma, inflammation (chalazion/hordeolum), and/or
Outer surface of the eyetid
neoplasia.
The outer surface of the eyelids is inspected and then
palpated for wounds, swelling, alopecia, or wetness.
Position of the eyetid
Wet eyelids and trichiasis were discussed in § 19.4.2.
The edge of the eyelid should fit smoothly against the
curvature of the globe (Fig. 19.9). There can be
The morgin of the eyelid
entropion or inversion of the margin of the lid, which is
The free rim of the lid margin on the outside is usually
primary (congenital or acquired) or secondary (too wide
pigmented, smooth, glossy, hairless, and dry. It is
palpebral fissure, enophthalmos after trauma), or there
2-3 mm wide on the lower lid and about 1 mm wide
can be ectropion or eversion of the margin of the lid.
on the upper lid. The haired part of the outer surface
 Entropion or ectropion can be complete, which is to say
ends in a narrow edge that is seen to be perpendicular
to the cornea. In the middle of this margin lies a barely
that the entire eyelid edge is involved. It can also be
angular (only the lateral canthus) and it can be partial
visible groove in which the openings of the meibomian
(e-g-, medial) (Fig. 19.10). The severity is expressed as
glands are visible as small spots. Dogs and cats do not
low, medium, or high grade (Fig. 19.9). If there is no
have a row of eye lashes, but they do have eyelash-like
entropion but the eyelid is wet, or if the animal is of a
hairs beginning 1-2 mm away from the free rim of the
predisposed breed (e.g., bouvier and chow chow), then
upper lid margin, mainly laterally. The presence of
hairs on the free rim of the lid margin is referred to as
the entropion test is performed.
distichiasis (Fig. 19.8). The edge must be examined
very carefully to detect them, preferably with
Entropion test (Fig. 19.11)
magnifying glasses and a spotlight or with the slit lamp
A fold of skin is picked up, about 1.5 mm ventral to the
microscope. Initially only mucus accumulated around
lateral canthus. Then the hairy outside of the lid is
the hair may be seen as a small irregularity on the free
placed against the cornea. During this test the dog
rim of the lid margin. When this is wiped away the
should be held in a way that does not stretch the skin
hair can be seen. During inspection and palpation of
of the head. If there is no entropion tendency, no
183
Chapter 19:
EYES
2
3
4
margin, covering the inside of the lid and returning to
the limbus at the fornix. The conjunctival part, which
covers the inner side of the eyelids, is called the
palpebral conjunctiva. From the turn at the fornix
the conjunctiva covers the clearly visible sclera and is
referred to as scleral conjunctiva. In the medial canthus
there is a large, folded extension of the conjunctiva,
the
nictitating
membrane
(plica
semilunaris
conj unctivae; third eyelid).
The most important function of the conjunctiva is
that of a supple, smooth, moist barrier which closes off
the space between the eyelids and the globe and orbit,
Fig. 19.10 Possible locations of eyelid abnormalities in entropion:
1 complete lower eyelid. 2 partial lower eyelid. 3 angular in the lateral
while still allowing movement of the globe. The
canthus.
conjunctiva also plays an important role in local
immune defense. It is rich in lymphatic tissue and
contains numerous goblet cells, which produce mucus.
The ducts of the lacrimal glands and accessory lacrimal
glands open into the dorsal fornix. The conjunctiva is
attached to the underlying tissue by elastic fibers.
The conjunctiva is transparent and its apparent color
is actually the color of the underlying tissue (see also
§ 8.3.5). The scleral conjunctival vascular system has
anastomoses with the vascular system of the globe.
Inflammation {uveitis) or increased pressure (glaucoma)
in the bulb almost always involves the conjunctival
vessels as well, causing redness of the conjunctiva.
Dorsally and ventrally in the mucosa of the medial
Fig. 19.11 Entropion test. At about 1.5 cm ventrolateral to the lower
canthus of dogs and cats, about S-8 mm from the
eyelid a fold of skin is lited and the eyelid is entropionized
angle and about 1 mm inside the edge of the eyelid, are
the lacrimal puncta, the openings of the tear drainage
entropion will occur or the entropion that is artificially
system. In rabbits there is only one lacrimal punctum.
formed will be blinked away immediately when the
 n    d p a 
fold of skin is released. If there is instead habitual
for a few millimeters under the thin mucosa. The
entropion, the patient will be unable to blink the
lacrimal sac in the medial canthus by the entrance
entropion away or can do so only with great difficulty.
of the nasolacrimal duct into the lacrimal canal is,
however, not visible. (see § 19.4.9 for checking passage
19.4.6 Conjunctiva and nictitating
through the drainage system).
 The nictitating membrane contains a flat T-shaped
membrane
cartilage which gives it support and curvature. At the
The conjunctiva is a thin, transparent membrane
base is the superior gland of the nictitating membrane,
attached to the inner side of the free rim of the lid
which is responsible for about 30% of the mucoserous
184
Examination of the eye and adnexa
fraction of the tear production. The ocular mucosa
The conjunctiva is evaluated for color, smoothness (feel
of the nictitating membrane in particular contains
with the tip of the finger if necessary), moistness,
considerable lymphoid tissue.
swelling (e.g, due to edema = chemosis), lesions/
defects, follicles, vascular injection, foreign bodies, and
Inspection ond poipotion
inflammatory exudate. Any pigmented spots are also
The examination of the conjunctiva consists 
 noted. If these have a diameter of about 1 mm and are
of
inspection and palpation and, if necessary, taking a
located 1-5 mm inside the margin of the lid, they
smear or scraping or a biopsy. Before inspection the
sometimes contain ectopic cilia (see Fig. 19.8). Without
use of magnification (loupe or microscope), the hairs
conjunctiva is anesthetized with a few drops of a local
anesthetic. If there is doubt about the sensitivity of the
are difficult to recognize. A neoplasm (adenoma,
cornea, it should be examined before the anesthetic is
melanoma,) can also be markedly pigmented. The
applied (§ 19.4.9).
medial canthus is examined to see that the lacrimal
Whenever drops of a local anesthetic or medication
 puncta are present and of adequate size.
are applied, the patient should be looking directly
upward. The dropper should never come in contact
Nictitoting membrone (pfico semilunoris
with the cornea, the eyelids, or hairs of the patient
conjunctivoe, third eyetid)
(keep 5 to 10 cm above the eye). If the dropper
In dogs and cats the nictitating membrane is located
becomes contaminated, the contaminant will be sucked
nasoventrally, in the rabbit nasally, and in birds
inside when the dropper is released!
dorsally. In most birds the third eyelid is transparent.
The eyelid is ectropionized with Von Graefe's fixation
 Before beginning the inspection, one should compare
forceps (Fig. 19.12). The conjunctival limb of the
the two eyes to see whether the nictitating membrane is
 forceps is inserted between the globe and palpebral
adequately positioned in the medial canthus.
A
conjunctiva, in a plane tangential to the globe and
nictitating membrane that is visible far laterally
is
parallel to the edge of the eyelid, in such a way that
described as protruding. Among the causes of this are
the corners of the jaws of the forceps do not damage
local abnormalities of the nictitating membrane
as
the cornea. The eyelid is held with one jaw of the
well as enophthalmos. In case of doubt one can raise the
forceps on the palpebral conjunctiva and the other on
dog's nose, for this causes a protrusion to increase. In
the skin, 1-2 mm from the edge of the eyelid. The jaws 
addition, processes located behind the globe can press 
 of the forceps thus come to lie perpendicular to the
the third eyelid forward (retrobul bar a bscess, tumor).
edge of the eyelid. Often some sebaceous secretion is
The nictitating membrane (Fig. 19.13) is inspected-
thus squeezed from the meibomian glands.
after local anesthesia—by bringing the forceps in from
the lateral side to its edge. {Remember to maintain
Note: hand contact with the head must be maintained
contact with the hand on the animal's head!) Light
without interruption! The opposite end of the forceps
pressure on the cornea causes a slight enophthalmos,
{arrow in Fig. 19.12) must remain free of the palm
so that the nictitating membrane shoots up over one
of the hand. In case of resistance and/or unexpected
jaw of the forceps by itself. Then the nictitating
movements, the hand with the forceps will follow the 
membrane is fixed and pulled laterally so that the
movements of the head and the cornea will not
palpebral mucosa can be evaluated. Then it is moved
be damaged. With fairly firm closure of the forceps
medially and the ocular side is inspected.
the eyelid is ectropionized and rolled up, so that the
conjunctiva is made visible and at the same time
 In addition to the aspects mentioned for the palpebral
tensed. If the forceps are not held firmly closed,
conjunctiva, attention is given to the cartilage visible
the eyelid slips out of the jaws and there is a risk that
through the conjunctiva (Fig. 19.14, (1)), the often
the teeth will thereby damage the edge of the eyelid.
present lymph follicle field (2) in the ocular mucosa,
and swelling of the lacrimal gland (3) at the base of
Fig. 19.12 Inspection of the edge of the eyelid and the palpebral
mnjunctiva. The upper eyelid is ectropionized with the aid of Von
Graefe's fixation forceps. The opposite end of the forceps must remain
Fig. 19.13 Inspection of the palpebral (1) and the bulbar (2) side of the
sufficiently free from the palm of the hand (arrow).
nictitating membrane.
185
Chapter 19:
EYES
Strabismus (squinting) is often encountered in Siamese
cats and occasionally in the dog. Nystagmus is the term
used for involuntary trembling, repeatedly vertical or
horizontal or rotary eye movements (see § 18.2.4).
Enophthoimos
The retractor bulbi muscle is very strong in domestic
mammals and can retract the globe as much as 10 to
15 mm. This also results in protrusion of the nictitating
1
membrane. When there is pain or irritation of the eye,
there is almost always not only blepharospasm but also
enophthalmos (deeply set eye). Also when there is
and enophthalmos can occur. The examination must
Fig. 19.14 The bulbar side of the nictitating membrane.1 cartilage. 2 field
thenbe
directed
especially
to
these
aspects.
 of lymphoid follicles. 3 superfcial glands of the nictitating membrane.
Enophthalmos can be caused by insufficient retrobulbar
support due to cachexia, old age, loss of retrobulbar fat,
atrophy of chewing muscles, or retraction of the eye by
the nictitating membrane. Foreign bodies sometimes
the retractor bulbi muscle.
remain lodged behind the nictitating membrane.
Exophthoimos
Sclerol conjunctivo
This refers to rostral displacement of the globe. Several
The scleral conjunctiva is evaluated while the eyelids
breeds have a more or less 'physiologic' exophthalmos:
are spread apart with the fingers. The white sclera
the Pekingese, Shih Tzu, Boston terrier, and French
bulldog. Pathologic exophthalmos is usually caused by
conjunctiva. This very loose scleral conjunctiva can
 space-occupying processes behind the globe. There is
contain a few thin vessels, especially in young
also a certain pseudo-exophthalmos when there is an
animals.
Theconjunctivalvessels
lie
more
enlarged
globe
{see
e     
the
perpendicular to the limbus and are brilliant red. The
exophthalmos in itself does not usually give an
scleral vessels usually lie more or less parallel to the
indication of its cause, further examination is required.
limbus and are usually purple. Excessive vascular
In this regard it is important to begin with t
the
activity (vascular injection), redness, soft swelling,
anatomical structures behind the eye (see § 19.4.2) and
and bleeding (between the conjunctiva and the sclera)
to consider the possible pathological changes there.
are usually quite easily recognized against the white
background of the sclera. When there is doubt
whether these  abnormalities are conjunctival
Retrobuibor pressure (retropulsion)
or
scleral, the conjunctiva can be anesthetized and then
If either exophthalmos or enophthalmos is indicated in
lifted or moved a little with the fixation forceps to
the history or found during the examination, it is
make this differentiation. Also, a drop of 0.1%
Aq aa aui um ansad au aeniaa on hundui
epinephrine can be applied. Usually the conjunctival
palpation. For this purpose one lays the tips of the
vessels react with a rapid vasoconstriction and are
forefingers on the upper eyelids, closes the eyelids,
then less clearly visible. The scleral vessels initially
and presses both globes carefully into the orbits
 remain practically unchanged.
(Fig. 19.15). The counter pressure in the two orbits
must be equal and it should be possible to press the
eyes {in dolichocephalic breeds), easily and without
19.4.7 Globe (bulbus oculi)
pain, to about 10-15 mm deep in the orbits. This
The globe as a whole should be evaluated separately.
manipulation can then be repeated while the owner
holds the animal's mouth open. The retrobulbar
Position
area can be examined further by ultrasonography,
 In looking at the patient, take note of the line of vision
computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) (§ 19.6).
(the imaginary visual axis) and the interplay of the two
eyes. The eyes fix upon a certain point. One can then
try to attract the attention of the animal (by snapping
Size
the fingers or having the owner call the dog), so that
The two globes should be equal in size and appropriate to
the coordination of the eyes can be checked.
the size of the animal's head. A wide palpebral fissure or
186
Examination of the eye and adnexa
posterior chamber (between the lens and the iris),
through the pupil, to the anterior chamber. It is drained
and from there partly by means of pinocytosis and via
very fine canals to the scleral venous plexus. Another
part flows out via the ciliary cleft. From there the
greater part passes via the vortex system. A small part
passes via anastomoses to the conjunctival vascular
network. The aqueous fluid maintains the tension of
the eye at an average pressure of about 16-25 mm Hg
in dogs.17 This intraocular pressure together with the
rigidity of the cornea is called the tension. The least
reliable but still most readily available method for the
practitioner to measure the tension is by palpation.
Fig. 19.15 Measurement of the retrobulbar pressure. With both
Reliable veterinary tonometers use applanation of the
forefingers on the upper eyelids. the globes are pressed into the orbits
cornea with anesthesia, or the rebound effect on the
cornea, without the need for a topical anesthetic.
enophthalmos does not necessarily mean that the globe
is too small, although this may be the first impression.
However, they are costly for general practice.
Unilateral microphthalmos (congenitally small globe),
Bilaterat measurement of tension by poipotion
phthisis bulbi (acquired small globe), and buphthalmos
(acquired enlargement of  the  globe)  are usually
The tips of the two index fingers are laid, slightly curved,
recognized easily. It is more difficult if the cornea of one
on the closed upper eyelids of the two eyes (Fig. 19.16a).
eye is opaque white, for this usually makes the eye seem
If the curvature of the globe can be felt, slight pressure
larger. To confirm the size, one can measure the
 can be applied with both fingers at the same time and
horizontal  diameter along  the limbus  with  sliding
 thus the tension of both eyes can be compared. When
calipers. The horizontal corneal diameter is 16.7 ±
 correctly performed, the globe is not pressed into the
ue sI auaut fI s, 'sieo ul ww 8'0 F 6'Zl pue ssop ul ww [
orbital, and there is no protrusion of the nictitating
identical abnormality in size in both eyes, one must
membrane. For further comparison, one can then
estimate whether the globes are of abnormal size and not 
immediately palpate the tension of the eyes of another dog.
appropriate for the size of the head. One must then look
for associated signs to support the impression about the
Unitaterat measurement of tension by patpation
size of the globes. Ultrasonography provides an objective
The tips of both index fingers are placed on the upper
mea sure of globe size.
eyelid of one globe. One fingertip palpates while the
other carefully varies the pressure (Fig. 19.16b). Both
Introocuior pressure/tension
methods
S give rough, subjective estimates. Breed
The aqueous fluid is formed by diffusion via the ciliary
predispositions and secondary signs of glaucoma such
      e 
 as complete diffuse corneal edema and mydriasis are
epithelium of the ciliary processes. It flows via the
then also of extra importance for the diagnosis.
Fig. 19.16 Estimating tension by bilateral palpation. A With the tips of both forefingers on the upper eyelids. the globes are lightly pressed inward
from the lateral side. against the hard orbital floor. B Unilateral method of manual estimation of tension. One finger is used to palpate while the other
varies the pressure.
187
Chapter 19:
EYES
19.4.8 Sclera
3 Descemet's membrane (fibrous, elastic layer)
4  endothelium
After the examination of the area around the eye,
the orbits, adnexa, and the globe as a whole, the
Nerve fibers from the trigeminal nerve (n.V) branch
components of the globe itself are examined.
extensively under the corneal surface, resulting in great
The sclera together with the cornea forms the stiff
corneal sensitivity. The transparency of the cornea is the
outer wall of the globe. The sclera consists of white,
result of the absence of keratinization, its uniform
lamellar, slightly elastic fibrous tissue. The thickness
varies, being 1 mm near the ciliary body, 0.3 mm at
condition of the stroma. The endothelium has the most
the equator, and about 0.8 mm at the emergence of the
important (Na+ pump) function in this regard. Damage
optic nerve. In contrast to the avascular cornea, the
to the endothelium or elevation of the pressure in the
sclera contains both a lymphatic and a blood vascular
system. Parts of the scleral venous plexus can be seen
retention in the cornea {edema). This may cause its
as a slightly bluish ring about 2 mm posterior to the
thickness to increase five fold. Epithelial damage also
limbus. From this plexus, anastomosing vessels join the
leads immediately to edema, but to a much smaller degree
conjunctival vascular system. Small accumulations of
and limited to a small area. The edema leads to irregular
pigment can be seen in the superficial layers of the
swelling of the cornea with gray-blue-white discoloration
sclera, especially in older animals.
and an irregular surface (islet pattern). A normal cornea
has an intact tear film and has a smooth, spherical surface
that is reflective, transparent, and very sensitive.
 During inspection, note is taken of the color of the
sclera, which is normally practically white. Pigments
Further exomination should toke place in a dimly-lit or
o i  r  q  u 
dorkened room!
making it yellow (see § 8.3.5).
Voscufor injection
Reflectivity
If the sclera is thin, the vascular system shines through
By means of its smooth surface, normally curved shape,
with a bluish color (this is normal in pups and kittens).
and appropriate tear film, the cornea acts as a curved
When the eye is inflamed or there is glaucoma, there
mirror. Although the reflected image of a window,
can be increased vascular activity {vascular injection,
outside light, or a lamp is distorted by the curvature,
redness) and edema in the limbal area. This is often
the object is completely and distinctly reflected {see
found in combination with conjunctival vascular
Fig. 19.4).
injection. If there is doubt whether the vascular
If inspection with or without a lamp reveals little or no
injection is conjunctival or scleral, the conjunctiva can
reflection, the tear film may not be intact (see § 19.4.3)
be lifted up or moved slightly over the sclera {see
and/or the corneal surface may be irregular. A reflected
§ 19.4.6) or the conjunctival vessels can be identified
image that is irregular but reasonably sharply outlined is
with the aid of a drop of 0.1 % epinephrine.
 almost always an indication of irregularity of the surface 
of the cornea, such as due to edema, possibly associated
Thickening
with defects. The tops of the greatest elevations reflect
Local inflammation of the sclera or episclera can result in
well (mountain peaks in the sun). This gives rise to a
pinkish-red thickened areas. These can be palpated with a
distorted image or one that is shattered. Pigment or
fingertip to evaluate their firmness. Neoplasms usually
granulation tissue can also cause a poorly outlined or
arising from the uvea (mostly melanomas) or limbus
scattered reflection image.
(nevus) can cause darkly pigmented areas on the sclera.
Curvature (sphericatity)
19.4.9 Cornea
The curvature of the cornea can be tested with the
keratoscope. The keratoscope is a disk with concentric
The cornea is the avascular, transparent window in the
black and white rings which when lighted are projected
onto the cornea. Most direct ophthalmoscopes are
The thickness, which is mainly determined by the
provided with a keratoscope with a line pattern. These
stroma, varies from 0.45 to 0.65 mm.? From the outer
rings or line patterns should be uniform and concentric
surface {covered by the tear film) to the inner surface,
when reflected by the cornea. If the cornea has an
the cornea consists of the following layers:
irregular protrusion or depression or is conical
1 epithelium (7-15 cells thick)
(keratoconus), the reflected image will be distorted
2 stroma (in very regularly-oriented collagen fibers)
(like elevation contours).
188
Examination of the eye and adnexa
Transporency
side to side, by rotating it and by varying the angle
The entire cornea should be completely transparent, but
(15-45° with respect to the eye of the examiner), the eye
in pups of about 12-40 days it is still slightly hazy. With
is examined for abnormalities. The first line is formed by
the naked eye, or better yet with a loupe or a slit lamp
the reflection on and the scattering in the cross-section
microscope, it is possible to detect focal edema, scars
of the cornea. This is followed by the cross-section of the
{white, like the sclera), dystrophic precipitates (white,
anterior chamber, which forms a darker band, in which
there is almost no light scattering. Then the light bundle
like sugar crystals or glass fibers), blood vessels,
granulation tissue, pigment, or foreign bodies. In many
reaches the surface of the iris and the anterior lens
diseases,
cornea
locally
capsule, which is observed as a convex line (curving out 
corneal
，the
becomes
vascularized.  Superficial blood  vessels are usually
toward the examiner). The lens is then ‘transected", its
branched and continue into the conjunctiva. Deep
optical density being similar to that of the cornea. In
animals over 6 years of age there is a physiological
(branching late) and disappear under the sclera. In
sclerosis of the nucleus of the lens, leading to a less
order to localize abnormalities in the depth of the
transparent cross-section in the slit lamp picture. The
cornea, use is made of the slit lamp, preferably
posterior lens capsule produces a concave line and then
in
combination with a binocular loupe or microscope.
the light beam fans out in the vitreous. The retina is
If there is so much corneal edema that inspection of
usually not visible with the slit lamp. If it is visible,
the deeper parts  is impossible because of
either the lens is absent or dislocated {lens luxation) or
the
the retina is displaced anteriorly (retinal detachment).
cloudiness, drops of hypertonic {5-10%) NaCl solution
can be applied in order to reduce the ederma temporarily.
Sensitivity
Note: Descemet's membrane remains clear when
there is corneal edema. If a clear pit is found in a field
The sensitivity of the cornea can be tested with a
of corneal edema, it is most probably a deep defect
moistened and twisted pluck of cotton. This should be
that extends to Descemet's membrane! It should be
done before a local anesthetic is applied (see § 19.4.6).
checked with fluorescein (see below). The margin of
When the cornea is touched the eyelids should close
the defect (stroma) will stain, the “floor” of the defect
immediately (corneal reflex). This reflex can also be
(Descemet's membrane) will not.
stimulated by blowing on the cornea, but the cornea
should not be touched with the fingertip.
Slit lomp (microscope)
Diagnostic staining
With the aid of a narrow beam of light (Fig. 19.17), its
length and width being adjusted to the size of the part
The use of staining materials can be helpful for the
to be examined, a thin slice is made through the eye so
detection of defects in the cornea and for examination
that even optically dense parts or areas can be
of the tear drainage system. If there are indications of
illuminated (Tyndall effect;  4.1.1).17
central  corneal defects (edema, irregular reflection
al rane un paep a Pnogs uis "a
In addition, convex and concave surfaces in the cornea
examination of the deeper parts of the eye. Otherwise
and the anterior and posterior lens capsules produce
the persistence of the stain can temporarily prevent
reflections. By moving the lamp up and down and from
 good examination of the deeper parts.
Sodium fluorescein
The orange-colored sodium fluorescein becomes yellow-
 green fluorescent when diluted and it adheres quite well 
in corneal defects, thereby improving visualization.
The patency of the tear drainage system can also be
examined with fluorescein. For examination of corneal
defects, it is preferable to use paper strips impregnated
with this stain; the strip is placed in the ventral
conjunctival sac for about 1 second. Excess stain can
be rinsed away if necessary.
Fluorescein solution is especially useful for examining
the tear drainage system, but much more dye is applied
than with the paper strip. If the fluorescein solution
becomes contaminated, pathogenic bacteria such as
Fig. 19.17 The narrow light beam of the slit lamp penetrates the
anterior segment of the eye. 1 cornea. 2 anterior chamber. 3 lens.
4 vitreous
customary to use commercially available mini-packages.
189
Chapter 19:
EYES
Passage through the tear drainage system
light, which makes the fluorescence easier to see. If there
(Fig. 19.18)
is rapid passage of the stain in spite of epiphora, then it
When there is hindrance to tear drainage, which can be
can be concluded that there is overproduction of tears
manifested by a tear stripe (see § 19.4.2), the passage of
caused, for example, by irritation. An abnormally high
tear production will have been noticed earlier in the eye
the fluorescein from the conjunctival sac to the nose is
checked. For this purpose the impregnated strip is left in
examination in the Schirmer tear test. Very slow passage
the conjunctival sac a little longer than for corneal
or no passage at all can be the result of an abnormality
staining and a few drops of 0.9% NaCl solution can
in
thetear
drainage
system, withor without
also be applied. It is also possible to use a fuorescein
Overproduction of tears.
solution (see above). With the nose in a low position the
stain should reach the ipsilateral nostril within
Corneof defects (Fig. 19.19)
maximally one minute. When its appearance in the
 Fluorescein cannot penetrate in or through intact corneal
nostril is in doubt, it can be checked with a cobalt blue
 or conjunctival epithelium. When there is an epithelial or
deeper defect, the stain can penetrate and attach in and
between the damaged epithelium and/or stroma. In case
of doubt, one can make use of cobalt blue light and a
loupe or slit lamp microscope. If a fluorescein-positive
defect is present, its location, size, edge, and depth are
vascular injection toward the defect indicate a good
undermined {the fluorescein creeps under the edge) and
the absence of vascular injection are signs of indolence.
ay iog apeu a ueo saapa aaul jo sueis
examination (microbiology, cytology) (see § 19.2). Edges 
that are swollen and yellowish-gray are usually an
indication of a very aggressive liquefaction of the
corneal tissue by lysing bacterial products.
 In addition to the appearance of the edges, the deeper
parts of the defect are also examined. In deep defects,
Fig. 19.18 The tear apparatus. 1 tear gland. 2 accessory tear glands.
3 fornix. 4 inferior lacrimal punctum. 5 superior lacrimal punctum.
epithelium and stroma are well stained by fluorescein
 6 lacrimal sac. 7 nasolacrimal duct, 8 orifice in the nasal opening.
but Descemet's membrane is not. Very deep defects
1
2
2
③
1
2
③
4
5
4
6
5
C
B6
Fig. 19.19 Corneal defects in cross-section. stained with fuorescein (black in the figure). A superficial epithelial defect. B defect extending into the
stroma. C defect extending to Descemet's membrane. which itself does not take up the stain. 1 tear film. 2 epithelium. 3 stroma. 4 Descemet's
membrane. 5 endothelium. 6 aqueous.
190
Examination of the eye and adnexa 
thus consist of a crater with a fluorescent wall and a
surface of the iris {the caudal border of the anterior
thin, crystal-clear center. In such a case one must take
chamber) is straight.
great care because of the risk of corneal perforation.
Damaged granulation tissue on the cornea also stains
anterior face of the base of the iris and the inner side
with fluorescein and should not be confused with a
of the cornea at the limbus. The chamber angle should
corneal defect.
form a roomy entry to the drainage system for the
The fluorescence disappears after a few hours. As
aqueous fluid (see § 19.4.7). In the ophthalmologic
soon as a corneal defect is covered by flattening
literature an unambiguous distinction is not always
epithelial cells, it becomes fluorescein-negative, even if
made between the concept of chamber angle and that
the cornea is not yet of normal thickness.
of drainage or filtration angle. If the chamber angle is
narrowed, the beam of the slit lamp on the iris will lie 
Rose bengot (not routine)
closer to or in contact with the corneal endothelium.
Rose
(dichlorotetraiodofluorescein)
The pectinate ligaments of the drainage can only be
bengal"
1%
 penetrates through intact, but not vital, epithelial cells
inspected with the aid of a special contact lens
of the cornea and conjunctiva, and attaches to cells no
Clority
The fluid in the anterior chamber should be crystal clear.
inadequate tear film. The stain is irritating to the eye,
 In healthy animals the anterior chamber is therefore
so a local anesthetic should be applied in advance,
optically ‘empty'. In principle, any cloudiness in the
and when defects are present the staining is very
 anterior chamber is a bnormal. Examples are given below.
persistent. Hence this diagnostic staining is used
As a result of trauma, a uveal vessel can rupture and
only when dubious STT values lead to suspicion of
hemorrhage can occur in the anterior chamber
keratoconjunctivitis sicca or there is too rapid
(byphema). In the light beam of the slit lamp, one finds
disruption of the tear film without epithelial defects
the anterior chamber more or less filled with blood. If
(fluorescein-negative).  The   number  of  purplish-red
the bleeding has already stopped, the sedimentation of
flecks, which can only be counted carefully with the
the erythrocytes will result in a horizontal line in the
aid of a slit lamp microscope, is a measure of the loss
anterior chamber.
of cells and consequently of the severity of the
Hypopion is the presence of pus in the anterior
disturbance of the tear film. In cats dendritic corneal
chamber. In general it is the product of inflammation
defects, such as can be caused by herpes
virus
 in the uvea (anterior uveitis).22
infection, may also be stained by rose bengal.
After inflammation or trauma, adhesions (synechiae)
can develop. Anterior synechiae are those formed
between the cornea and the iris, and posterior
19.4.10 Anterior chamber
synechiae are those between the iris and the lens. As
 part of the syndrome of persistent papillary membrane,
The anterior chamber is examined with the aid of the slit
lamp or a small, focal light source. The anterior
thread-like structures may be observed in the anterior
chamber is evaluated for shape, depth, and clarity.
chamber (see § 19.4.12: embryonic remnants). Small,
fixed or drifting, usually pigmented cysts {iris cysts) are
Shope ond depth
occasionally observed in the anterior chamber. Very
thin, white clouds of vitreous hanging over the edge of
The anterior border is formed by the endothelium of the
the pupil are an indication of the beginning of a lens 
cornea. In the light beam of the slit lamp special
luxation (see § 19.4.14). Neoplasms can more or less
attention is given to the posterior border of the section
fill the anterior chamber.
precipitates can be attached to the endothelium,
causing an irregular, bumpy inner border. The iris and,
19.4.11 Pupil
at the level of the pupil, the lens form the caudal
border of the anterior chamber. The iris, lying against
Shope ond position
the lens, should follow its curvature. Thickening of
The central opening in the iris is called the pupil. The
the iris causes this regular curvature to be distorted
shape of this opening is determined by the course of
and the slit lamp shows a bumpy or a larger step
the fibers of the sphincter muscle of the pupil. Many
to the lens than is normal. With loss of support
species have a round pupil. The cat has a vertically
from the lens, due to its detachment, absence, or
slit-form pupil. The shape of the pupil is particularly
flattening, the iris lies in a flat plane, so that the
recognizable during complete miosis (narrowing of the
anterior chamber is deeper and the light line over the
pupil).
191
* Lissamine green can be used in place of rose bengal.
Chapter 19:
EYES
In mydriasis (widening of the pupil), the pupil is
right side and normal on left: abnormalities in the
usually round or practically round. Anisocoria refers to
afferent system on the right, from the retina to the
a difference in the size of the two pupils. Adhesions
optic chiasm
between the edge of the pupil and the lens or the cornea
6 anisocoria with mydriasis on right side and normal
can cause changes in the shape of the pupil (dyscoria).
pupil on left, DPR absent on right side and normal
on left, CPR absent: defect in parasympathetic
Reflexes
innervation on the right side (via the oculomotor
The pupillary reflex apparatus regulates the size of the
nerve)
pupil opening and thus the amount of light that falls
 7  anisocoria with mydriasis on right side and normal
upon the retina. The accommodation system of the lens
pupil on left, DPR and CPR absent on right side
is influenced at the same time. The sphincter muscle of
but DPR normal and CPR absent on left: optic
the pupil is the strongest muscle and is innervated by
nerve and ciliary ganglion nonfunctional on the
the parasympathetic fibers in the oculomotor nerve.
right side, usually caused by a retrobulbar lesion
The dilator muscle of the pupil is innervated by
sympathetic fibers.
Direct pupillary reflex (DPR). In a completely
19.4.12 Iris
darkened room a strong but not too large light source
The iris is a part of the uvea. Posteriorly the iris
is held before the eye. A penlight can be used for this
merges with the ciliary body, without a definite border.
purpose. The light is held about 5 cm in front of the
The ciliary body merges, via the ora ciliaris retinae,
eye on the imaginary visual axis, so that the light beam
with the choroid and the pigment epithelium of the
shines on the central point {central area) of the retina.
retina.
The eye should be allowed at least 15 seconds to adapt
The iris consists of connective tissue, muscle fibers of
to the dark and then suddenly the light is turned on.
the sphincter and the dilator muscles, and a great
The exposed pupil should narrow rapidly and remain
number of blood vessels and nerve fibers, and it is
small (miosis).
usually strongly pigmented. In most species of animals
Consensual or indirect pupillary reflex {CPR). In this
there is a well-developed arterial ring in the base of
test one observes the pupil of the eye that is not
the iris. This can often be seen as a small, slightly
illuminated. The room should be darkened slightly less
mea ndering, elev ated ring.
than for evaluating the direct reflex. When the light is
shone in one eye, usually a prompt miosis occurs in the
opposite eye. The CPR is named after the eye in which
 In most species of animals the iris is deep brown to golden
the light is shone.
yellow (but blue in the Siamese cat). The pigmentation is
When light shines on the retina, the narrowing of the
pupil should occur within a few seconds and should be
usually most pronounced at the edge of the pupil.
optimal after 5-6 seconds. After the light is turned off,
Pigment epithelium extending from the retina covers the
posterior surface of the iris. The absence of pigment
from the anterior part and the stroma of the iris gives a
Miosis can occur slowly in response to light because
 blue appearance as a result of the pigment epithelium on
of the animal's anxiety or because of a pathological
change. The test should therefore be repeated a few times.
its posterior surface. If there is no pigment in either the
iris or the pigment epithelium (albino), the iris appears
Pupillary rigidity, which is the complete absence of a
red because of its vascular network. Abnormalities in iris
reaction to light, is almost without exception the result
of a pathological condition. If there is an abnormal
pigmentation are often associated with similar
abnormalities in the choroid. Sometimes pigment is
pupillary reaction and a mydriatic has not been used,
absent in only one eye, so the irises are of different
the principal conclusions which can be drawn are:
1 DPR and CPR normally present: normal
colors {heterochromia iridis). This can be seen, for
 2 DPR and CPR present bilaterally but slow: anxiety
example, in *blue merle' dogs.
or retinal abnormality without complete loss of
A reddish or gray coloring of the iris indicates
function
hyperemia and/or exudative inflammation. These are
3 normal pupil size, DPR and CPR absent: possible
signs of iritis or uveitis. The development of darkly
 adhesions between the lens and iris, or iris atrophy
pigmented focal elevations is an indication of the
4 bilateral mydriasis, DPR and CPR absent: bilateral
beginning of a neoplasm.
motor disturbance, possibly combined with afferent
disturbance, which cannot be localized further
Surfoce
5 anisocoria with slight mydriasis on right side and
 The normal iris has a slightly irregular surface as a result
normal pupil on left, DPR and CPR delayed on
of the vascular network that lies just under the surface.
192
Examination of the eye and adnexa 
During inspection with the slit lamp, the light beam
A 'thread’ on the surface of the iris or crossing the pupil to
falling on the iris causes a curved line, more or less
 another part of the iris, or attached to the lens or the
parallel to the lens curvature. One looks for focal,
cornea, is called a persistent pupillary membrane (PPM).
often more deeply pigmented nodules (melanoma). An
 Larger parts of the membrane persisting in the center,
unusually smooth, slightly tense surface, the result of
with a few threads passing to the iris, sometimes
 0 anp aq uo i tieuqe ose si 'suams asn
resemble a spider's web in the anterior chamber. They
inflammation or neoplastic growth in the entire iris.
 can also remain attached to the corneal endothelium and
cause scars there. Threads from the surface of the iris or
Thickness
the edge of the pupil can also be acquired (uveitis).
When the light from the slit lamp shines on the iris and
the anterior lens capsule, one can easily evaluate the
Resting position
thickness of the iris, right at the tra nsition.
Because the iris is normally supported and pushed
If the iris is thickened, the light beam will make a
slightly forward by the lens, it should follow the same
more definite step from the iris to the anterior capsule.
curvature as the lens. If the lens is absent, too flat, or
In this case the curvature of the iris can also be
luxated, the iris loses its support and lies in a flat plane.
obviously abnormal (see also § 19.4.10).
 In addition, the iris and especially its pupillary margin
will no longer follow the eye movements but begin
Defects
to flutter (iridodonesis). In inspecting the eye for
When inspected with a focal light source or the slit lamp,
iridodonesis, the examiner must hold his own head still.
the edge of the iris should be reasonably smooth and
The patient must also be held as still as possible and for
regular. The pupil should have a shape appropriate to
this purpose the person holding the animal should rest 
the species.
his elbow(s) on the table). With a spot light or slit lamp,
Defects in the edge of the iris {through which one
the edge of the iris in particular is observed carefully
can see the lens) are usually congenital (colobomas)
until the patient makes a spontaneous movement of the
(Fig. 19.20); the shape of the pupil is only slightly
eye. Directly after the eye movement one can see the
changed. One can also encounter mesh-like defects
iridodonesis develop. When inspection with the slit
(atrophy); the iris can be almost transparent focally or
lamp reveals a straight or slightly posteriorly curving
even absent over large areas {aniridia).
light beam on the iris, it is very likely that support for
the iris by the lens is inadequate or completely missing.
Embryonic remnonts
In this case one must give special attention to the
During embryonic development the ‘pupil’ of the
presence of iridodonesis and the location and shape of
the lens, as well as to the presence of small amounts of
primitive iris tissue is covered by a vascular membrane,
the pupillary membrane (see Fig. 19.24).
vitreous in the anterior chamber.
This
membrane connected to the anterior side of the iris at
A circular adhesion of the iris to the lens {e-g-, after
the level of the so-called collarette (epipupillary, thus
iritis) can obstruct the flow of aqueous fluid through
the pupil. As a result, the iris can bulge anteriorly {iris
not at the pupil margin), begins to regress about two
bombe; see Fig. 19.27a). The line of light reflection by
weeks before birth, and generally has completely
the slit lamp on the iris thus lies almost directly behind
Occasionally, remnants of this membrane remain as
the cornea, the anterior chamber angle has almost
congenital defects (Fig. 19.21).
disappeared, and centrally the iris turns directly
posterior to the anterior capsule of the lens. This
abnormality is often associated with an overall increase
in pressure in the eye (glaucoma), via which diffuse
clouding (edema) of the cornea develops. This hinders
the slit lamp examination of the ophthalmic structures
behind the cornea considerably.
Tronsilluminotion
When cloudiness of the cornea hinders inspection of the
anterior chamber and especially the iris and pupil,
transillumination may be effective. A small, strong
a an oui au si uad e se ys aos 
from below or the light is placed directly against the
Fig. 19.20 Interrupted contour of the pupil due to congenital defects in
sclera 5-10 mm posterior to the limbus. In this way
dosure of the edge of the iris/pupil (colobomas).
light shines on the tapetum lucidum. If one then
193
Chapter 19:
EYES
 Fig. 19.21 Remnants of the hyaloid' system. the tunica vasculosa lentis and the pupillary membrane: 1 persistent pupillary membrane. crossing the
pupil. 2 extending from the iris to the anterior capsule of the lens. 3 between the iris and the corneal endothelium. 4 remnant of the hyaloid artery
(only visible when a slit lamp microscope is used). 5 remnant of the anterior tunica vasculosa lentis anterior.
looks into the eye from the front, one can use the
reflected light to evaluate the contour and sharpness of
the pupillary margin.
19.4.13 Posterior chamber
The posterior chamber of the eye is formed by the space
bordered by the lens, the ciliary body, and the iris. This
 space cannot normally be inspected. The presence of a
u o  a   u n is
in space between the iris and the lens, so that
inspection with the slit lamp is possible.
19.4.14 Lens
The lens is a biconvex structure (Fig. 19.22) and in dogs
the distance between the anterior and posterior poles is
6-7 mm. Anteriorly there is a fairly thick capsule,
beneath which there are one or two layers of epithelial
cells. Just past the equator is the transition to the
posterior capsule of the lens, which is much thinner
and under which there is no epithelium. The interior of
the lens consists of fibers which are arranged like the
layers of an onion, arising in the equatorial area and
surrounding the older lens nuclei. The central nuclei of
the lens undergo condensation with age and they also
undergo dehydration. In older animals (from about six
years of age) this can result in a physiologic haziness of
the center of the lens (nuclear sclerosis).
1
The lens fibers lie grouped in such a way that the
Fig. 19.22 Cross-section of the lens. 1 thick anterior capsule.
connection points where their ends meet (Fig. 19.23)
2 epithelium. 3 cortex (youngest fibers). 4 juvenile nucleus. 5 fetal
form a Y in the anterior part of the lens and an
nucleus. 6 embryonal nucleus. 7 posterior capsule.
194
Examination of the eye and adnexa
4
3
Fig. 19.24 The embryonal hyaloid' vascular system around the lens. at
Fig. 19.23 The course of the lens fibers in the anterior and posterior
parts of the lens. The junction of the fbers forms the connection lines.
its maximum development. 1 arteria hyaloidea. 2 tunica vasculosa lentis
in the shape of a Y anteriorly and an inverted Y posteriorly.
(TVL) posterior. 3 TVL anterior. 4 membrana pupillaris.
vascular network, the tunica vasculosa lentis (TVL). After
inverted Y in the posterior part. Especially in pups and
passing the equator the vessels join to form the vascular
kittens, these lines are easily seen with the slit lamp
ring in the future base of the iris, where the pupillary
microscope. Turbidity of the lens fibers (cataract) often
membrane (PM) also arises. This AH-TVL-PM system
begins at these division lines, so that they can also be
begins to regress shortly before birth. A remnant of
distinguished with the naked eye in the light of the slit
the hyaloid artery is visible postnatally as a white
lamp.
microscopic spiral string hanging from the posterior
The lens hangs on very fine threads, the zonular fibers,
capsule slightly under the posterior pole (see Fig. 19.21).
which form the suspensory apparatus of the lens,
The inspection of the lens is performed initially with a
the ciliary zonules or Zinn's zonules. The fibers are
focal light source and subsequently with the slit lamp
attached to the lens at its equator and they are
(Figs 19.25 and 19.17).
suspended peripherally between the ciliary processes of
Note: Vision is tested directly after this initial
the ciliary body.
inspection (see § 19.4.16), but before it can be
The lens contains no blood vessels or nerves and thus
influenced by the administration of a mydriatic. In
inflammation within it is extremely rare (only
in
animals that already have mydriasis, for example as
congenital, traumatic, or neoplastic abnormalities).
a result of loss of retinal function, the examination of
During the embryonal phase (Fig. 19.24) the hyaloid
the lens, vitreous, and fundus can be carried out
 artery (arteria hyaloidea, AH) grows anteriorly out of the
directly. If there is a more or less normal pupillary
optic papilla. At the lens it divides to form a surrounding
reaction, the definitive examination of the lens and
A
234
B
2345
Fig. 19.25 Slit lamp image of the
6-section through the cornea. 2 light
beam on the surface of the iris. 3 light beam on the anterior lens capsule. 4 cross-section through the lens. 5 light beam on the posterior lens 
capsule.
195
Chapter 19:
EYES
deeper parts of the eye is carried out after administration
conical shape. If the lens is too flat, the iris lies in a
of a short-working mydriatic (older animals: 0.5%
flat plane. If the anterior surface of the lens is irregular,
tropicamide; animals up to about 12 weeks: 1%
the iris tends to take on this irregularity also. The slit
atropine).4
lamp line on the iris and the anterior capsule will thus
be either too straight or wavy (Fig. 19.28a). Conical
Caution: if glaucoma has been diagnosed or is suspected
changes are usually posterior and the slit lamp line on
because of increased intraocular pressure {increased
the posterior capsule, which is found to be unusually
tension), or there is an increased risk of glaucoma,
deep, bends away or has an abnormal curvature.
as with lens luxation, the use of a mydriatic is
contraindicated! Also do not forget that animals,
especially cats, can react to the bitter mydriatic after
Lentidonesis
it passes through the nasolacrimal duct to the
If some of the zonular fibers are missing or defective
nasopharynx and reaches the taste papillae, by excessive
(Fig. 19.27), the lens will be partly loosened and
salivation, swallowing, and/or foaming at the mouth.
vitreous can “leak' over the edge of the pupil into the
anterior chamber. This will be visible as very thin,
Clority
white, cloudy material in the anterior chamber. When
the eye moves, the lens can, because of its inertia, lag
Macroscopically the lens is completely transparent,
behind and vibrate {lentidonesis). Just as in inspection
having approximately the same density, in the slit lamp
for iridodonesis, the head of the patient must be held
light, as the cornea. Every abnormal increase in density
verystill
and the examiner must wait
tfora
of the lens or its capsule shown by the light beam of
spontaneous movement of the eye.
the slit lamp is called cataract.
The location of cataracts within the lens is described
Location
using the terms polar, capsular, subcapsular, cortical,
anterior, posterior, and nuclear. Cataracts at the
If most or all of the zonular fibers are broken, the lens
periphery of the lens are described as equatorial
can be displaced. When only part of the fibers are
(Fig. 19.26).
broken there is subluxation. The iris thus loses part of
its support, iridodonesis develops, and an aphakic
Size ond shape
crescent develops between the pupil and the contour of
the lens (Fig. 19.28c).
When there is enlargement of the lens due to swelling,
the only change usually seen in the slit lamp beam is a
In complete anterior luxation of the lens (Fig. 19.28d),
slight shallowness of the anterior chamber. If the lens is
the slit lamp cross-section of the lens is found to lie
too small in diameter, full mydriasis allows the ciliary
directly against the corneal endothelium. In total
       
posterior luxation, the slit lamp light beam shows in
  1  o a o u sl  "nd
the worst cases that behind the pupil there is no lens at
irregularly folded surface, or instead bulge out in a
all or only a small part of the lens. To magnify the
view of the lens and its surroundings, use can be made
of the ophthalmoscope (+8 to +12).
1
A
B
Fig. 19.27 A The edge of the pupil is adhered to the anterior lens
3
capsule. The iris is pushed anteriorly by the continuing production of
aqueous: iris bombe. B Some of the zonular fibers are ruptured. The
Fig. 19.26 Locations of lens densities (cataract). 1 capsular.
lens is luxated posteriorly. The iris and the lens thus lose their support
2 subcapsular. anterior polar. 3 cortical, 4 nuclear. 5 equatorial.
and fixation. respectively. and they both make trembling movements:
6 subcapsular cortical. posterior polar. 7 retrolental.
iridodonesis and lentidonesis. respectively.
196
Examination of the eye and adnexa
！
B
C
Fig. 19.28 Slit lamp images. A An image in mydriasis of a lens that is too flat and irregular on the anterior surface and is conical posteriorly
B Posterior luxation of the lens. in miosis. C Posterior luxation of the lens. in mydriasis. A dark moon is visible between the equator of the lens and
the pupil contour. D Anterior luxation of the lens linto the anterior chamber). The cross-section of the lens is now visible directly behind the cornea.
19.4.15 Vitreous
float in the vitreous (asteroid hyalosis). In a liquefied
vitreous they can also have the tendency to swirl
The vitreous is a gelatinous mass which may have many
downward (synchysis scintillans). In the examination
compartments. There is still little known about this
with the slit lamp, with full mydriasis, these crystalline
structure. This part of the eye also contains no blood
spots can be illuminated in the light beam behind the
vessels or nerves. A white string extending from the
 posterior capsule of the lens. Larger flakes or streaks of
posterior capsule of the lens in the direction of the
blood in the light beam indicate processes arising from
retina can be a persistent hyaloid artery. Densities
the choroid or retina. Streaks of blood behind the
(Fig. 19.29), such as those due to degenerative
lens, with or without vessels, can be congenital
processes, may be seen as small white flakes which
abnormalities or an indication of retinal detachment.
If there is more solid material, with thicker vessels,
neoplasia must be considered. When abnormalities are
found in the vitreous, they can be examined further
with the ophthalmoscope (lenses +1 to +8).
19.4.16 Fundus (retina and choroid)
The fundus is understood to mean the most posterior
inner layers of the globe that are visible with the
ophthalmoscope (Fig. 19.30). The innermost layer is
formed by the retina. This is a transparent membrane
through which the underlying choroid is visible.
Only when there are abnormalities such as exudation,
retinal hemorrhage, retinitis, or retinal detachment, can
Fig. 19.29 Slit lamp image of densities in the vitreous. during 
the retina itself be evaluated. TheCentralareafin
mydriasis. The white string behind the capsule at the posterior pole
humans called macula) is the part in which, during
of the lens is a persistent hyaloid artery. Streaks or fakes (asteroid
hyalosis or synchysis scintillans) light up in the vitreum.
miosis, the most important image recording occurs. The
197
Chapter 19:
EYES
A
B
Fig. 19.30 Fundus image (by direct ophthalmoscopy only small areas can be examined) of the right eye of a dog (A) and the right eye of a cat (B)
slightly developed or even absent. In some animals
Toward the periphery the concentration of rods rises
with litle pigment, much white skin, or a blue merle
color pattern, portions of the tapetum nigrum and/or
dark. The nerve fibers of the retina come together in the
lucidum can be absent and hence the vessels of the
optic papilla (optic disc), from which they proceed as
choroid are visible. These vessels should radiate more
the optic nerve (n. II) via the optic chiasm to the brain.
 or less regularly to and from the papilla. Because of the
The papilla is the only part of the nervous system that
very great variation in the appearance of the fundus
can be inspected noninvasively.
between and within animal species, inexperienced
examiners find the fundus difficult to evaluate and can
 In most species of animals the greatest concentration of
usually only confirm gross abnormalities. When there
retinal blood vessels passes to and around the central
is doubt it is better to refer the patient to someone
area. The retinal arterioles are in general thinner and
who has specific expertise in this subject.
brighter than the venules, which are somewhat darker
red. In the dog the arterioles rise up over the edge of
Exominotion of vision
the papilla; the venules can partially join in a ring
nearer the center of the papilla. In the cat the vessels
The examination of the vision of animals is difficult and
disappear directly at the edge of the papilla into the
not very reliable. The owner's mention in the history
tissue. These retinal vessels are the only part of the
that the patient bumps into objects in the light and/or
vascular system that can be inspected in this way.
in the dark is usually reliable information. If vision is
The choroid lies posterior to the retina. Its inner layer
to be evaluated, it must in any case be done before the
 is strongly pigmented in most species/breeds of animals.
size of the pupil is influenced {e.g., it can be done
The term tapetum nigrum is used for the pigmented
directly after the pupillary reflex has been tested), but
choroid. A more or less hemispherical area dorsal to
it can also be done after mydriasis has been induced
the papilla, varying in color from blue to orange-
(e.g., in patients with central clouding of the cornea,
yellow or green, is called the tapetum lucidum. This
anterior chamber, lens, or vitreous).
Vision is tested in full light and in a shaded area,
light so that a great variety of colors is produced.
allowing the use of both eyes and with one eye
Before these structures are developed (pups/kittens
shielded. It is preferable for the animal to be able to
younger than about seven weeks), this part of the
walk freely during this examination.
fundus is dark purplish-blue. In English and American
literature tapetal area or fundus is often used for T.
Obstocle test
lucidum and nontapetal area or fundus for the T.
In a room or hallway with a few obstacles, such as a
nigrum.
horizontal pole at some distance from the ground,
In some dogs with a very strongly pigmented (also
white paper, a ladder, etc., the animal is released and
chocolate colored) skin, the tapetum lucidum is only
then called by the owner. Preferably the animal should
198
Examination of the eye and adnexa
be called toward the exit. One observes the behavior of 
 is possible to examine the eye during miosis, but the
the animal. Careful walking, holding the head low, 
 u      ua
sniffing excessively, being easily startled, lifting the feet
 and so a short-acting mydriatic is applied about
too high like a rooster, bumping into the objects, etc.
15-20 min before the examination (see § 19.3)². In very
all indicate visual disturbance or blindness. In case of
 young animals mydriasis is produced by applying 1%
doubt the test can be repeated after the obstacles have
 atropine, Y2-3 hours before the examination.
been moved or taken away.
Ophthalmoscopy should always be performed in a
darkened room. If possible, the patient should be
Opticot piocing reoction
positioned so that it looks directly at the examiner.
Dogs and cats should preferably be held in a sphinx
Small animals can be picked up in such a way that the
 l a  aa a a  sa 
position, or alternatively in standing position. The
brought near a table, it should place its feet upon the
animal is then restrained in such a way that the head
table (optical placing reaction). If it does not do so
and neck are at an angle of about 90°.
until the feet have contacted the edge of the table, its
  o     oo  
Ophthoimoscope
reaction) (also see § 18.2.5).
Begin direct ophthalmoscopy with a lens of -1,
Falting object test
corrected if necessary for the examiner's eye.
Let an object such as a small fluff of cotton fall in front of
the animal. This should not cause any perceptible
The ophthoimoscopic exominotion
movement of the air. If the animal follows the object with
The light beam of the ophthalmoscope is placed in
one or both eyes, the vision of the eye(s) is presumably
the visual axis of the patient (Fig. 19.31). The
normal. Failure of the eyes to follow the falling object is
an indication, but not a confirmation, of poor vision.
eye. Then the examiner's eye is brought to about 1 cm
from the opening in the ophthalmoscope. Use the right
Folling off test
eye to examine the patient's right eye and the left eye for
The vision of pups, kittens, or cats can be tested by
the patient's left eye. Using the opposite eye has the
disadvantage of bringing the examiner 'nose to nose'
placing the patient on a table without restraining
it.
Cushions are placed on the floor surrounding the table.
with the patient, with the risk of the patient sneezing in
If the patient walks around and falls right off the table,
 your eye or biting your nose. If one begins carefully to
one may conclude that the vision is poor or absent. If
examine in the visual axis, one usually directly obtains a
the patient will hardly move or not move at all, the
view of the central area or the papilla. Only after
test is inconclusive.
 slight turning of the ophthalmoscope.
Menace reoction
Inspection
The menace reaction can be provoked by waving an
Papilla. The color, shape, outline, and elevation of the 
extended finger in the direction of the eye. This test is
not very reliable. The tactile hairs around the eye and
papilla are noted; a small central depression is normal.
A healthy color is pinkish white. The outline should be
the cornea itself are extremely sensitive to air
sharp. The shape varies from round to slightly
movements, which are very quickly produced by the
triangular or oval, depending on the species and the
moving hand, thus stimulating the eyelid reflex (see
§ 19.4.5 and § 18.2.4). The complete absence of a
degree of myelination.
Vessels. If the retinal vessels are present, attention is
response is an indication for a vision problem, but
given to their thickness, the regularity of the vessel
no more than that, for some animals react very
iaoy e ui eag Aq uazo are auos pue aeuad
wall, and the filling, the degree of tortuosity and color.
The complete absence of vessels in the normal location
environment or in the presence of a veterinarian.
is either congenital, acquired complete atrophy or due
to complete detachment of the choroid, the retina
Ophthatmoscopy
being suspended in the vitreous. Very thin vessels in the
Ophthalmoscopy is performed by use of a light beam and
 normal location can be an indication of degeneration.
a system of lenses. It can be direct or indirect. Beca use the
Tapetum lucidum. A normal tapetum lucidum, with a
nonspecialized veterinarian usually only has access to
normal retina overlying it, makes a moderately
a direct ophthalmoscope, only this system will be 
reflective, glossy, very finely granular and nicely
 described here. With the ophthalmoscope, a fundus area
 colored picture. If there has been retinal degeneration,
of only about 10 mm diameter can be examined. It
less light is absorbed through the retina, so that the
199
Chapter 19:
EYES
A
B
lewou e yonoun 5assed zuhil aun y ain ul 5ixe lensi aun ui 'aa aun jo uoeuiexa gidonsoweuydo buunp nuhi aun jo yied aul le'6h di
functioning retina (black): the entering light is partly absorbed by photoreceptors of the retina. The rest is reflected through the tapetum lucidum.
Circle B: when there is loss of function of the photoreceptors (e.g. degeneration). very litte light is absorbed: almost allight is now passing through
 and is being reflected by the tapetum lucidum (hyperreflection).
affected area is strongly illuminated, as though a lamp
The contents of the globe, the adnexa, and the skull can
were shining from behind it (hyperreflection). The
be examined by computerized tomography (CT) and
examination should also detect any hemorrhages,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).2 In recent years
exudates, accumulation of pigment or neoplasia.
 io jo a ii  s a
Tapetum nigrum. Abnormalities in this very strongly
techniques and the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for
pigmented area are very difficult for an inexperienced
identification of pathogenic organisms. Cytological
examiner to recognize.
examination of  fine-needle  aspirationbiopsies is also
used more often. Blood examination can sometimes be
19.5 Notation
helpful in characterizing inflammatory processes.
The most important ophthalmologic techniques for
The DVD contains a form for systematic recording of
further examination are:
the findings of the history and examination. Several of
the abnormalities can be drawn in.
alcian blue staining'
4
tonometry/tonography16
19.6 Further examination
Ultrasonography is very useful for further examination
 aspiration from the anterior chamber and other
isuonedse ssouse
7.5-1s MHz is needed. Ultrasonographic guidance
 gonioscopy (chamber angle inspection)21
facilitates accurate fine-needle aspiration biopsy
indirect ophthalmoscopy
of
 orbital processes.
fundus contact lens examination
Radiographic examination is carried out for the
electroretinography (ERG; examination of the
detection of radiopaque foreign bodies and changes in
retinal activity)
bony
Botht
the
making
and
the
visual evoked potentials (VEP; examination of
structures.
brain activity, stimulated by light)
interpretationofradiographs in this area require
considerable experience.
24,25
References
1 Cammpbell LH. Fox JG. Snyder SB. Ocular bacteria and mycoplasma
5 Bistner Sl. Examination of the eye. Vet Clin North Am 1971: 1:29.
of the clinically normal cat. Feline Pract 1973: 3:10.
6 Gelatt KN. Examination of the eye. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1970:
2 Allgoewer I. Schaffer EH. Stockhaus C. et al. Feline eosinophilic
37:326.
conjunctivitis. Vet Ophthalmol 2001: 4:69-74.
 7 Krawitz L. Clinical examination of the canine and feline eye. J Am
3 Kimura SJ. Fluorescein paper: simple means of insuring use of
Vet Med Assoc 1965: 146:33.
sterile fluorescein. Amm J Ophthalmol 1951: 34:446.
8 Magrane WG. Canine ophthalmmology. 3rd edn. Philadelphia: Lea &
4 Gelatt KN, Boggess TSl. Cure TH. Evaluation of mydriatics in the cat.
Febiger: 1977:9.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1973: 9:283
200
References
 9 Sammuelson DA. Ophthalmic anatomy. In: Gelatt KN. ed. Veterinary
l pa a Aojoleudo Aeuuaan ui Adosouog  unos 
ophthalmology. 3rd edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott. Willams & Wilkins:
66:895.
1999.
22 Olin DD. Examination of the aqueous humor as a diagnostic aid in
10 Stades FC. Beijer EGM. Hartman EG. Use of the lysozyme test in
anterior uveitis. J Amm Vet Med Assoc 1977: 171:557.
the diagnosis of kerato-conjunctivitis sicca in dogs and cats. Tijdschr
23 Boroffka SA. Verbruggen AM. Boeve MH, et al. UItrasonographic
Diergeneesk 1976: 101:1141.
diagnosis of persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis/
 11 Veith LA. Cure TH. Gelatt KN. The Schirmer tear test in cats. Mod
le ia shop o ui snoa Aed seldadu yuasiiad
Vet Pract 1970: 57:48.
UItr as0und 1998: 39:440-444.
12 Saito A. Kotani T. Estimation of lacrimal level and testing methods
 24 Dixon RT. Carter JD. Canine orbital venography. J Am Vet Rad Soc
 on normal beagles. Vet Ophthalmol 2001: 4:7-11.
1972: 13:43
13 Abramms KL. Brooks DE. Funk RS. et al. Evaluation of the Schirmer
 25 Gelatt KN. Guffy MM. Boggess TSl. Radiographic contrast
tear test in clinically normal rabbits. Am J Vet Res 1990: 51:1912-
 techniques for detecting orbital and nasolacrimal tumors in dogs. J
1913.
Am Vet Med Assoc 1970: 156:741.
 14 Slatter DH. Differential staining of canine cornea and conjunctiva
 26 Boroffka SA. Voorhout G. Direct and reconstructed multiplanar
2:7l e/6l oeid wuy 1ews r ang ueile pue jeuaq a5ou yni
mmputed tomography of the orbits of healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res
15 Stades FC. Boeve MH. Van der Woerdt A. Palpebral fissure length
1999: 60:1500-1507.
in the dog and cat. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1992: 2:155-161.
 27 Gelatt KN. Ophthalmic biopsy procedures. Vet Clin North Am 1974:
16 McMillan F. Foster RK. Comparison of MacKay-Marg. Goldmann.
4:437.
 and Perkins tonometers in abnormal corneas. Arch Ophthalmol 
 28 Shewen PE. Povey RC. Wilson MR. A survey of the conjunctival flora
1975: 93:420.
of clinically normal cats and cats with conjunctivitis. Can Vet J 1980:
17 Martin CL. Slit-lamp examination of the normal canine anterior
21:231.
ocular segment. Part I: Introduction and technique. J Small Anim
29 Vierheller RC. Clinical experience with indirect ophthalmoscopy.
Pract 1969: 10:143.
Mod Vet Pract 1966: 47:41.
18 Holland MC. Fluorescein staining of the cornea. J Am Med Assoc
 30 Bellhorn RW. Fluorescein fundus photography in veterinary
1964: 188:81.
ophthalmology. J Am Animm Hosp Assoc 1973: 9:227.
 19 Cello RM. Lasmanis J. Pseudomonas infection of the eye of the dog
 31 Hil DW. Young S. Arterial fluorescence angiography of the fundus
resulting from the use of contaminated fuorescein solution. J Am 
l say ag dx3 suawanseaw pue saueeadde ien aun jo n
Vet Med Ass0c 1958: 132:297.
16:457.
 20 Ward DA. Ophthalmic dyes. In: Gelatt KN. ed. Veterinary
:u g sey osuiddn eudiapeld upa pae hoowieuudo
1999.
201
20
Ears
A.J. Venker-van Haagen
 Poor hearing or deafness are usually only noticed if the
Chapter contents
hearing of both ears is disturbed.
20.1 History 202
20.1 History
20.1.1 Symptoms 202
If the general history and/or general impression indicate 
20.2 Examination of the ear 
203
an ear problem, questions are directed to the past
20.2.1 External ear 203
history. We ask whether there have been similar
Pinno 203
problems in the past, in the same ear, in the opposite
Eor conol 203
ear, or in both ears. Have the problems developed
20.2.2 Tympanic membrane 204
suddenly (a foreign body in the ear canal can cause
intense itching), or are they gradually worsening, or are
20.2.3 Middle ear 205
20.2.4 Hearing 205
to relieve the problem? In cases of chronic recurrent
20.3 Notation 205
otitis externa, the latter question is aimed specifically at
20.4 Further examination 206
discovering whether the owner has cleaned the ears
frequently. This method of ‘treatment” can make the
otitis externa persist and even become more severe. If a
parasitic disease is suspected, questions should be asked
about contacts with other animals, of the same species
The examination of the ear consists of examining the
as well as other species.
pinna, the ear canal, the tympanic membrane, the
middle ear, and the inner ear or labyrinth. Whether
20.1.1 Symptoms
there is a problem with one or both ears, the history
usually localizes it directly. Sometimes abnormalities of
Owners are often first confronted with the presence of
the ears are part of a generalized disorder, such as a
an ear problem in the animal because of the symptoms
 skin disease, or are the cause of generalized symptoms.
of pruritus and pain: rubbing the ear, scratching at it,
Pruritus, pain, changes in the shape of the ears, and
shaking the head. The head may be held in a different
increased secretion and odor are usually clearly described
position,
usually with the problem side turned
by the owner.
downward. The pinna can also have a different position
Both ears should always be examined, even if the
than is characteristic for the breed and although this can
history seems to indicate a unilateral problem, because
a severe disorder in one ear can disguise a less severe
it can also be an artifact {ear trimming)* or be due to an
but still important disorder in the other ear Whenever
inflammation or tumor of the pinna, or filling with
possible, the examination is begun on the side of the
blood (othematoma) or pus.
'good’ ear, in order to avoid carrying contamination
 The hair covering the pinna on the convex side is a
from the bad” ear over to the ^good’ ear.
continuation of the coat on the head, sometimes with
In disorders of the labyrinth the resulting vestibular
 an increase in the length of the hairs on the edge of the
dysfunction is so striking that coexisting deafness or
pinna. The concave side is thinly haired. Long hairs
reduced hearing are seldom mentioned in the history.
can be matted by food, blood, or exudate.
202
* prohibited by law in several countries
Examination of the ear
Skin changes are often caused by self-mutilation
movements also have a function in facial expression
(scratching, rubbing) and especially in the acute phase
and, to a small extent, in defense. It is also thought
they are characterizedby interruptions of the
that the movements of the jaws during eating have a
epithelium. Chronic skin changes are usually located
function in the transport of cerumen.
on the concave side of the pinna and can be in the
The pinna and the inner side of the external ear canal
form of scaling, hyperpigmentation, and proliferation,
are covered by skin. On the convex side of the pinna
the latter particularly at the base of the ear.
the hair is dense and full, on the concave side it is thin.
Thickening of the pinna can result from chronic
The ear canal in most animals has little or no hair, but
changes, but can also develop very acutely as a result of
in poodles, schnauzers, and rough-coated terriers, the
hermorrhage (othematoma), in which case the owner may
entrance to the ear canal in particular can be quite
have noted the fluctuating character of the thickening.
heavily haired, which can lead to chronic ear problems.
The temperature of the pinna varies with the
The vascular supply to the pinna can easily be seen on
circulation of blood, which can be increased in
the convex side. The concave side is mainly supplied
inflammation. Sometimes the owner reports that the
by vessels that penetrate through the cartilage.
pinnas feel warm.
Cerumen is secreted at the base of the pinna and in
Pinno
the ear canal. Cerumen is a product of sebaceous and
The pinnas are inspected for symmetry {although
ceruminous glands, yellow-brown and waxy. The odor
especially in dogs asymmetry can be normal) and for
can be described as slightly aromatic. Normally a small
uniformity and any abnormalities of the skin and hair
amount of cerumen is seen in the ear canal as well as
covering.
at the base of the pinna on the concave side. If the skin
The pinnas are palpated to discover temperature
becomes inflamed, the production of cerumen (
can
differences and structural changes. Temperature differences 
increase and its composition can change. As a result of
can occur as a result of reduced circulation (cool in shock,
an increase and a change in the bacterial flora, the
cold if necrotic) or inflammation (warmer). When the
appearance and the odor of the cerumen can change.
 pinna is thickened by an othematoma its temperature is
In severe inflammation, pus and blood can be mixed
normal but when there is an accumulation of pus (cat,
with it. Many owners can describe the odor as well as
after fighting), the pinna is warmer than normal. Structural
the appearance of the cerumen.
anp ane Aaul uayo auow inq 'siowni ot anp aq ueo sasueu
to ossification of the cartilages after trauma.
20.2 Examination of the ear
When indicated—for example, by signs of a disturbance
Eor conot
of equilibrium—the examination is not limited to
Inspection of the entrance of the ear canal provides
examination of the ear, but is extended to include a
important findings if there are indications of inflammation
 general examination and/or a neurological examination.
of the ear canal. First, the width of the entrance is
examined, for normally it should be possible to look into
20.2.1 External ear
the first part of the vertical part of the ear canal. A small
amount of hair can obstruct the view without being
The shape of the external ear is determined by the
 considered abnormal. The entrance can be narrowed by
cartilaginous structures and to a small extent by bone.
swelling of the skin or proliferation of the skin. Excessive
The pinna, the vertical part of the ear canal, and half
hair can occlude the entrance. In severe infections, erosions
of the horizontal ear canal are formed by the auricular
can also be seen in the epithelium of the ear canal.
cartilage. The second part of the horizontal ear canal is
Excessive production of cerumen can be visible in the
formed by the annular cartilage and the bony external
entrance. Pathological secretions, such as an excessively
acoustic meatus, which is part of the temporal bone of
sebaceous cerumen, or cerumen mixed with pus or blood,
the skull. The attachment between the two cartilages
can already be visible here. In cases in which excessive
and also between the cartilage and bone is formed by
abnormal secretion is already visible at the entrance, an
connective tissue. This structure of the external ear
abnormal and excessively strong odor will also be noted.
allows it to move freely in relation to the skull. The
The vertical part of the ear canal can be examined by
directions of the movements are determined by the
palpation. It should be possible to palpate this simple
actions of muscles attached to the cartilaginous
funnel-shaped part of the ear canal without causing pain.
structures. The innervation of the muscles is provided
It should therefore be possible to slightly compress the
by the facial nerve (VIl) and the trigeminal nerve (V).
cartilaginous structure. During this examination and
Under normal conditions a lively asymmetrical activity
passive movement of this part of the ear canal, there
of the ears is observed. The function of this movement
should be no sensation of fluid movements, which can
is to obtain optimal reception of sound, but ear
indicate an excessive amount of fluid secretion. The
203
Chapter 20:
EARS
compressibility can be reduced by proliferation in the ear
canal and by ossification of the cartilage. When there is
severe proliferation in the canal, the circumference is also
increased.
 Inspection of the further course of the ear canal is only
 possible with the help of special illumination techniques 
and special instruments. An otoscope is used for this
purpose in dogs and cats. This instrument consists of an
ear speculum with exchangeable cones, a small light
source, and a magnifying lens (also see § 4.1.1). The
fberglass bundles. The same otoscope can be used to
examine the ear canal and the tympanic membrane in a
Fig. 20.2 Ear flushing apparatus with handgrip and cannula
small cat as well as in a very large dog, by means of
various sizes of cones.
animal and scarcely results in hyperemia of the skin of
The technique of otoscopic examination is the same
the ear canal. The examination can also be hindered by
in the dog and cat. The animal is held in a sitting
excessive secretion or by excessive scaling. In this case
position or resting on its elbows and sternum on the
the ear canal must be flushed before good otoscopic
examination table and fixed in position by an expert
examination can be caried out. If microscopic examination
assistant (also see § 24.1.3). The animal's head is held
for parasites or bacteriologic examination of secretion is
looking straight ahead. If possible, the mouth should
indicated, material for this purpose must be collected
not be tightly closed with a cloth band or muzzle
before the flushing.
($ 24.1.3) during this examination, particularly with
Water or 0.9% NaCl solution can be used to flush the
 something tied behind the ears, for this usually presses
ear. The fluid must have a temperature of 35-39°C in
the ear canal shut or fixes it tightly against the head.
        
When the animal is held securely, either sitting or
The stream of water must be thin and strong in order
lying on its sternum, the left hand (if the examiner is right-
to wash out the long and narrow ear canal. An
handed) is used to grasp the pinna securely and pull it
apparatus developed for ear flushing in man is
frmly out laterally and ventrally. The effect of this is that
excellent for this.
the vertical and horizontal parts of the ear canal together
The apparatus is connected to the water supply pipe.
form a straight horizontal tunnel. Now the otoscope, held
The water is heated to 37°C and the pressure is
in the right hand, is inserted carefully into the ear canal.
indicated by the meter (Fig. 20.2). The blunt cannula is
The entire canal and the tympanic membrane can be seen
easily exchanged and can be sterilized. A stream of
by keeping the ear canal stretched and slowly moving it,
water is sprayed into the ear canal through the
 dorsally, rostrally, ventrally, and caudally, while looking,
cannula, with a force that is regulated by an easily.
following with the otoscope (Fig. 20.1).
controlled lever on the handle. Every ear can be
Sometimes the examination of the ear canal is
flushed in this manner, even if it is not known whether
hindered by excessive hair in the entrance. The hair
the tympanic membrane is intact, with one exception:
can be plucked out with the help of a round-topped
if after a recent trauma there is blood present in the
Pean forceps. With a short jerk bunches of hair can be
ear canal (skull trauma, risk of meningitis!) the ear
plucked out. This is not noticeably painful for the
may not be flushed.
After the flushing, the ear canal is dried. This is
accomplished most effectively by letting the animal shake
its head. Then the otoscopic examination continues.
The ear canal can be too narrow because of
inflammation (swelling or proliferation) of the lining
skin. Epithelial lesions may be seen and tumors can
also occur. Foreign bodies and bunches of hair (usually
loose and coming from outside the ear canal) must not
escape attention.
20.2.2 Tympanic membrane
If the ear canal is wide enough, the tympanic membrane
 e si au uda a padsi a u
Fig. 20.1 Use of an otoscope in the cat.
transparent membrane. It is round, but it appears oval
204
Notation
Pars flaccida
Malleus
Pars tensa
adial stripes
8
aans jeeue jo saeu y sauenga juedw yal pue  aun jo hue toz i
are seen less clearly. In the cat a polyp can push from the
middle ear against the tympanic membrane, causing it
to bulge outward. Eventually the polyp can grow through
the tympanic membrane into the external ear canal.
Excessive pressure in the middle ear causes the pars
flaccida to bulge outward, giving it the appearance of
a *pink blister” in front of the tympanic membrane.
A perforation of the tympanic membrane is usually
seen as a dark area. If the tympanic membrane is
severely torn, it is possible to see into the middle ear.
20.2.3 Middle ear
The middle ear can be inspected only if the tympanic
membrane is destroyed. Healthy mucosa in the middle
ear is whitish-yellow. If there is inflammation, the color
is red. For further examination of the structures of the
Fig. 20.4 Otoscopic view of the left tympanic membrane of a dog. The
ear within the skull, diagnostic imaging is necessary.
handle of the malleus (manubrium malleil is largely embedded in the
tympanic membrane and is visible as a curved white structure.
20.2.4 Hearing
because it is not situated perpendicular to the long axis of
Examination of hearing is usually not carried further than
the ear canal, but lies further inside ventrally and rostrally
observing the animal while a whistle is blown, hands are
than it does dorsally and caudally. The tightly stretched
clapped, or a door is slammed shut. These sounds must be 
part, the pars tensa, has a grayish-blue color, within
produced without the animal being able to see the
which the handle of the malleus (manubrium mallei) is
motions. If the dog or cat does not respond to any of these
outlined in white. Dorsally lies the pars flaccida, which is
stimuli, then severe bilateral hearing loss is very likely.
pinkish-red and elastic. Along the manubrium mallei
Hearing in each ear can be examined separately by means
there are small vessels and the structure of the pars tensa
of brainstem evoked response audiometry {BERA).4 This
has radial stripes. The manubrium mallei is slightly bent
electrophysiological  technique  involves recording  the
and the ventral end points rostrally (Figs 20.3 and 20.4).
brainstem response to stimulation of the ear with tone
Color changes can occur in the course of otitis externa
bursts at several frequencies.
or an inflammation of the middle ear. In chronic otitis
externa the tympanic membrane can become white or less
20.3 Notation
transparent. The tympanic membrane can in this case be
markedly thickened. If there is a middle ear inflammation
A form for recording the observations is shown on the
the tympanic membrane is red and the other structures
DVD.
205
Chapter 20:
EARS
20.4 Further examination
inspection under anesthesia
diagnostic imaging (radiography, CT, MRI)
The possibilities include:
brainstem evoked response audiometry (BERA)
examination for parasites
bacteriological examination
References
1 Venker-van Haagen AJ. The ear. In: Venker-van Haagen AJ. ed.
4 ter Haar G. Venker-van Haagen AJ. de Groot HN. et al. Click and
 Ear. nose. throat. and tracheobronchial diseases in dogs and cats:
low-. middle-. and high-frequency toneburst stimulation of the
Hannover: Schlutersche: 2005.
canine cochlea. J Vet Int Med 2002: 16:274-280.
 y ul ea an jo sasea huu  uae ulaua z
 ed. Current veterinary therapy Vll Philadelphia: Saunders: 1983.
 3 Venker-van Haagen AJ. Diseases and surgery of the ear. In:
Sherding RD. ed. The cat: diseases and clinical management. 2nd
edn. New York: Churchill Livingstone: 1994.
206
21
Endocrine glands
A. Rijnberk and H.s. Kooistra
Because only the enlarged thyroid gland and the
Chapter contents
testes are accessible for physical examination, the
examination of the endocrine glands rests mainly
21.1  History 208
upon signs of functional disturbances of other organ
Appearance 208
systems. The history and physical examination are used
Behovior 208
to obtain a picture of the full development of the
Endurance 208
patient, with special attention to the period in
which the iatrotropic problem developed. In addition,
Appetite 208
several aspects of the organ systems are pursued
Water intoke 208
systematically.
Reproductive functions 208
Many relevant findings may already have been
Coat and skin 209
 obtained in the history, general impression, and general
Locomotion 209
 s  a   s rua
Nenvous system ond vsion 209
further focusing of the examination in cases in which
21.11  Living conditions 209
the problem formulation points in the direction of an 
211.2 Past history 209
endocrine disorder. Overlapping with other chapters is
thus unavoidable. Many examples are used to illustrate
21.2 Physical examination 209
the descriptions of signs and abnormalities.
21.2.1  Respiratory movements 209
Objective information should if possible be collected
21.2.2 Pulse and ictus cordis 209
with the help of measurements based on an interval
21.2.3 Rectal temperature 210
scale. These data will become even more valuable as
21.2.4 Coat and skin 210
measurements, such as body weight, are made during
21.2.5 Abdomen 210
follow-up. Previous photographs can be of great help
in obtaining insight into the nature and the rapidity of
21.2.6 Male genitalia 211
 changes in the patient's appearance.
21.2.7 Female genitalia 211
In this way the history and physical examination often
21.2.8 Skeleton and muscles 211
reveal a pattern that makes it possible to recognize an
 21.2.9 Thyroid glands and parathyroid glands 211
endocrine disorder. In many cases the diagnosis of an
21.3 Notation 212
endocrine disorder depends on recognition of a pattern.
21.4 Further examination 212
In other cases a diagnosis is only obtained by a
thorough analysis of one or more of the formulated
problems, such as was presented systematically in
Chapter 3. Hence the results of the examination
The endocrine glands are involved in regulating the
described below can lead to the formulation of a
function of almost all organ systems. Hence functional
 problem representing a disease (e.g., the clinical picture
disturba nces
ofendocrine
glands
often
have
of hyperthyroidism), or it can lead to a problem
consequences for more than one organ system and thus
formulation that goes no further than a clinical sign
for the functioning of the animal as a whole.
(e.g-, polyuria).
207
 Chapter 21:
ENDOCRINE GLANDS
21.1 History
on hypothalamic regulatory centers and as compensation
for energy loss via glucosuria. Affected animals can
 Disorders of endocrine organs often lead to disturbances
exhibit a very pronounced hungry behavior. Picky eaters
of other organ systems and the signs arising from these
can
change into animals that devour everything,
disturbances form the iatrotropic problems. Some of
including such things as potato peelings and refuse along
these, such as polydipsia and polyuria, are often the
the street. At the least suggestion or signal that there is
reason that the animal is brought to the veterinarian.
something to eat, they suddenly appear. Especially in
The following discussion of signs does not, however,
those cases in which there is weight loss in spite of a
proceed in the order of their frequency of occurrence.
good or even increased appetite, it is important to obtain
First an attempt is made to give a general picture of
an exact history of feeding and food intake, to determine
the patient and this is followed by a few specific
the energy intake.
questions about the functioning of the organ systems.
Some endocrine disorders can have the opposite
effect, resulting in a poor appetite, signs of nausea, and
Appeoronce
sl la e jo id nn si s a ui
Both weight loss and obesity are usually mentioned
and malaise, occurring in hypoadrenocorticism and
spontaneously by the owner. Other changes
in
ketoacidosis resulting from diabetes mellitus.
appearance, such as increased abdominal size or a change
in the appearance of the face, are often mentioned only in
Water intoke
response to specific questioning. However, the owner's
Especially in the dog, many endocrine diseases are
impression of such changes may be equivocal. Old
associated with reduced concentration of the urine and
photographs sometimes resolve the uncertainty.
consequently with increased water intake. The polyuria
and polydipsia are readily noticed by the owner,
Behovior
especially if they begin to interfere with the owner's life,
Apathy and lethargy are two of the classical signs of
such as having to get up a few times every night to let
       o
the dog out. The dog may also begin urinating in the
characterized as sleepiness and little or no interest in
house. The amount {in liters) that the dog drinks is often
playing or going for a walk. This is often associated with
overestimated by the owner. It may also be found that
signs that the animal feels cold, such as a preference for
the dog does not really have polydipsia but drinks more
lying in warm places. Apathy and lethargy are also part
beca use the owner has changed its food from a moist to
of the general illness in hypoadrenocorticism. In contrast,
a dry type. In such cases, further questioning will reveal
in hyperfunction of some endocrine glands, such as
that water intake has increased but the amount of urine
hyperthyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism, a preference
has not. Slight degrees of polyuria can be detected by
for cool places is evident. The excessive production of
asking the owner whether the dog has a greater urgency
heat can even result in excessive panting. Especially in
to urinate when first let out in the morning and whether
cats, hyperthyroidism can result in a somewhat tense,
it then urinates more than previously.
restless behavior.
The severity of the polydipsia and the polyuria often
remains uncertain when evaluated in this manner. Asking
the owner for the animal's water intake in liters usually
Enduronce
brings matters no further, unless the owner has already
Endocrine  disorders  witha catabolic
character
been requested to measure and record water intake for a
(hyperthyroidism and hypercortisolism) lead quite soon
few days. More definitive evidence is only obtained when
to reduced muscle strength. This affects both the
the specific gravity of the urine is measured. However,
muscles of locomotion and those of respiration, and
water intake may vary considerably during the day. When
therefore the animals are quickly tired. There remains
it is not immediately clear that the polyuria is related to a
an interest in going out for a walk, but the walk
specific disorder, such as hypercortisolism, the owner
becomes progressively shorter. In hyperadrenocorticism
should be instructed to collect urine samples at 2-h
obesity plays a part in this and an enlarged and full
intervals for 24 h. If these reveal a marked variation in
abdomen can also interfere with the proper functioning
urine osmolality {or specific gravity) during the day, it is
of the diaphragm. The impression that the animal
more likely to be due to a marked variation in water
becomes tired quickly may be increased by the
intake (e.g, primary polydipsia) than to a hormonally-
 previously mentioned thermal polypnea.
induced reduction in renal concentrating ability.
Appetite
Reproductive functions
 The appetite can increase via a direct influence of the
Either hormone excess, as in hyperadrenocorticism, or
excessive secretion of thyroid or adrenocortical hormone
deficiency, as in hypothyroidism, can directly or
208
 Physical examination 
indirectly influence gonadal functions. If the disorder
the episodic occurrence of fainting spells with the
has existed long enough, the owner of a bitch will
character of epilepsy.
have noted that the animal has failed to come into
The apathy already mentioned under the topic of
estrus. One is deprived of this evidence in spayed
Behavior can also be the result of a large pituitary
bitches and in those in which estrus is prevented with
tumor. This can eventually cause pressure on the optic
progestagens. In male animals it is even more difficult,
chiasm and thus lead to disturbed vision. A visual
for although a diminished interest in the opposite sex
disturbance can also occur rather suddenly as a result of
"is aul ui suaedde wpis si h! 'paiadxa aq un
clouding of the lens (cataract) due to the hyperglycemia
This may be partly related to the fact that many male
of diabetes mellitus. This can already have been noted
animals have only limited contact with females in
by the owner.
estrus or proestrus.
21.1.1 Living conditions
Coot ond skin
Endocrine diseases such as hyperadrenocorticism,
Since the background of this examination is a suspicion
of an endocrine/metabolic disorder, it will sometimes
dogs with testicular tumors), and growth hormone
be necessary to consider the information obtained in
deficiency eventually result in atrophy of the skin and
the general history (Chapter 6) in more detail with
adnexa. This is manifested in the first place as a
regard to feeding, food intake, etc.
slightly dull, dry coat. Sometimes the only change
noticed initially by the owner is that the animal sheds
21.1.2 Past history
          5
eventually found to be less full, which the owner
 Many medications in use in veterinary medicine contain
notices because the plume of the tail disappears or the
 hormones, which can cause a variety of metabolic effects.
hair covering on the caudal surfaces of the thighs
 In addition, their administration has consequences for
becomes thinner. Later the coat may become so thin
the functioning of endocrine glands.
that the skin is visible and bald areas develop. This
The family history is of particular importance if the
alopecia usually occurs first on places where friction
problem has appeared at a young age, but a few
causes loss of the loose hairs in the atrophic follicles,
endocrine diseases occurring in adult animals have also
such as under the collar, on the caudal aspects of the
been found to be familial.
ischium {upon which the dog sits), in the axillae and
flanks, and on the lateral surfaces of the trunk (if the
animal often lies on its side).
21.2 Physical examination
Just as in obtaining the history, an attempt is made in the 
Locomotion
physical examination to first obtain a general picture of
As already mentioned under Endurance, endocrine
the patient. This can be achieved with the general
disorders of a catabolic nature can lead to reduced
impression, as described in Chapter 7. Then follows the
muscle strength. This can result in muscle weakness
examination of a few relevant parts of organ systems.
with
1cervicalventroflexion{suchasinfeline
Some results can be taken from those of the general
hyperaldosteronism) or a slight tendency to sag down
examination (Chapter 8), if this has already taken place.
in the joints of the extremities, but a stiff gait can also
Finally, the endocrine glands themselves are examined
OCcur (such as in hypothyroidism). In disorders associated
 in so far as they are accessible for physical examination.
with hypocalcemia, tetanic muscle cramps can occur.
Particularly in cats, diabetic neuropathy may result in a
21.2.1 Respiratory move ments
plantigrade posture with the hocks touching the floor
during walking.  Hypoglycemia  is also sometimes
 Animals with a large production of heat can have thermal
manifested by muscle weakness and an uncertain gait, at
moments such as following a long period without food
when at rest. Respiratory compensation for ketoacidosis in
(during a morning walk before eating).
diabetes may lead to deep respiratory movements.
Nervous system ond vision
21.2.2 Pulse and ictus cordis
The metabolic effects with continuing consequences for
the central nervous system were discussed above under
 In endocrine disorders both bradycardia (in hypothyroidism
the topic of Behavior. Apart from these continuously
and with hyperkalemia in hypoadrenocorticism) and
present signs, endocrine disorders associated with
tachycardia (in  hyperthyroidism)   are encountered.
electrolyte disturbances or hypoglycemia can lead to
In addition,  a small
circulating
volume
in
209
Chapter 21:
ENDOCRINE GLANDS
hypoadrenocorticism and a small stroke volume  in
hypothyroidism can lead to a weak pulse and a weak or
even completely undetectable ictus cordis. In interpreting
these findings one must certainly take into account the
nutritional condition of the animal.
Although this screening examination is mainly
intended to obtain information that can lead to pattern
recognition, the findings sometimes also provide
a
reason for a complete examination of the circulatory
system (Chapter 10).
21.2.3 Rectal temperature
Fig. 21.2 A 5-year-old male mixed-breed dog with hypothyroidism.
Animals  with   hypermetabolism  (hyperthyroidism,
The dog makes a very calm impression. There are thick folds of skin
over the shoulders. The thyroxine deficiency has led to cessation of the
hyperadrenocorticism) tend to be hyperthermic while
physiological shedding of hair. There is no definite alopecia but there
those with hypometabolism (hypothyroidism) tend to be
appears to be less hair in the groin.
hypothermic. Very ill animals, whether comatose or not,
can also have a very low body temperature. As was
noted in § 8.3.3, excitement and exertion preceding the
wrinkled. This can be noticed when determining the
measurement must be taken into consideration in the
thickness, flexibility, and turgor of the skin. The thin
interpretation.
wrinkles can be demonstrated by placing two fingers or
two hands slightly apart on the side of the trunk or the
thigh and then bringing them together. The elasticity of
21.2.4 Coat and skin
the skin is also reduced, so that when a fold of skin is
In the examination of the coat and skin, the changes
lifted and released it stretches out slowly (>1 s).
described by the owner should be considered objectively.
 In acromegaly the excess of growth hormone leads to the
Attention is given to the gloss, color, continuity, and
formation of thick skin folds on the head and neck, but this
density of the coat. Areas of alopecia and of very thin
is accompanied by excessive growth of hair rather than
covering with hair are sketched in on the figures on the
thinning of the coat. In hypothyroidism the skin atrophy
report form.
is accompanied by accumulation of mucopolysaccharides
 The bald areas are usually pigmented and sometimes
in the dermis. This results in the combination of a dull,
have a slightly rough surface. The pigmentation causes
thin coat and skin that forms thick folds {Fig. 21.2), to
diffuse darkening of the skin. This should not be
which the associated growth hormone excess appears to
confused with the sometimes grayish or soiled
contribute. The anal sacs must certainly be included in
appearance of the skin that, upon closer examination, is
the examination of the skin and adnexa, as described in
found to be due to the filling of hair follicles with keratin
§ 11.2.4. An apocrine gland tumor of the anal sacs can
plugs (Fig. 21.1).
lead to a paraneoplastic syndrome.
The skin atrophy in hypera drenocorticism mainly involves
the dermis, with the result that the skin is thin and easily
21.2.5 Abdomen
The abdomen is examined with regard to its form and
contents, regardless of whether or not the owner has
reported that there has been a change in its size.
Superficial palpation($ 11.2.3) is  performedto
determine whether the abdomen is well suspended; the
ventral line of the abdomen should pass fairly straight
from the sternum to the os pubis. In addition to
sagging as a result of weakening of the muscles, there
can be a rounded increase in circumference with a
tense abdominalwalldue toabdominaland
retroperitoneal accumulation of fat. Both forms occur
as manifestations of the centripetal accumulation of
fat, such as occurs in hyperadrenocorticism. The
circumference is measured in centimeters at its
Fig. 21.1 Abdominal skin of a 9-year-old male mixed-breed dog with
maximum. It should be noted that in dogs with obesity
hyperadrenocorticism. There are still a few hairs. but most hair follicles
mntain only plugs of amorphous keratin.
 not related to hyperadrenocorticism most of the fat is
210
Physical examination
not accumulated in the abdomen but spread over the
21.2.7 Female genitalia
entire trunk, sometimes with very clearly circumscribed
The examination of the female genitalia is limited here
accumulations bilaterally in the lumbar area.
The abdomen is palpated to detect any resistance,
to an inspection of the vulva and the caudal part of the
with special attention to possible enlargement of the
vestibule. The vulva is evaluated with regard to form
liver. If the liver is palpable, its extension caudal to the
and size, as described in § 13.2.1. By spreading the lips
costal arch is noted in centimeters. This is easily
of the vulva, a view can be obtained of the clitoral fold
determined if the abdominal wall is not tense.
and the body of the clitoris, which can give an
indication of exposure to androgen excess.
21.2.6 Male genitalia
21.2.8 Skeleton and muscles
The genitalia are examined  for evidenceC
of
hypogonadism or a testicular tumor and in particular a
Further consideration of the skeleton is chiefly of
Sertoli cell tumor that has endocrine activity. Especially
importance  in  retarded  growth.  Disproportionate
when hypogonadism is the result of castration at an
retardation of the growth in length of the limbs can be
early age, the androgen deficiency can result
a key to the diagnosis. Excessive secretion of growth
in
hypogenitalism (small prepuce and small penis). These
o an u m ou sasn al he un a
changes will be much less evident if the hypogonadism
the limbs, because the growth plates are closed. There
developed at a later age. Secondary hypogonadism in
is still outgrowth of some endpoints of the body,
old age is manifested by testicular atrophy. The testes
chiefly of the flat bones. This is clearly seen in the
are soft and small, while the epididymis retains an
outgrowth of the upper and lower jaws (prognathy), by
essentially normal configuration. The volume of the
which the incisor teeth come to be separated from each
testis can be estimated with the aid of a string of ovoid
Other.
beads made for this purpose. These are of increasing
Endocrine
diseases with
catabolic
effects
size and each is imprinted with its volume (Fig. 4.5).
(hyperthyroidism,   hyperadrenocorticism)   lead 
Absence of testicles in the scrotum can be the
muscle atrophy, often more clearly seen in the spinal
result of castration (which might be unknown to the
muscles and the thigh muscles. Atrophy of the
present owner), or incomplete testicular descent.
temporal musculature is sometimes obvious because the
Undescended testicles may be in the abdomen or in the
occipital
1  protuberance becomes more  prominent.
inguinal canal. Incomplete testicular descent is an
Atrophy of the shoulder muscles can result in the front
important risk factor for the development of testicular
limbs being less closely attached to the trunk. The
tumors.3
trunk appears to hang in the shoulder girdle, causing
Testicular tumors are described according to the
the elbows to be turned slightly outward.
characteristics given in § 4.1.2. The endocrine-active
testicular tumors mainly produce an excess of estrogens
21.2.9 Thyroid glands and
and thus lead to signs of feminization, including
parathyroid glands
gynecomastia and a slightly enlarged and sagging
prepuce (Fig. 21.3).
Apart from the testes, the thyroid glands are the only
endocrine glands that may be accessible for physical
examination. They lie on either sides of the trachea at
the level of the first three to eight tracheal rings.
Because of their deep position they are not palpable
when of normal size. When enlarged they are usually
palpable but because of their loose attachment they are
free to gravitate along the trachea. When a mass is
detected in this area, the next step is to determine
whether it is easily displaced along the trachea, a
characteristic of masses arising from thyroid tissue.
Then it should be described as discussed in § 4.1.2.
For palpation of the thyroids, the owner is asked to
hold the animal's neck slightly extended with the head
slightly elevated. The examiner places one hand around
the larynx and moves it caudally over the transition
Fig. 21.3 An 8-year-old male German shepherd dog in lateral
from larynx to trachea and then along the trachea
recumbency. A Sertoli cell tumor in a scrotal testicle is the cause
down to the thoracic inlet, to determine whether a
andaud paeua Apuis pue saddu paejua ssol jieu aun jo
mass can be detected. In cats thyroid enlargement is
211
Chapter 21:
ENDOCRINE GLANDS
a s aar  i a  q rs 
21.4 Further examination
fingertips alternately along each side of the trachea.
The parathyroid glands are not palpable in healthy
The diagnosis of an endocrine disorder very oten rests 
animals and even though it is also usually not possible
upon
patternrecognitionandthe
pattern
can
to detect enlarged parathyroids by palpation, when
sometimes be completed by routine laboratory studies.
Both hematological and biochermical findings may
hyperparathyroidism is suspected the neck should be
carefully palpated as described above for the thyroid
strengthen certain suspicions.
glands.
However strong the suspicion may be, the definitive
diagnosis must always rest upon the results of specific
21.3 Notation
functional studies of the gland in question. Hormone
measurements, sometimes together with suppression or
The findings of the history and physical examination are
stimulation tests, provide information about the
reported on the form on the DVD. The general findings
function of endocrine glands. It is often necessary to
of the physical examination are recorded together
also know something about the morphology of the
with the previously determined general impression
gland. The introduction of diagnostic imaging by
 s  a o    
ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT), and
adequate.
magnetic resonance imaging (MRl) has brought about
 In patients in which a general exa mination (Chapter 8)
much progress in the diagnosis of abnormalities of
has been carried out, the findings can be entered for
 endocrine glands. In addition, cytological examination 
respiration, pulse, and rectal temperature. These 
of aspiration biopsies may provide insight into the
are
aspects of the examination that will certainly be included
nature of morphologic changes (see § 2s.2.6).
for a new patient but at a follow-up examination can
sometimes be omitted.
References
1 Van Vonderen IK. Kooistra HS. Rijnberk A. Intra- and interindividual
 3 Van Sluijs FJ. Testes. In: Rijnberk A. ed. Clinical endocrinology of
variation in urine osmolality and urine specifc gravity in healthy pet
dogs and cats. Dordrecht/Boston: Kluwer: 1996:119-130.
dogs of various ages. J Vet Int Med 1997: 11:30-35.
 4 Van der Vlugt-Meijer RH. Voorhout G. Meij BP. Imaging of the
2 Lee WM. Diaz-Espineira. Mol JA. et al. Primary hypothyroidism in
 pituitary gland in dogs with pituitary-dependent 
 dogs is associated with elevated growth hormone release. J Endocr
hyperadrenocorticism. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2002: 197:81-87.
2001: 169:59-66.
212
22
Behavior
M.B.H. Schilder and B.w. Knol
Chapter contents
Sproying. urinating. and defecating in the
house 219
22.1 History taking for dogs 214
Anxiety 219
2211 latrotropic problem 214
22.3.3 Living conditions 219
221.2 Present behavior/functioning 214
22.3.4 Past history 220
Obedience 214
Origin 220
Aggression 214
Age when introduced into the
Feor 215
household 220
Other behovior 216
Medicot information 220
221.3 Living pattern and living conditions 216
22.1.4 Past history 216
22.2 Behavioral examination 216
The management of behavioral problems requires a
22.2.1 Obedience and dominance
tests 217
different approach  than is appropriate for  the
Obedience tests 217
examination for somatic a bnormalities. For the latter, the
examination consists of the history, general impression,
Grosping the muzzle 217
and general examination. In patients presented for
22.2.2 Provocation tests 217
behavioral problems, physical examination is performed
Doll test 217
only if an indication for it is found during the
Hit-kick test 217
consultation. If the behavioral examination is to be
Testing sensitivity to ond recovery from
performed by someone who is not a veterinarian, it
vsuot ond ocoustic stimuti 218
should be preceded by a veterinarian's attending to the
Testing feeding bowt oggression 218
 general impression and general examination (Chapters 7
Testing the response to petting 218
and 8). If these introductory examinations indicate the
need for additional physical examination (e.g-, the
22.2.3 Confrontation with dogs and the role of the
nervous system and/or the eyes), this should also be
 owner 218
Confrontation with dog of some gender 218
undertaken before the behavioral examination {see also
$2.5).
Influence of the owner on aggressive
In order to make the behavioral treatment less
behovior 218
 dependent on the owner's perception and description, the
22.3 History taking for cats 218
consultation includes evaluation of a video recording of
22.3.1 latrotropic problem 219
the patient. When an appointment is made for an
22.3.2 Present behavior and functioning 219
examination concerning a behavioral problem, the owner
Aggressive behovior toword people
is requested to document the problem by making a short
ond other cats 219
video recording. Behavioral tests are carried out during
the consultation if necessary and these together with the 
213
Chapter 22:
BEHAVIOR
video recording and the behavior of both the patient and
 owner's attention, and how the owner responds. This
owner during history taking provide information about
may reveal something about the owner's role in the
the problem behavior the communication signals
 development of the problem behavior.
between the animal and owner, and the characteristics of
the bond between them.'
The questions asked of the owner are divided in the
usual way:
Because of the differences in the nature of dogs and
 1  iatrotropic problem
cats and the differences in their behavioral problems,
 2 present behavior/functioning
the two species are considered separately in this chapter.
 3 living conditions
4 past history
22.1 History taking for dogs
Owners of dogs with problem behavior are often much
22.1.1 latrotropic problem
more emotional during the consultation than they are
Questions are asked about the following:
problems have existed for a rather long time and the
The nature of the problem.
animal's behavior has been a hindering or damaging
How long it has been present. The longer a
or even dangerous experience. Without cutting off
beha vioral problem exists, the greater the chance
manifestations of these emotions, the line of the
of learned behavior and shaping of the behavior.
discussion should be maintained. The development of a
The conditions under which the problem behavior
good discussion technique thus deserves attention. The
occurs. Questions must be asked especially about
guidelines summarized in Chapter 6 provide a good
the first and the most recent occurrence. Knowing
basis for this, with the following remarks.
the conditions under which the problem first
First, questions of an accusatory nature should be
Occurred may provide insight into why it
avoided with even greater care in a behavioral history
than
otherwise.Presumably
owners
come
to
what has occurred most recently and so it is worth
understand, whether in this discussion or otherwise,
asking about this also.
that something in the relationship between them and
Any measures, punishment or otherwise, that ha ve
their dog has failed, because for this reason they are
been taken to curb the problem. This provides an
seeking help. By leading the discussion with tact one
impression of how the owner gets along with the
can avoid causing the owner to give answers with a
animal and the effect of these measures. It is
 more defensive than informative character?
important to discover whether such measures,
Second, it is important that when asked *What is the
proba bly unintentionally and/or unconsciously,
problem?" the owners are given the chance to tell their
may have reinforced the problem behavior by
story without interruption. This allows them to let off
giving attention to it.
emotional steam, increasing the chance that the
subsequent discussion will be informative. This can
22.1.2 Present behavior/functioning
u suosanb aul jo awos sueadau Aq panowod aq ose
an altered way to check earlier answers. The protocol
The questions are concerned with:
for a behavioral history contains such discrete repeat
obedience
questions, but suggestive questions should be avoided.
aggression
When an owner describes the behavior of the dog
-anxiety
aiss, s ns sal aaada suin
or
-other behavior
fearful, he should be asked to spell out this behavior.
This allows the examiner to interpret the behavior in
Obedience
connection with other information obtained.
Third, both verbal and nonverbal communication are
The owner is asked how the animal responds to
important. The table and chairs should be so arranged
commands (whether practiced daily or not), such as
"come', “heel, *sit", “down", and *stay". Then the owner
that everyone can look at each other and the veterinarian
should assume an interested but relaxed attitude. The
is requested to demonstrate the dog's obedience to a
few commands (see § 22.2).
Owner that the animal will be discussed.2
Fourth, during the consultation the dog is allowed
Aggression
to walk about freely. This provides the examiner with
Questions are aimed at obtaining insight into the type of
an impression of its behavior (nervous, quiet, free). It
aggression and its cause. Of importance are the way in
stimulates interaction between owner and dog and can
which the dog bites or threatens, the circumstances
reveal the extent to which the dog tries to attract the
under which this occurs, and the dog's posture. A low
214
History taking for dogs
posture combined with brief biting suggests fear-induced
important to ask whether as a pup it was grabbed in
aggression. A high posture (see video on the DVD) during
the anxiety phase by a dog and whether it has been
threatening and biting indicates dominance. Defense of
 socialized sufficiently with dogs differing in appearance.
food may be associated with either low or high posture.
As the result of such a traumatic experience in the
If there is aggression against persons—familiar or
anxiety phase, a dog may later attack others of the same
unknown to the dog, within or beyond the dog's
breed, or having the same features, as the one that
territory, and characterized by unpredictable biting and
snapping—one
should
lask
insistently
for
the
 aggressive behavior toward dogs of other breeds may
circumstances preceding the aggression. This can reveal
an inducing factor, such as the reaching out of a hand,
adulthood give rise to killer type' aggression.
even though that may not induce the aggressive
Often the owner plays a role in aggressive beha vior of
behavior every time it occurs.
dogs, as the behavioral examination may reveal {see
If pain or another physical factor is thought to play a
§ 22.2). The owner may be unsuccessful in preventing
role, it must be sought by physical examination.
the dog's aggressive behavior outdoors. The dog may
Questions to reveal other behavioral changes
are
find this stimulating, with an effect opposite to what
important: Does the dog play less? Does it withdraw from
was
contact? Does it respond to signals? Does it greet the
punishing,  22.1.1). The owner's role may be revealed
owner less now or not at all? Pain-induced aggression
when dogs in the same household fight only in the
may be triggered by touching or even just approaching a
owner's presence. Probably the presence or activities of
sensitive body part, as can occur with external otitis,
the owner disturbs the ranking order of the dogs. One
arthritis,
or
intervertebral
disc
herniation.
After
such disturbing activity is punishing the dominant dog
appropriate treatment of the disease that is the primary
for attacking the subordinate. This support for the
cause of the pain, the secondary aggression usually
'underdog’ reinforces its position and in the presence of
disappears. Administration of an analgesic may aid in the
the owner it will have the courage to threaten or
diagnosis
of pain-induced aggression when 
physical
examination reveals no explanatory abnormalities,
but
 nearly always directed at dogs of the same sex.3,14
this is usually helpful only if the aggression occurs almost
daily.
Feor
There are indications of the occurrence of genetically
Anxiety about threatening situations is normal because
 predisposed—thus breed-associated—aggression, which
it contributes to avoiding them. It becomes problem
behavior if there is a relatively low threshold for arousing
play a role, there being indications that high-protein
anxiety, since this will lead to a rather high frequency
of the occurrence of fear behavior. A low threshold can
 Aggression only toward strangers on the dog's own
be
territory is probably territorial aggression. Tests may
insufficient socialization and other learning processes. In
elderly dogs, fear or fear-related aggression is sometimes
This may help in assessing the risk the dog poses.
caused by loss of vision or hearing.3
Insufficient socialization may lead to aggression
Anxiety behavior is easily learned, not least because
against
children.Fear and
pain
resulting
from
many owners try to reassure the dog, which actually
intentional or unintentional harassment by a child may
reinforces fearl
behavior,
whereasthe
emotional
also induce aggression. Jealousy’ may have a similar
 component may be dampened.23 Owners do not intend 
effect. If the child's parents exercise insufficient
to reinforce fear behavior and are not aware of it, and
authority, the dog may take liberties that turn into
therefore they usually deny doing so.12,16
aggressive behavior against children. A doll test may
Fear aroused by sounds. This often concerns thunder,
fireworks, or automobile traffic. In many dogs the
Aggression against dogs should be investigated to
manifestations of fear worsen with time due to the
determine whether it is a very dangerous (*killer type') of
owner's
soothing
responsesand/or
generalization
aggression. With little or no noticeable preceding threat,
 processes.? It is important to find out to what degree the 
 a dog with this behavior runs immediately upon sighting
soothing by the owner may have reinforced anxiety-
an opponent, sometimes over a great distance, to attack
related behavior. A test may reveal the behavior after a
by biting and shaking the opponent. In the
less
frightening stimulus, as well as the recovery from it ($ 22.2).
dangerous ('normal) aggression, there is threatening
Anxiety about people andlor other dogs. Genetic
behavior and posture communication without immediate
factors as well as early experience can result in this
kind of anxiety.17 A less than optimal socialization
aggression, in which there is also no communication with
period plays an important role. This anxiety is more
the prey.!' For dogs with “killr type’ aggression it is
215
 Chapter 22:
BEHAVIOR
those raised normally. Unpleasant experiences can also
giving insight into the dominance relationship and/or
have this effect in older animals.3.18
the presence of pain.
Sleeping place. Questions about the sleeping place are
Other behovior
relevant in cases of separation anxiety and control
Inappropriate urination. When urinary incontinence has
problems. If the dog sleeps in the bedroom, and
been excluded as the reason for inappropriate urination,
especially if it sleeps on the bed of the owner, there is 
questions are asked about the way the dog urinates (with
close contact between dog and owner. Such a strong
leg raised?) and in what circumstances (when the owner
bond may lead to separation anxiety. Allowing the dog
comes home? following punishment? in the owner's
to sleep in the bedroom, and especially allowing it on
absence?). Urination with the leg raised may indicate
the bed, is often associated with lack of control over
dominance. Other possible causes include insufficient 
the dog.
house training, excitement, or fear of the returning
Exercising the dog. It is important to obtain a picture
owner. Sometimes the cause is the combination of a
of how the dog is exercised (frequency, duration,
sensitive dog and an owner with an impressive
intensity),
especially
if thedog isrestless
or
appearance and/or a low voice. Aging may cause the
unmanagea ble.
Origin. If the dog is derived from a breed of working
house only if alone indicates separation anxiety.*
20
dogs, restlessness in the house is to be expected unless it 
Problems of being alone. The manifestations
are
receives adequate exercise. An inquiry about this is
usually interpreted as being the result of stress due to
importa nt.
the absence of the owner. However, there are dogs who
Obedience training. The owner is asked whether and
do not show symptoms of stress in the absence of the
how often the dog is given obedience training.
owner (no barking, howling, whining, running back
Obedience training can to some extent help prevent
 and forth, urination, and panting)3.18 but nevertheless 
 problem behavior.
quietly start to “demolish things. Pure separation
m o a m ad n a x
22.1.4 Past history
the owner is very strong, which is indicated by
 continuously following the owner in the house, begging 
Behavior in the litter and early living conditions. Afraid,
behavior, sleeping in the bedroom, and frequently
shy, neutral, or spontaneous? The answer enables
attracting attention (also during the consultation!).
comparison of the animal's present behavior with that
Whenthe owner is asked to walk around the
in its past (if a reliable picture of the latter can be
examination table, such a dog often follows like a
obtained). Questions about the living conditions with
shadow. Video recording of the behavior of the dog
the breeder or the previous owner can provide insight
when it is alone (camera on tripod) is an important
into the socialization or other influential experiences.
diagnostic aid. The video should reveal some of the
This information can aid in guiding further examination
above symptoms of stress.
and treatment.
Excitement when a bell rings or visitors enter.
Age at which the animal was taken into the
Questions are asked about examples such as running to
household. Dogs with behavioral problems may be
the front door, jumping up on people, hyperactivity
found to have had more than one owner or to have
when a bell rings, mounting people and objects,
remained with the breeder longer than usual.
Medical information. Sometimes this is important in
owner is asked about his response to this behavior. The
connection with problem behavior, as with neurological
answers give an impression of the owner's authority
abnormalities and also with disorders of the locomotor
over the dog as well as of the owner's approach when
system, the skin, the ears, and the digestive tract if
the bell rings and of the effect of corrective measures.
associated with pain. Disease at a very early age may
contribute to the later occurrence of problem behavior21
22.1.3 Living pattern and living conditions
22.2 Behavioral examination
Function of the animal. Dogs with a role other than as
companion animal, such as hunting or guarding, may
Some owners have difficulty in describing the problem
have undergone conditioning for aggression or barking.
behavior of their dog. Also, their appraisal of the dog's
Especially with regard to territorial defense, the learned
obedience may be somewhat optimistic. To obtain an
and desired behavior may easily get out of hand
impression of the communication between the owner
because in some breeds it coincides with the natural
and the dog, additional information is often needed.
inclination to alarm and defend.
For this purpose the examiner begins his own
Grooming care. Questions about grooming care are
observation of the behavior of the dog and the owner
concerned with the way the dog tolerates this, thereby
in the examining room, in their interaction in the video
216
Behavioral examination
recording made at home, and in the performance of
while the doll's other arm is stretched forward. The
behavioral tests. Asking the owner to comment on the
 dog is approached calmly to within a distance of about
video reveals how he interprets the dog's behavior, the
 1 meter, without looking at it. The doll is held slightly
intentions he ascribes to the dog, and something about
away so that dog, doll, and examiner are not in a
his own behavior.
straight line. The forward movement is stopped to
In addition, tests can be carried out. Although most 
allow the dog to approach the doll. Then the examiner
of these tests still have to be assessed for sensitivity,
tries to pet the dog with the outstretched arm of the
doll for about 1 minute.
probably provide useful information ( 22.2.2). Even if
Alternatively, the doll can be mounted on a board
the owner responds to the behavior of the dog during a
with wheels and pulled toward the dog by a rope
test with the remark that the dog doesn't normally do
 passing around a pulley or post behind the dog. To pet
this, it has the advantage of conversation on specific
the dog as described above, the examiner lifts the doll
behavior, which makes it easier for the owner to tell
together with the undercarriage.
how the dog usually behaves.
The test can be extended by running away with the
The tests are described briefly below and are
illustrated by video recordings on the DVD. The tests
Interpretation. A dog that is familiar with children
should be performed by a man, because dogs usually
and behaves well with children will approach the doll
find men more threatening than women.22
with tail wagging and will sniff at the doll's hands and
face. Usually this behavior ceases quickly. If the dog
22.2.1 0bedience and dominance tests
shies away or flees from the doll, it is not familiar with
Obedience tests
up and by growling. Anxiety-aggression is revealed
Indication. Need for information on dominance and
when the examiner tries to pet the dog.
obedience.
Roughly 20-30% of dogs tested do not recognize the
Performance. The exercises 'sit', *down', “follow',
doll as a child, but respond to it as a threatening object
or a toy.* Dogs that try to bite, with or without
'come', and *stay” should be carried out in a sufficiently
threatening behavior, are considered to be very
large room, or better, outdoors.
Interpretation. Indications of insufficient dominance
bazardous, especially if they bite forcefully in the face
by the owner are the dog's refusal to 'sit’ and especially
of the doll. Dogs that respond to the doll's “behavior"
refusal to lie “down', protests and diversions (such as
by threatening and/or snapping are considered to be
hazardous. Dogs that threaten but try to flee are
 growling or giving a paw) while reacting to the “down"
command, a stretched leash, a high posture, ignoring
considered to be moderately hazardous. Dogs that only
the command to follow", and delaying the response to
al 0t Aem ao Aos e ui aaq 1o aa o A1
‘come'. If several family members are present, the tests
doll (inviting it to play, licking its hands and face) are
should be carried out with each of them.
categorized as lotw risk.
The predictive value of the doll test was studied
recently in dogs with or without a history of aggressive
Grosping the muzzie
behavior to a child. Over 80% of the dogs that
Indication. Suspicion of a dominance problem.
responded aggressively to the doll had a history of
Performance. The owner is asked to hold the dog's
aggressive behavior to a child, whereas 65% of those
muzzle for 5 seconds.
not responding aggressively had a history of being
Interpretation. If the dog tolerates this, there is
good with children. The authors concluded that the
probably an acceptable dominance relationship, even
doll test may be useful in determining aggressive
with insufficient obedience. If the dog growls or tries
tendencies of dogs. The major limitation of the test
to bite, a dominance problem is likely. Note: Head
was the excessive numbers of false positives and false
pain or discomfort should be excluded by physical
 negatives.10
examination.
Hit-kick test
22.2.2 Provocation tests
Indication.
Appraisal  of  aggression  and   anxiety
reactions to challenging behavior by an unfamiliar
Doll test
person and the capacity to recover from this social
Indication. Appraisal of the behavior toward an
stressor.
unfamiliar child, the extent to which the dog has to be
 Performance. The dog is held firmly or if necessary
challenged before it bites, and the way it bites.
tethered to a post or a ring in the wall. The collar and
Performance. The dog is not muzzled. The examiner
leash must be strong enough to withstand the dog's
holds the doll by one of its arms directed backward
lunging. The examiner makes three hitting movements
217
 Chapter 22:
BEHAVIOR
and three kicking movements toward the dog, while
Testing the response to petting
remaining safely out of its reach. Then the dog is
Indication. Aggression during petting.
approached from a distance of about 5 meters, while
looking straight in its eyes.? The manner and force of
Performance. An artificial arm is used to pet the dog
in the way which the owner describes as normally
biting can be tested by mimicking the kicking with a
leading to aggressive behavior.
boot held in the hand.
Interpretation. Peting in various ways reveals how
The dog's capacity
to recover is testedby the
and where the dog wants or does not want to be
examiner squatting beside and turned slightly away
petted, how long peting is tolerated, and how the dog
from it and absolutely not looking at the dog. The
responds (threatening and/or biting).
examiner then attempts to engage the dog with an
open hand, then with some food in it. The tendency to
follow people aggressively can be tested by running
22.2.3 Confrontation with dogs and
away from the dog.
the role of the owner
Interpretation. This test seems to predict future
Confrontation with dog of same gender
responses to meeting with strangers who may be
pue 'suoen uoissase pue Aaxu suaea
Indication. Uncertainty about the type of aggressive
beha vior toward other dogs.
seeking the protection and support of the owner can be
 Performance. The dog is held on a leash and is
observed. It also reveals how quickly the dog responds
muzzled if necessary, then confronted with a dog of the
with physical aggression and what type of aggression.
Some dogs interpret the hitting or kicking movements
same gender that is also on a leash or fastened, and
as the throwing of a ball. When recovery is slow
muzzled if necessary.
(taking minutes) or absent, treatment is likely to be
Interpretation. If the dog runs immediately from a
troublesome and lengthy. Note: Performing this test is
nom o puoos a ie (w si<) aous 1a
threatening
behavior
{growling,
showing
risky and best avoided by the veterinarian involved,
teeth,
since it may leave the dog with an undesirable and
retracted upper lips, stiffening), it is considered to have
J asuns uaa si uadai s ussaise a
unplea sant association.
the dog looks at its owner during the conflict. In
‘normal’ aggression the posture of the dog indicates
Testing sensitivity to ond recovery from visuol
whether either dominance or anxiety plays a role. The
ond ocoustic stimufi
behavior of the owner is included in the observations.
Indication. Dogs with fear of specific events or stimuli.
 Performance. Depending on the dog's problem(s), one
Influence of the owner on oggressive behavior
or more visual or acoustic stimuli are presented, with
 sufficient intervals for recovery. A visual stimulus could
Indication. Uncertainty about the role of the owner in
be the opening of an umbrella and an acoustic stimulus
aggression of the dog toward people or dogs.
could be the sound of a ladle striking a pan or its lid.
 Performance. Aggression toward people can be tested
Recovery from a visual stimulus can be tested by
indoors and aggression toward dogs can be tested
placing the opened umbrella on the floor and allowing
outdoors. If the test is considered to involve a risk, the
dog is securely tethered and muzzled. The dog to be
the dog to examine it. If the dog does not approach the
umbrella, the owner can be asked to walk calmly to
tested is challenged by an approaching dog or a person
the umbrella and touch it.
entering the room. The owner is asked in advance to
walk away from the dog (to leave the room) as soon as
Interpretation. Great sensitivity {fright from a minor
the dog starts barking or growling.
Interpretation. If the dog concentrates on the
treatment will be troublesome. These tests also reveal
whether the owner is inclined to comfort the dog or to
disappearing owner and gives scarce attention to the
behave inadequately.
provocation, the presence (support) of the owner is
taken to be important in developing and maintaining
the problem behavior, especially if this behavior
Testing feeding bowl oggression
declines when the owner leaves. In killer aggression,
Indication. Feeding bowl aggression.
the outcome is expected to be independent of the owner.
Performance. The examiner attempts to push away
the dog's own feeding bowl with an artificial arm. This
22.3 History taking for cats
 is repeated for about half a minute.
Interpretation. The test reveals the dog's body
The history concentrates on aggressive behavior, anxiety,
position, whether it responds by threatening and/or
urinating in inappropriate places, spraying, and
biting, and the frequency and force of biting.
defecation.
218
History taking for cats
22.3.1 latrotropic problem
Sproying. urinoting, ond defecoting in the house
The questions are very similar to those for dogs
From observations (owner's video) of the position of the
(§ 22.1.1), but it is also important to ask about the
cat and/or the location of urine traces, it should be clear
whether the cat sprays while standing (marking) or
duration of the problem. Cats are creatures of habit
urinates while sitting, although marking can also occur
and tend to continue certain behavior in the same place
(object).
the duration of the problem and the number of locations
used to spray or urinate. The possibility that the urine is
22.3.2 Present behavior and functioning
from neighboring cats that have entered the house via a
cat flap, window, or door should be excluded.
Aggressive behovior toword people
A possible cause of spraying in the house is stress
ond other cots
caused by changes in the house that are relevant to the
Physical causes of aggression. Pain (e.g, dental),
cat, such as moving furniture, the arrival of a baby, a
disorders of the central nervous system (tumor,
child leaving home, the arrival of another cat, or bad
epilepsy), endocrine diseases (hyperthyroidism), and
relations with another cat. The onset of puberty may
senility should be excluded.24,25
play a role, as can territorial conflicts with neighboring
Aggression toward people. It is first necessary to
d    ln o p i s
confirm that there is aggression, for which purpose
may also be the result of frustration due to inadequate
questions are asked about vocalizations that might
social contact or a feeding pattern with only rare
Kad yie pu aed in si e, ue yim io
access to food.3
silently, but their aggresive behavior is accompanied by
For the problem of urination or defecation outside
the litter box it is important to ask for the number of
young cats can direct their silent prey-catching behavior
locations where the cat urinates or defecates. If it uses
and/or play aggression at people if they do not have
one or two fixed locations, there may be something
sufficient
opportunities to express this behavior
wrong with the litter box. It may be a new box, one
otherwise.24,27
that is covered or filled with a new kind of litter; or it
The examiner should also determine where the
may be dirty or not in a quiet location; or the cat may
‘attacks’ occur. For example, redirection aggression
may occur close to window seats, windows, or
 doors.28,29 Observing an *enemy' outdoors may induce
If the cat urinates or defecates in several places, a
physical cause is more likely.
aggression that can be redirected at a person.
Urinating or defecating on the doormat often
Redirection aggression can occur indoors during or
indicates territorial marking,29 sometimes as a reaction
after a conflict with another cat, and a person may
to markings of other cats against the house. Such
become the victim. The intervals between episodes of
markings may also occur at other locations in the
aggressive behavior should be documented, together
with the context.
cause loss of house training.
 Some cats tolerate petting only on certain areas, such
as the head and neck, and/or only for short intervals.
Anxiety
Usually no physical cause can be found for this, but
Cats may refuse to be petted or they may be afraid of
cats attack visitors, which is regarded as territorial
past history often reveals insufficient socialization.3
aggression? that often has anxiety components. The
Traumatic experiences with children or adults, or an
cat's low posture and the way it walks along walls and
unpredictable social situation {some people are nice to
under chairs, but without stalking, are indications of
cats, others are not) may also lead to anxiety behavior.
this type of aggression.
A traumatic experience with another cat may lead to
Aggression toward other cats. Aggression toward
avoidance of areas where that cat might be met.24
neighboring cats (territorial aggression) is common, as is
 Fearful cats tend to hide themselves and/or find high
aggression toward cats in the house (competition,
places on which to sit.
jealousy-like aggression,territorial aggression,redirection
aggression, and pain-induced aggression)24 The last two
22.3.3 Living conditions
that have gotten along well, especially if one cat is
Questions about social situation include the age and
consistently the offender and the other consistently the
gender of any other cats in the house and their social
victim. Food allergy has been suggested as a possible
relations, the presence of young children, and whether
the owner is often away. Other information of interest
219
Chapter 22:
BEHAVIOR
concerns the type of house (apartment or house with or
Age when introduced into the househoid
without a garden), whether there is a cat flap or outside
Sometimes kittens are taken into a family before they are
exercise area for the cat, the number of rooms accessible
8 weeks of age. They may also be fed artificially.
to the cat, locations of food and water, and the number
Information about the age of weaning may explain
 of litter boxes, their position and type (covered or not).
abnormal behavior such as aggresive playing with the
owners.3
22.3.4 Past history
Medicot information
Origin
See § 22.1.4.
 It may prove to be of interest to know whether the cat
was obtained from a farm, a shelter, a breeder, a
private owner, or was found in the street.
References
1 Knol Bw. Behaviour problems in dogs. Problems. diagnoses.
Shurdington: British Small Animal Veterinary Association: 2002:
therapeutic measures and results in 133 patients. Vet Quart 1987:
173-180.
9:226234
19 Hunthausen W. Housesoiling and the geriatric dog. Vet Med 1995:
 2 Hart BL. Hart LA. Canine and feline behavioral therapy.
90:Suppl 4.
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger: 1985:1-25.
 20 Borchelt PL. Separation/elicited behaviour problems in dogs. In:
3 Landsberg G. Hunthausen W. Ackerman L. Handbook of behaviour
 Katcher AH. Beck AM. eds. New perspectives in our lives with
 problems of the dog and cat. 2nd edn. Oxford: Butterworth
companion animals. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press:
Heinemann: 2003.
1983.
4 Campbell WE. Behaviour problems in dogs. 2nd edn. Goleta:
21 Serpell J. Jagoe JA. Early experience and the development of
American Veterinary Publications Inc: 1992:49-73.
 behaviour. In: Serpell J. ed. The domestic dog. its evolution.
 5 Podberscek AL. Serpell JA. The English cocker spaniel: preliminary
behaviour and interactions with people. Cambridge: Cambridge
 findings on aggressive behaviour. Appl Anim Behav Sci 1996:
University Press: 1995:79-102.
47:75-80.
 22 Wells D. Hepper PG. Male and female dogs respond differently to
 6 deNapoli JS. Dodman NH. Shuster L. Effect of dietary protein
men and women. Appl Anim Behav Sci 1999: 61:341-349.
 content and tryptophan supplementation on dominance aggression.
 23 Lynch JJ. McCarthy JF. The effect of petting on a classical
territorial aggression and hyperactivity in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
conditioned emotional response. Behav Res Ther 1967: 5:55-62.
2000: 217:504-508.
 24 Heath S. Feline aggression. In: Horwitz D. Mills D. Heath S. eds.
7 Dodman NH, Reisner I. Shuster L. et al. Effect of dietary protein
 BSAVA Manual of canine and feline behavioural medicine.
 content on behavior in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996: 208:376-379.
 Shurdington: British Small Animmal Veterinary Association: 2002:
8 Van der Borg JAM. Netto WJ. Planta DJU. Behavioural testing of
216-228.
 dogs in animal shelters to predict problem behaviour. Appl Anim
 25 Beaver B. Disorders of behaviour. In: Sherding RG. ed. The cat:
Behav Sci 1991: 32:237-251.
diseases and clinical management. New York: Churchill Livingstone:
9 Netto WJ. Planta DJU. Behavioural testing for aggression in the
1989:163-184
domestic dog. Appl Anim Behav Sci 1997: 51:243-263.
 26 Leyhausen P. Verhaltensstudien an Katzen. Berlin: Verlag Paul 
10 Kroll TL. Houpt KA. Erb HN. The use of novel stimuli as indicators
Parey: 1956:110-140.
 of aggressive behavior in dogs. J Am Animm Hosp Assoc 2004: 40:
 27 Voith VL. Aggressive behaviour of cats toward people. Proc 12th
13-19.
LAK KAN symposium: 1990:13-17.
 11 OFarrell V. Manual of canine behaviour. Shurdington: British Small
 28 Chapman BL. Voith V. Cat aggression redirected to people: 14 cases
Animal Veterinary Association: 1992:77-92.
(1981-1987). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990: 196:947-950.
12 Lindsay SR. Handbook of applied dog behavior and training. vol lIl.
 29 Overall K. Clinical behavioral medicine for small animals. St Louis:
Ames: lowa State University Press: 2001:161-201.
Mosby: 1997.
 13 Askew HR. Treatment of behaviour problems in dogs and cats.
 30 Neville P. Do cats need shrinks? London: Sidgwick & Jackson: 1990.
Oxford: Blackwell Science: 1996:184-202
31 Borchelt PL. Voith VL. Elimination behavior problems in cats. In:
14 Dehasse J. Le chien agressif. Paris: Publibook: 2002:137-141.
Voith VL. Borchelt PL. eds. Readings in companion animal
15 Scott JP. Fuller JL. Dog behavior. the genetic basis. Chicago: The
behaviour. Trenton: Veterinary Learning Systems: 1995:179-190.
University of Chicago Press: 1974:133-141
32 Horwitz D. Behavioral and environmental factors associated with
16 Gant WH. Factors involved in the development of pathological
elimination behaviour problems in cast: a retrospective survey. Appl
behaviour: schizokinesis and autokinesis. Perspect Biol Med 1962:
Animm Behav Sci 1997: 52:129-137.
5:473-482.
33 Heidenberger E. Housing conditions and behavioural problems of
 17 Appleby DL. Bradshaw JWS. Casey RA. Relationship between
indoor cats as assessed by their owners. Appl Anim Behav Sci 1997:
aggressive and avoidance behaviour by dogs and their experience
52:345-364
in the first six months of life. Vet Rec 2002: 150:434-438.
 34 Overall KL. How understanding normal cat behaviour can prevent
18 Neilson JC. Fear of places and things. In: Horwitz D. Mills D. Heath
 behaviour problems. Vet Med 1998: 93:160-171.
 S. eds. BSAVA Manual of canine and feline behavioural medicine.
220
23
Emergencies
J.H. Robben and F.J. van Sluijs
Acutely diseased or injured patients should be examined
Chapter contents
  s a a    a
threatening or organ-threatening conditions. Swift help
23.1 Primary survey: brief history 222
may reduce the morbidity and the risk of a fatal
23.2 Primary survey: physical examination 222
outcome. Traumatologists have coined the term ‘the
23.2.1 Brief general impression 222
golden hour’ to emphasize the importance of early
Level of consciousness 222
intervention. Mortality occurs in three peaks after
trauma: immediately after the injury, due to fatal
Behovior 222
damage to the brain or the circulation, such as rupture
Posture 223
of the aorta; after one hour, due to injuries such as
Notoble obnormoities 223
rupture of the spleen or tension pneumothorax; and
23.22 A: Airway 223
after several days, due to complications of the initial
Stridor 223
trauma or inadequate first aid.
Orol covity 223
Adequate action may decrease mortality in the second
and third peaks. This applies not only to trauma but
Oropharynx 223
probably also to poisoning, severe acute illness, acute
Lorynx ond trocheo 223
decompensation (
of a chronic illness, and acute
23.2.3 B: Breathing 223
complication of a medical or surgical intervention.
Respiratory movements 223
Quick and efficient intervention requires that the
Chest woll 223
veterinarian:
Auscultotion of the lungs 223
1 remains calm and maintains an overview
Percussion of the chest 224
2 is well prepared:
23.2.4 C: Circulation 224
 Both the veterinarian and the staff should have
thorough ready knowledge of acute conditions.
Puise 224
 The entire team must be well trained and have
Mucous membrones 224
practical experience.
Heort 224
 Essential equipment and instruments should be
Hemorrhoge 224
accessible and ready for use.
23.2.5 D: Disability 224
In emergency medicine the sequence of steps in the
Level of consciousness 224
management of an acute case is often described as a
Pupil size ond pupillory light reflex 225
'chain of survival.' This chain starts at the scene of the
Locomotor system 225
calamity and continues into the hospital. For humans
Respiratory pattern 226
23.2.6 E: Environment 226
management of common acute conditions (trauma, heart
failure).1-3 Veterinary medicine lacks such a system but
23.3 Secondary survey 226
important parts of the protocols for humans can be used
221
 Chapter 23:
EMERGENCIES
   n s  si  5
23.2 Primary survey: physical examination
companion animals.4,5
Two important links in the chain of survival are
Abnormalities that can cause death within minutes or
basic life support  (basic cardiorespiratory cerebral
hours share a common trait: they quickly lead to tissue
l paoueape pue
The
hypoxia that in turn causes cell death. Brain damage
res uscitation}
 support.2
diagnostic protocol for basic life support is simple and
due to _hypoxia may be irreversible within S-7
focuses on the ABCs (see below). Is the
patient
minutes.7
Physical examination is therefore focused
conscious? Is there a free airway? Are there respiratory
primarily on the route that oxygen takes to reach the
movements? Can a pulse wave be detected? Basic life
tissues. The most generally accepted approach is the
support has a certain simplicity, for it is to be provided
ABCDE
 protocol: Airway, Breathing, Circulation,
at the calamity site by laymen without the help of
Disa bility, and Environment.
medical equipment.6 For animal victims this kind of
 In nonemergency cases additional examinations are
help is still rare and most dogs and cats receive first
based on problems defined after a complete history and
aid only after they have been brought to a veterinary
physical examination, but electrocardiography is often an
begin
integral part of advanced life support protocols. In
addition, life-threatening or organ-threatening conditions
according to advanced life support guidelines, for these
are executed by professionals (the veterinarian and his
are treated immediately, without waiting for a complete 
or her assistant) with equipment and instruments
diagnostic
work-up.(
Consequently, diagnosis 
and
      
readily available.
This chapter concerns the diagnostic protocol for
Valuable information may be lost as a result of early
advanced life support. The protocol is divided into
initiation of treatment and to minimize this risk, samples
for additional examinations are collected as early as
two sections: primary survey and secondary survey.
The primary survey comprises a brief history, a brief
possible. Common laboratory tests in emergencies
include packed cell volume, total protein and albumin,
general impression, and a physical
examination
 sodium, potassum, urea, creatinine, and glucose. Blood 
according to the ABCDE protocol. Once the condition
of the patient is stabilized and treatment of life-
gasses and coagulation profiles are also requested, if
threatening conditions has been initiated, the secondary
indicated.
survey is carried out. This comprises a complete history
Becauseé
emergency patients are usually unstable,
physical examination should be repeated regularly.
and physical examination.
This ensures timely recognition of deterioration and
23.1 Primary survey: brief history
provides information that can be used to evaluate the
effect of treatment.
aissod aui ot uodui aou si li Aouaaawa ue u
A complete physical examination cannot always be
threats to organ functions or the animal's life than to
carried out. Certain parts of the examination may be
define the exact nature of the animal's problems. An
too stressful for the patient; the presumed benefits of
extensive history is not required and may even
be
an examination should always be weighed carefully
undesirable insofar as it interferes with rapid and
against the disadvantages. The actual examination may
adequate action. The history can often be limited to
thus be less detailed than described earlier in this book.
the following questions:
For example, the examination of the heart and lungs
What has happened?
may be less comprehensive 
in a patient that is
How did it happen?
recumbent and una ble to stand.
juaddey t Pip uauA 
23.2.1 Brief general impression
There may be additional questions, (
depending on
the
esituation (trauma, poisoning).
For example,
Level of consciousness
The first impression of consciousness usually indicates
patient has been unconscious. A short period of
 u  e   
unconsciousness (seconds to a few minutes) followed
by a period of confusion usually points to brain
example, cardiac arrest can be excluded if the patient
is still able to stand but is a possible diagnosis if the
concussion
without
serious
brain
damage.
 Unconsciousness for several minutes may indicate more
animal is recumbent and cannot be aroused.
serious damage, such as brain contusion or rupture,
a d go ss n a  no 
Behavior
history attempts to determine the type of poison, the
In emergency situations  animals  may behave  in
amount ingested, when it occurred, and the course
unexpected ways and a muzzle is sometimes necessary
since the ingestion.
(§ 24.2.2), but it should be borne in mind that restraint 
222
Primary survey: physical examination
may endanger the patient, such as by impeding airflow
Oropharynx
when applying a muzzle.
The area between the two halves of the mandible is
inspected and palpated for pain, open wounds, or
Posture
deformities, and to determine whether stridor is
Recumbent patients are positioned with the head and
elicited by light pressure. Using the fingers or the
neck in a neutral position before being examined.
blade of a laryngoscope, the base of the tongue must
Traumatized patients should be treated with caution
be pressed down to enable inspection of the pharynx,
because they may have injuries to the head or vertebral
but this can only be done if the patient
is
column. They should be placed on a solid surface
unconscious. The pharynx is inspected for obstruction
(*back board') and if necessary fixed to it with adhesive
by a foreign body, severe swelling of the mucosa,
enlarged tonsils, or the abnormal shape or position of
movements. Dyspneic patients that are recumbent
the soft palate.
should be turned in dorsal recumbency for examination
d sn u parea raiq are siun ae asno
Lorynx ond trocheo
The upper airways should be kept free from external
External inspection and palpation of the larynx and
pressure. Especially in cats, forceful positioning should
trachea is performed to detect any pain, open wounds,
be minimized, to avoid the patient's resistance and
deformities, or swelling, or the rustling sounds
exertion. This follows an important principle in
caused by subcutaneous emphysema. Subcutaneous 
emergency care: first do no harm'.
emphysema indicates that there is a perforation of the
larynx or trachea. If laryngeal paralysis is suspected,
Notoble obnormofities
the glottis should be examined and for this the
These include dyspnea, abnormal position of the limbs,
conscious patient must be anesthetized. To examine the
glottis, the neck is extended (taking great care
and open wounds. Early listing of these abnormalities 
may modify the approach to the patient, for fractures
in patients with neck trauma), the mouth is widely
are painful and traumatized areas need to be protected
opened, and the base of the tongue is depressed with
the blade of a laryngoscope.
to prevent complications, as well as to protect the
examiner against being bitten.
23.2.3 B: Breathing
23.2.2 A: Airway
Respiratory movements
 The primary goal in examining the airway is to assess 
The depth, type, rhythm, and frequency of thoracic
its patency. If the patient is breathing freely and
and abdominal respiratory movements are evaluated.
without stridor, the airway is not obstructed and
Attention is given to labial breathing, the use of the
nostrils, breathing with an open mouth, and the use of
indicating airway obstruction include excitation (due to
accessory respiratory muscles (see also § 8.3.1).
hypoxia), decreased consciousness, harsh barking,
stridor, labored inspiratory movements including those
Chest woll
 of the auxiliary respiratory muscles, apnea, tachypnea,
The chest wall is inspected for deformities, wounds, or
and cyanosis.
abnormal
movement such as the paradoxical
movement of a flail chest. A flail chest is the result of
Stridor
fractures of two or more successive ribs in two or more
Breathing sounds help to identify the site of the
places. During both inspiration and expiration, the
obstruction. A nasal stridor is characterized by a sniffing
direction of movement of the wall between the
sound, a pharyngeal stridor by a snoring sound, and
fractures is opposite to that of the remainder of the
laryngeal or tracheal stridor by a harsh g-sound.
thorax. This paradoxical movement reduces the
efficiency of ventilation. Wounds of the thorax are
Orat cavity
inspected for evidence of perforation. Palpation is used
to detect subcutaneous lesions and deformities such as
fractured
 ribs, ruptured intercostal muscles, and
mouth and therefore it should be free of obstruction.
Thus the mouth is opened and the mobility of the
subcutaneous emphysema (causing rustling sounds).
 Palpation can also locate pain.
mandibular joint examined. The oral cavity is inspected
for saliva, food, vomitus, blood, foreign bodies, broken
teeth, a swollen or abnormally positioned tongue, and
Auscuttation of the fungs
other swellings such as salivary cysts.
See § 9.2.4.
223
 Chapter 23:
EMERGENCIES
Percussion of the chest
23.2.5 D: Disability
 In emergency patients attention is primarily focused on
 In emergency cases disability generally concerns cerebral
detection of a very hollow tone (pneumothorax), a
functions. When peripheral neurological dysfunction
reduction in tone ventrally {fluid or a mass), or dull
becomes life threatening, it usually does so via effects
sounds in the lung area (lung cavity or solid mass). See
on A, B, or C {e.g-, dyspnea in polyneuropathy) and
also § 9.2.4.
will be detected when these systems are examined.
The primary survey reveals (1) whether there is
23.2.4 C: Circulation
cerebral dysfunction and (2) how serious it is. Repeated
examinations may reveal (3) whether it is progressive.
Puise
The latter may suggest the cause and the prognosis. For
 If the patient must be examined in lateral recumbency,
example, rapid deterioration is more consistent with
the symmetry of the femoral pulses cannot be assessed
hemorrhage and slow progression with cerebral edema.
as described in Chapter 8. If no pulse wave can be
The neurological
examination
 is  especially
detected, the thorax is examined to determine whether
informative if there is primary cerebral damage due to
the heart is still beating (see below). This situation may
trauma. It is less helpful in cases of poisoning, severe
occur in cats that are presented in shock.
metabolic disorders, or after the ingestion of drugs that
affect the central nervous system (e.g-, anesthetics).
Mucous membranes
 Asymmetrical neurological signs suggest a localized
It is not necessary to examine all of the mucous
'sisouond rood e aanu aleiausg pue lapios ureng
membranes during the primary survey. Inspection of
 Symmetrical signs suggest a diffuse disorder and may
have a favorable prognosis.
the conjunctival and/or the oral mucosa will suffice.
The examination is limited to evaluation of the color,
moistness, capillary refill time {CRT, § 8.3.5), and the
Level of consciousness
 presence of hemorrhages.
Consciousness is maintained by the cerebral cortex and
the reticular formation in the brainstem (Fig. 23.1).
Heort
Effective communication between these systems is
The presence of the ictus cordis is assessed by palpation
essential for normal function. Elimination of the
on both sides of the thorax. If there is a fremitus
reticular formation or loss of the connection between it
and the cerebral cortex results in coma. Damage to the
($ 10.2.4) its location is noted but in this examination
its location is not important.
cortex alone will not seriously decrease the level of
consciousness. Focal lesions will only cause stupor or
During the initial examination auscultation of the
heart is limited to three essential aspects: Is there a
coma if they are located in the brainstem, because a
        
focal lesion is usually too small to block the extensive
Is there a cardiac murmur?
communicationnetwork
between
reticular
formation and the cerebral cortex. But a diffuse lesion
such as cerebral edema may have this effect.8
Hemorrhage
Hemorrhage can be arterial or venous, internal or
external. Acute blood loss is usually much more severe
with arterial than with venous hemorrhage and can be
fatal within a short period of time. Arterial bleeding can
be recognized in the acute stage by its pulsation.
External hemorrhage is usually clearly visible, assessing
the amount of blood loss can be difficult. The history
and the results of examination of the circulation may
detected by physical examination but may be confirmed
by diagnostic aspiration of body cavities. Internal
hemorrhage can result in a dull tone ventrally in
ul uouenpun Aq pue uonssnad Suunp xeiou a
the abdomen. Subcutaneous hemorrhage can cause
swelling and discoloration of the skin and hemorrhage
Fig. 23.1 Schematic representation of the cerebrum. cerebellum.
in muscle can also cause swelling. Hemorrhage in
and brainstem: 1 cerebral cortex. 2 diencephalon (thalamus).
the gastrointestinal tract can result in hematemesis,
3 mesencephalon (midbrain). 4 metencephalon (pons). 5 reticular
hematochezia, and/or melena.
formmation. 6 myelencephalon (medulla oblongata)
224
 Primary survey: physical examination
The different levels of consciousness {awake, sopor,
Locomotor system
stupor, and coma) are described in § 18.2.2.
Motor abnormalities caused by neurological dysfunction
 may provide clues to the location of the primary lesion
Pupil size ond pupillory fight reflex
and
the
 prognosis.
The
following
locomotor
Abnormalities of the pupils may help to identify primary
abnormalities indicate nervous system dysfunction:?
cerebral lesions if peripheral abnormalities and toxic,
Asymmetrical loss of function (hemiparesis/
metabolic,
and  pharmacological causes can
be
paralysis, unilateral hypertonia) in combination
excluded. The latter is not always 1
possible
in
with a severely decreased level of consciousness
Jo uiadia al s se pue saseo sa
 suggests focal damage to the brainstem and has an
the neurological examination difficult. Repeating the
unfavorable prognosis.
examination may be helpful by providing insight into
 Decerebrate hypertonia is hypertonia of the
the course and the prognosis.
extensor muscles of the extremities and the trunk
 Pupil size and the pupillary reflex help to locate and
(i.e., hyperextension of the front legs with
extension of the neck and head [opisthotonos] }.
OD
so
Prognosis
4
normal
normal
poo6
non-specific
diverse
bilateral
normal
miosis
metabolic
poob
cause
bilateral
pons
moderate
miosis
absent
('pin point)
poisoning with opiates or
good
cholinesterase inhibitors
unilateralmiosis
hypothalamus
lateral medulla oblongata
moderate
enophthalmos
ptosis
protrusion of 3rd eyelid
peripheral sympathic nerve
good
(Horner's syndrome)
tract
unilateral parasympatheticmoderate
oculomotor nerve
to
(transtentorial herniation)
poor
unilateral
slow orabsent
mydriasis
(OS)
peripheral
(oculomotor nerve/optic
poob
nerve/ocular globe)
unilateral
unilateral oculomotor
absent
moderate
mydriasis
oculomotor
ptosis
(OS)
nerve
to
divergent strabismus
(transtentorial herniation)
poor
poor
normal
absent
mid brain
to
verypoor
diffuse cerebral anoxia
poor
bilateraloculomotornerve
bilateral
to
slow or absent
mid brain
very poor
mydriasis
poisoning with atropine
poo6
increased sympathetic tone
Fig. 23.2 Pupil size and pupillary light reflex related to location and prognosis of brain lesions. O0 = oculus dexter [right eye). OS = oculus sinister (left eye).
1 Evaluated under normal lighting conditions (diffuse daylight or artificial light. 2 Only the direct lipsilateral pupillary light refex. Must be performed in a
darkened room. using a bright light source [§ 19.4.1. 3 See also Fig. 23.1. 4 Possible recovery of the central nervous system, not the patient as a whole.
 5 Difficult to evaluate if there is miosis.
225
Chapter 23:
EMERGENCIES
If combined with a severely decreased level
23.2.6 E: Environment
of consciousness, it suggests a lesion in the
This part of the survey focuses on the direct influence of
rostral part of the brainstem and has a poor
the environment on the body and mainly concerns body
prognosis.
temperature and damage to the haircoat and skin.
Respiratory pattern
Hyperthermia must be distinguished from fever (§ 8.3.3).
Hyperthermia can occur if a patient has been kept in a
Although also mentioned in the section on respiration,
hot, enclosed environment (e.g., in a closed automobile
some abnormal respiratory patterns are discussed here
parked in the sun). Hypothermia occurs primarily in
because of their association with brainstem lesions:
patients immobilized by an accident or disease. Severe
Cheyne-Stokes respiration." The respiratory rate
hypothermia may induce irreversible coagulopathies.
increases gradually, then slows down again
Shivering to restore normal temperature increases energy
 gradually. This pattern alternates with episodes of
demand and may aggravate tissue hypoxia.
respiratory arrest. It occurs in patients with severe
The entire body is inspected for wounds, both
damage to the cerebrum or the diencephalon and
traumatic (e.g-, gunshot, automobile) and due to burns
has a poor prognosis.
(including chemical).
Neurogenic hyperventilation. The respiratory rate
is high and regular. It suggests damage to the
midbrain and has a poor prognosis.
23.3 Secondary survey
Apneic respiration. The inspiratory phase is
 prolonged (*bated breath') and there is a long
When the patient is stable (at least temporarily) a
 pause after expiration. This pattern is repeated
secondary survey is started. The history is completed
1-1.5 times per minute. It suggests a lesion in the
($ 6.1.4) and depending on the findings, the examination
caudal part of the pons or the medulla oblongata.
is extended to a general physical examination and
 Atactic respiration. Respiration is irregular and
examination of the relevant organ systems. Based on the
there are variations in both frequency and depth.
findings of these examinations, a problem list is generated
There are long periods of apnea. It occurs in
and diagnostic and therapeutic plans are made. If a
patients with severe damage to the
complete history and physical examination are omitted,
myelencephalon and is considered a premortal
important findings may be missed and problems may be
 overlooked. This can result in serious complications.1's
References
1 Goris RJA. Ongevallen. In: Thijs LG. Delooz HH. Goris RJA. eds.
7 Delooz HH. Bronselaer K. In: Thijs LG. Delooz HH. Goris RJA. eds.
Acute geneeskunde: een probleemgerichte benadering in acute
 Acute geneeskunde: een probleemgerichte benadering in acute
genees- en heelkundige situaties (Emergency medicine: a problem-
genees- en heelkundige situaties (Emergency medicine: a problem-
 oriented approach in emergency medicine and surgery). 4th edn.
oriented approach in emergency medicine and surgery). 4th edn.
Maarssen: Elsevier/Bunge: 1999.291-322.
Maarssen: Elsevier/Bunge: 1999:13-24.
2 American Heart Association (AHA) in collaboration with the
8 Shores A. Craniocerebral trauma.In:Kirk RW.ed. Current veterinary
International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ILCOR).
therapy X. Philadelphia: Saunders: 1989:847-853.
Guidelines 2000 for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency
9 Dewey CW. Budsberg SC. Oliver JE. Principles of head trauma 
 cardiovascular care. An international consensus on science.
la noeyd anpa zuog dwo 1led - 5ieo pue shop ui juawaeueu
Circulation 2000: 102(5uppl 1: 11-1384
1992: 14:199-207.
3 American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma (ACS CoT).
10 Heimans J. Thijs LG. Coma. In: Thijs LG. Delooz HH. Goris RJA.
Advanced traumma life support® for doctors. Student Course Manual.
eds. Acute geneeskunde: een probleemgerichte benadering in acute
Chicago: American College of Surgeons: 1997.
 genees- en heelkundige situaties (Emergency medicine: a problem-
4 How KL. Reens N. Stokhof A. et al. Huidige inzichten in de
ua ut (ana pue aua uaaa ui yneadde paua
 mogelijkheden van reanimatie bij de hond en kat (Recent insights
Maarssen: Elsevier/Bunge: 1999:87-110.
into the possibilities of resuscitation of dogs and cats). Tijdschr
 11 Van Nes JJ. Klinische neurologie van de hond en kat (Clinical
Diergeneeskd 1998: 123:464-470.
neurology of dogs and cats). Dictaat Departement Geneeskunde
5 Kovacic JP. Management of life-threatening trauma. Vet Clin North
van Gezelschapsdieren. Faculteit Diergeneeskunde (Faculty of
 Am Small Anim Pract 1994: 24:1057-1094.
Veterinary Medicine). Utrecht University. 1993
6 Anonymous. Wanneer elke seconde telt. Leerboekje elemmentaire
reanimatie (When every second counts). van Drenth J. ed. Een
 uitgave van de Nederlandse Hartstichting. Vrienden van de
Hartstichting: 1996.
226
* First described by John Cheyne (1777-1836) and later by William Stakes (1804-1878). Bath played an irnpartant rale in the foundatian of the Dublin Schaol of
Medicine
24
Positions and restraint
A.M. van Dongen and J.H. Robben
tail. The cat should not be allowed to lean against the
Chapter contents
examiner, which defeats the square stance.
24.1 Positions 227
24.1.2 Sitting
24.11  Standing 227
24.1.2 Sitting 227
This position is not only useful for examination of the
24.1.3 Sternal recumbency 227
head, neck, and front legs, but also for collection of
blood from the cephalic or jugular vein (see § 25.3.1).
24.1.4 Lateral recumbency 227
Many dogs respond to the command sit? but if they do
24.1.5 Suspended 229
not, they can usually be made to sit by pressing down
24.2 Restraint 229
on the back. Most do not resist once they are in a
24.2.1 Manual restraint 229
sitting position. The sitting position can also be used as
24.2.2 Muzzle or cloth band 230
an intermediate step between standing and sternal or
24.3 Restraint or sedation 231
lateral recumbency (see below). Cats do not as a rule
respond to commands such as 'sit' but can nevertheless
usually be persuaded to do so.
In the paragraph on handling (§ 8.2), specific positioning
24.1.3 Sternal recumbency
of the patient is indicated for certain parts of the
physical examination. If the patient does not readily
Examination of the ears and eyes is generally performed
with the dog lying on its sternum (sphinx position). A
accept the prescribed positioning, some form
of
cooperative animal with a painless disorder can often
restraint should be considered.
be restrained for this purpose by simple restraint of its
head, as shown in Figure 24.1. An animal that is
24.1 Positions
anxious or has a painful ear must usually be restrained
24.1.1 Standing
more thoroughly. In this case, the assistant not only
restrains the head but also leans slightly over the
Several parts of the physical examination require a
animal to prevent it from rising (Fig. 24.1).
square stance, meaning that the legs are vertical and
the four feet form a rectangle. Large dogs are most
24.1.4 Lateral recumbency
easily examined if allowed to remain standing on the
floor. Dogs that are frightened often object to standing
Small dogs can usually be placed and held in lateral
on the table but may accept doing so if they are
recumbency quite easily, without following any special
supported from behind. An assistant can place one
 procedure. Medium-sized dogs can be placed in lateral
hand between the dog's hind legs and quietly but
recumbency by reaching both hands over the standing
firmly raise the dog up to provide this support.
dog in order to grasp the front and hind legs on the
Cats are strongly inclined to take a sit-and-watch
 side of the handler. By pulling away both legs the dog
position on the table. They can be induced to stand by
 is made to lean against the body of the handler. This
gentle tickling along the spine from the head to the
cushions its fall against the handler and the dog is
227
Chapter 24:
POSITIONS AND RESTRAINT
Fig. 24.1 A dog in sternal recumbency with its head lightly restrained (left). If resistance is to be expected. the head can be restrained more firmly by
leaning over the animal slightly and by holding the head and neck as shown (right)
rolled down onto the table without an abrupt fall. In this
Very large dogs should be lifted by two persons and
action the dog's head can move freely and one should be
placed directly on the table in lateral recumbency. For
alert to the risk of biting. Once the dog is on the table,
this purpose, they should agree in advance exactly how
the grasp on its lower legs is maintained for fixation.
to handle the dog, for example, “Now let's lift him and
Large dogs are handled in a slightly different way. To
lay him on the table on his left side, with his feet
place a large dog on its side without a struggle it is best
toward the window.
to first ha ve the animal sit (Fig. 24.2). The dog's head is
Fixation in lateral recumbency can be performed
then slightly restrained by grasping its collar or by
better by one person than by two. Standing behind
placing a hand under its jaw. The other hand reaches
the dog's back, the assistant can reach over the animal
over the dog to grasp either the front or the hind leg
to grasp the lower legs (Fig. 24.3), leaving the upper
that is close to the handler and slowly pull it out from
legs free. Although it seems natural to many people to
under the dog. The effect is to roll the dog over in a
place one arm across the dog's neck and when
smooth and continuous movement onto its side
necessary to compel the animal to remain quiet by
without giving cause for anxiety or resistance. Then
pressing down on its neck, this restraint is achieved by
the dog is fixed in lateral recumbency.
causing pain. It may be necessary with large and
a hand under its jaw. The other hand reaches over the dog to grasp the near front or hind leg and slowly pull it out from under the dog. The effect is
to roll the dog over in a smooth and continuous movement onto its side. without giving cause for anxiety or resistance
228
Restraint
24.2 Restraint
Whenever an animal must be held in a certain position,
it is best to find out first whether the owner can do
this safely alone. If the owner cannot, the help of
an assistant must be obtained or other measures must
be considered, such as sedating the animal. The
problem must be taken seriously and part or all of the
examination should be postponed if necessary until
adequate help is obtained. This is better than venturing
an attempt which may not only result in injury to
oneself but in which the owner and the patient are
exposed to danger, as well. Usually the cooperation of
the patient is inversely proportional to the number of
attempts to restrain it.
There are many methods of restraint. The choice
depends on the behavior of the patient, the species, the
下
planned procedure, and the personal preference of the
 examiner.1l2 Here we present some of the possi bilities.
Fig. 24.3 Restraining a dog in lateral recumbency. The right elbow
uaawqaq play aq ueo yoau pue peay 5 bop aut 1eut o5 alqet aut uo 5t5al
the upper arm and chest. The lower legs are held to prevent the dog
from rising.
24.2.1 Manual restraint
Dogs can usually be restrained quite simply by firmly
 grasping the skin on both sides of the neck just below
aggressive dogs but it is generally better to place the
and behind the ears (Fig. 24.4). This grip causes little
elbow and forearm on the table so that the dog's head
discomfort while allowing good fixation of the head,
and neck are held between the assistant's upper arm
and in this way an anxious or aggressive dog can be
 and chest. If the dog begins to struggle, the upper arm
adequately immobilized for minor procedures such as
can be used to draw it more firmly against the chest
taking the rectal temperature or giving an injection.
of the assistant. Held in this way, the dog cannot bite
A cat may suddenly and without warning resist being
the assistant but its respiration is not hindered and
restrained and the handler should be prepared for this
pain is avoided. When the dog relaxes, its head and
sometimes explosive behavior. When such an abrupt
neck can be allowed more freedom of movement. If
change in attitude occurs, the first response should be
the dog continues to struggle, the assistant can bend
a full-handed grasp of the skin on the back of the
over and lean upon the animal's body slightly, taking
neck. The struggling cat can thereby be lifted with one
care not to hinder its respiration.
hand, so that its claws cannot strike instruments or
The height of the table should be suitable for the
equipment, or the owner, assistant, or veterinarian.
procedures to be carried out, as well as being
Once the cat is suspended, its hind legs can be grasped
comfortable for the person holding the dog. An
by the other hand, and then its front legs by another
electrically-controlled hydraulic table can be adjusted
person. In this way it can be returned to the table and
easily, so that its height can be adjusted during a
restrained.
procedure without disturbing the patient.
24.1.5 Suspended
Small dogs—and especially cats—tend to resist being
restrained in lateral recumbency. Firm restraint may be
required, but this impedes such procedures as a
neurological examination. An alternative is to suspend
the animal with one hand under each axilla. The
animal's body hangs freely, with its back held against
the chest of the owner or assistant. Note, however, that
its head can move freely, which may involve a risk of
biting. In addition, cats may not hesitate to use the
Fig. 24.4 Restraining the dog's head by firmly grasping the loose skin
claws of both the hind and front feet.
at the side of the neck behind the ears
229
Chapter 24:
POSITIONS AND RESTRAINT
24.2.2 Muzzle or cloth band
lie flat, not gauze bandage or a cord, for these will
 If a dog was aggressive and attempted to bite during a
cause pain when tightened.
The band is placed on the dog in a loop with a half-
previous examination, or it is anticipated that the
knot over the nose. The loop is held between the thumb
 present examination may be painful, the animal should
and forefinger of one hand and is stretched over the
be muzzled with a cloth band and the reason for this
forefinger of the other hand. This loop, which should be
should be explained to the owner. It is best to ask the
S s n     i i  
very wide, is placed over the dog's muzzle and the ends
are pulled quickly to close it (Fig. 24.6, left).
If the owner is unable to apply the muzzle alone, the
 In this maneuver the hands come quite close to the
two-handed grasp described above (§ 24.2.1) will be
dog's mouth. If this is thought to be too risky, the hands
needed to restrain the dog for this purpose. Lateral
 can be kept at a distance by preparing a loose loop with
movements can be controlled, whereas forward
a half-knot. Via the long ends the loop is placed over the 
outbursts are less easily controlled. It is thus safer to
muzzle and then turned 180° so that the knot can be
approach an aggressive dog from the side.
tightened under the jaw. This can also be achieved by
Ready-to-use muzzles are availa ble for most dogs and
cats (Fig. 24.5). Choose a muzzle that is close fitting
first tightening the preparedloop dorsally and then
turning the long ends around the muzzle again and
with regard to both length and diameter. The mouth
making another half-knot under the jaw (Fig. 24.6, right).
should be enclosed without impeding the animal's
The two ends of the band are brought behind the ears
breathing. There are muzzles for cats that also cover
the eyes and many cats accept this without difficulty if
and tied firmly. If it is decided that the dog must be
muzzled in this way, the band should be tied tightly
the muzzle is applied calmly while reassurance is given
enough and knotted securely with a bow knot. This
by contact and voice.
means that the loop with the half-knot that is placed
When a muzzle is not available or a dog does not allow
around the jaws is tightened sufficiently to completely
q a asn aq ue p o e p aq oi ao
prevent the jaws from being opened. If the loop behind
should be 4-5 cm wide, made of strong cloth that will
the neck is tied too low on the neck, it can creep up
Fig. 24.5 Left: one size of muzzle for cats. Right: different sized muzzles for brachycephalic and dolichocephalic dogs
Fig. 24.6 How to apply a cloth band. A wide loop with half a tie (at the bottom) is slid over the muzzle. The drawings show how to keep a distance
from the dog. A loop with half a tie (at the top) is slid over the nose and then turned 180 degrees. The tie is then fastened below the lower jaw. Finally
the ends of the band are tied in a bow directly behind the ears.
230
Restraint or sedation
during the examination, resulting in sufficient slack to
carefully, the periorbital skin may be placed under
allow the dog to open its jaws.
tension and if so, the manner in which the dog is being
held should be changed to avoid this tension.
When the examination is finished, the dog may try to
On warm days special attention must be given to the
remove the cloth band with its front paws. The bow knot
way in which a large dog with a thick coat is restrained.
allows the examiner or assistant to remove it quickly.
A St. Bernard, for example, may be panting heavily in
24.3 Restraint or sedation
the examination room. Sometimes excitement (which
also results in greater production of body heat)
 It may be thought prudent to sedate certain patients,
contributes to this. If such a dog is restrained in lateral
because adequate restraint cannot be assured by the
methods described above without some risk to the
thermal polypnea is being hindered. This can lead to
patient itself, as well as persons and equipment. Cats
increasing resistance to restraint and if the cause for
       e   
this is not recognized and the restraint is increased
tend to resist restraint more than dogs, and they are
instead of being decreased, the dog may resist
nimble and do not give in easily.
explosively, with serious risk to all who are involved.
In many brachycephalic dogs the muzzle is so short
With every dog and every cat that offers strong
that neither a cloth band nor a muzzle can be used.
resistance and becomes dyspneic, all attempts at
The dog's muzzle may appear to be long enough (e.g-,
restraint should be stopped immediately. It may be
boxer, Shar Pei) to allow a band to be used, but then
sufficient to place the animal in a quiet room until it
the band is found to lie mainly on the soft tissue of the
has calmed down, but oxygen should be administered
nose, with great risk of closing off the cranial part of
if its condition warrants. In the meantime, the owner
the nasal passages. In such cases, the two-handed grasp
can be consulted, adequate help can be arranged, and
must be used rather than a muzzle.
plans can be made for further examination and/or
Especially in small brachycephalic dogs such as the
treatment. Although a second attempt of restraint may
Pekingese, the two-handed grasp must be used with
be successful, sedation is often preferable. Particularly
in dyspneic animals, attention should be given to the
the head, which during a struggle can result in prolapse
respiratory system and the circulatory system during
of the eye. Even when the two-handed grasp is used
the preanesthetic examination.
References
1 Webb TA. Handling and control. In: Lane DR. Cooper B. eds.
2 Kesel LM. Neil DH. Restraint and handling of animals. In: McCurnin
Veterinary nursing. 2nd edn. Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann:
DM. ed. Clinical textbook for veterinary technicians. 4th edn.
1999:1-5.
Philadelphia: Saunders: 1998:1-26.
231
25
Collection of material for
laboratory examination
J.H. Robben and A.M. van Dongen
At the end of several chapters there is a short list
 Chapter contents
of options for further examination, among which
laboratory examination is often mentioned. In many
25.1 Preparation, packaging, and shipping 232
cases results of laboratory examinations are important
25.2 Materials 233
in the diagnostic process to test the hypotheses
25.2.1 Urinary catheters 233
resulting from the history and physical examination
25.2.2 Needles 233
(see also § 3.2). Laboratory findings may also provide
information about the severity and the course of the
25.2.3 Syringes 233
condition. In this chapter methods are described for the
Handling the syringe 233
collection of body fluids and substances often used for
25.2.4 Disinfection 235
laboratory examination.
25.3 Blood 235
25.3.1 Venipuncture 235
25.1 Preparation, packaging, and shipping
Cephalic vein 235
Jugulor vein 236
performed and the collection technique should be made
Sophenous vein 236
before specimens are collected. The materials needed
25.4 Urine 237
for collection (syringes, needles, catheters) and for
25.4.1 Collection methods 238
processing (tubes, microscope slides) should be ready
Voided urine 238
for use. Provision should be made for samples that
Urethral catheterization 238
must be cooled immediately to stop enzymatic
breakdown. This includes collection tubes chilled in ice
Cystocentesis 239
 and a refrigerated centrifuge.
25.5 Feces 239
Samples should be collected with high standards of
25.5.1 Collection methods 239
hygiene and orderliness, both to protect the patient and
Spontoneous defecotion 239
personnel (zoonoses!), and to prevent contamination
Collection from the rectum 240
and mix-up of samples. For the latter purpose it is
25.6 Tissue cells 240
important, prior to collection, to label all tubes with
25.6.1 Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) 240
the number and/or name of the patient and the origin
of the specimen, using either preprinted stickers or a
25.6.2 Collection of the specimen 240
permanent marking pen, and to label the frosted end of
25.7 Thoracocentesis 241
microscope slides with a lead pencil.
25.7.1 Method 241
The tubes and slides should be packed carefully to
avoid breakage during shipping and should be
25.8 Abdominocentesis 242
25.8.1 Method 242
accompanied by identification of the patient, and
the date, time, and method of collection. Other
232
Materials
information that may aid the laboratory in interpreting
easily withdrawn after the catheter reaches the bladder
the results includes pertinent findings in the history and
(Fig. 25.2).
physical examination, whether the animal was fasted,
and any medications it has received.
25.2.2 Needles
Some diagnostic laboratories provide pickup service
and the necessary materials and containers for sample
Disposable needles for injection or blood collection are
transportation. These are based upon international
clean, sterile, and sharp. The length is given in mm and
regulations  for transport of biological materials.
the diameter in mm or as a gauge (G).f The thinner the
Couriers also require packaging according to these
needle, the less pain it causes, which is especially
regulations. The European regulations can be found
important in cats.
at
www.eurobiobank.eu/common_docs/
(Transport
The needle most commonly used in dogs and cats is
document).
30 mm long and 0.7 mm in diameter (22 G) (color
code black). For collecting 10 ml or more of blood,
25.2 Materials
needles of 0.9 mm diameter (20 G) (color code yellow)
25.2.1 Urinary catheters
are used. Small volumes of blood are collected with
needles 25 mm long and 0.6 mm in diameter (23G)
Many types of urinary catheters are available. The
(color code blue) or 12 mm long and 0.45 mm in
length is usually given in centimeters {cm) and
diameter (26 G) (color code brown).
the outer diameter in both cm and according to the
The needle package should be opened at the hub end
Charriere (Ch) or French (F) scale.* The quality of the
of the needle. The needle should not be placed on the
catheter is important. One that is too rigid may injure
syringe by pressing on its plastic cover, which may
the urethra and bladder, while one that is too soft is
make the cover difficult to remove.The needle is
difficult to direct blindly, as necessary in female dogs
placed on the syringe after removing the needle cover.
and cats. Catheters should not be reused, because
The opening at the tip of the needle should be aligned
resterilizing ma kes them rigid and gives a rough surface.
with the calibration of the syringe (Fig. 25.3).
 w o  a s ui a ng sa
The needle should be discarded without attempting to
with a diameter of 3.0 mm (color code orange) for
replace its cover, putting it directly into a small
large and medium-sized female dogs, 2.0 mm (color
container designated for disposal of sharp objects.
code yellow) for males and small females, and 1.5 mm
(color code white) for small males (Fig. 25.1).
25.2.3 Syringes
The white-coded catheter can also be used for female
cats. In cats, especially males, a smaller catheter having
Disposable syringes are available in sizes of 1 to 50 ml.
a length of 11 cm and a diameter of 1.0 mm (3F) is
a q aodu si iaund a jo uawou a
often used. Because such a thin catheter is insufficiently
a uaund aui jo du aui uo de yaqqnu e jo auasad
rigid, it is stiffened by a metal wire (mandrin) that is
conical tip for the needle is centrally located on small
syringes but on large syringes it is eccentric, which
facilitates insertion of the needle into subcutaneous
veins. The calibration is conveniently placed on the
opposite wall of the syringe.
The tip of the syringe can be a simple cone that slips
snugly into the hub of the needle or it can be a threaded
‘Luer lock* into which the hub of the needle is firmly
locked with a half twist.t
and aui ie pauado ag pinous aeyed asuas au
end to avoid contaminating the tip, and not by pushing
the tip through the package.
Hondfing the syringe
Fig. 25.1 Urinary catheters for dogs with diameters of 1.5 mm (color
One hand is used to localize and fix the tissue while the
mde white). 2.0 mm (color code yellow). and 3.0 mm (color code
other holds the syringe. For good control of the
orange).
syringe, the barrel is held between the thumb and
* On the Charriere (Ch) scale. devised by Joseph Bernard Charriere (1803-1876). an instrumment maker in Paris. an interval corresponds to about 0.33 mnm!
t The gauge' (also gage? is an Anglo-Armerican standard measure for pipes. firearms. and other tubular objects. A catheter gauge is a plate with graduated
perforations for measuring the outer diammeter of catheters. In contrast to the Charriere (French) scale for catheters. the gauge of needles is not linearly
related to milimeters. In addition. the gauge increases with decreasing size.
887
t Named after the German instrument maker Luer. who worked in Paris (died in 1883)!
Chapter 25:
COLLECTION OF MATERIAL FOR LABORATORY EXAMINATION
Fig. 25.2 Urinary catheters for cats. On the left the catheter contains a mandrin. On the right catheter and mandrin are shown separately.
uo paeid apaau aipaau aun jo pua qny aun ie pauado aheyoed aeyed u! ms apaau auoiu ot yal woy asn jo saeis juaap ui saipaa e'sz i
the syringe. package and needle cover removed. Right: the four most commonly used needles in dogs and cats: 0.45/12 mm (color code brown).
0.6/25 mm (blue). 0.7/30 mm (black). and 0.9/30 mm (yellow).
forefinger or middle finger. The ring finger or little
finger is used to pull the plunger backward {Fig.
  i  a   
can be done without any movement of the syringe
and needle.
 The negative pressure exerted by pulling the plunger
draws in blood or cells for cytological examination. If
the suction is too great during blood collection, the
vessel wall can be drawn into the opening of the
needl, blocking it. If too much suction is used in
collecting cells for cytological examination, the cells
can be damaged sufficiently to impair interpretation of
the smear.
Note: In human patients blood samples are usually
collected by use of an evacuated tube with a special
 needl. This simplifies the procedure and reduces the
risk of contact with the patient's blood. This system is
 not widely used in dogs and cats but it is used in small
Fig. 25.4 To collect blood. the ring finger or the little finger is used to
mammals (Chapter 29 and the DVD).
 pull back the plunger.
234
Blood
25.2.4 Disinfection
position prevents the clot from extending over the full
length of the tube and usually results in a larger
In dogs and cats subcutaneous and intramuscular
serum sample, which can be further separated by
injections are usually given without prior 
skin
centrifugation. Tubes designed for obtaining serum
preparation. Hair is not clipped and a disinfectant is
contain a gel or synthetic granules that promote
not used. When a blood vessel is to be punctured, for
clotting and clot retraction. Following centrifugation,
either intravenous injections or blood collection,
the
the granules or gel forms a layer between the serum
hair is often clipped or the skin is even shaved and the
and the clot, which facilitates pipetting or decanting of
skin is disinfected with alcohol. The needle is inserted
the serum.
into the vessel within a few seconds, while the skin is
still wet with alcohol.
Studies in humans have shown that all of this
25.3.1 Venipuncture
preparation is
unnecessary.
Comparisons
after
It is usually possible to palpate a vein after it is distended
by pressure applied by an assistant. The hair should be
with and without skin disinfection have revealed no
clipped if the animal has a thick coat or the vein has
infections in any form when the skin was not
been used repeatedly. The syringe is held as described
disinfected prior to injection.? Nevertheless, a well-
above, with the opening of the needle facing upward
performed skin disinfection does decrease the number
O aqesae ss ll pgieapisuo iq us jo
(Fig. 25.4).
clip the hair and disinfect the skin prior to procedures
The cephalic,j
jugular, and saphenous veins are
 o u  s u  h  o
commonly used in dogs and cats. The cephalic vein is
unnecessary, including inserting needles into body
preferred for small samples. Most dogs are restrained
cavities (§ 2s.7 and § 25.8).
on the table in sternal recumbency (sphinx position)
The recommendation to stop using skin disinfection
(Fig. 25.5). Some may accept a sitting position better,
but their sudden movements are less easily controlled.
not easily accepted. In a British hospital in which
disinfection  prior  to  injection   was  officially
Cepholic vein
discontinued, it was still being used by 70% of the
The assistant's task is threefold: to prevent the dog from
doctors and 90% of the nurses 8 years later.
biting, to extend and fix the front leg, and to compress
In veterinary medicine there is another reason to clip
the cephalic vein. The assistant stands beside the table,
the hair and to moisten the skin prior to venipuncture: it 
grasps the dog's muzzle, and turns its head away from
does improve visibility of the vein. It should nevertheless
the person collecting the blood (Fig. 25.5). With the
be avoided or done only with the owner's permission if
other hand the assistant holds the foreleg at the elbow.
the animal is used for show and also with the
 h hd on d A    o 
knowledge that in some breeds, particularly among
rising. Placing the fingers behind the dog's olecranon
cats, the hair can regrow with a somewhat different
will automatically extend the leg. A second assistant
color initially.
may be needed to control the rear legs of a cat.
The cephalic vein lies on the medial side of the carpus
25.3 Blood
and continues up the dorsomedial side of the front leg
to the elbow. It lies just beneath the skin. The assistant
The
requirements
for
blood
1samples  (volume,
compresses the vein with the thumb at the level of the
anticoagulants, storage temperature, maximal duration
elbow, turning the hand slightly outward to shift the vein
of transport) should be obtained in advance from the
dorsally. Firm contact between the hand and the table
laboratory. Heparinized blood is satisfactory for most
prevents the animal from pulling the leg backward.
clinical chemistry measurements, but samples
for
The needle should be firmly fixed on the syringe with
measurement of glucose must contain sodium fluoride
 its opening facing upward and the calibration markings 
to
prevent glycolysis.
Serum is required
for
    o    uo
determination of the protein  spectrum and
for
person collecting the blood holds the animal's leg
immunologic tests. EDTA is used as the anticoagulant
lightly in the palm of the hand, just above the carpus.
for most hematology examinations.
The thumb is placed along the cephalic vein to prevent
If plasma is required, it is best to centrifuge blood
the vessel from moving away when the needle is
promptly and transfer the plasma to a plain tube, to
inserted through the skin. The hand should not grasp
avoid hemolysis during storage.
the leg too firmly, which may compress the vein.
If serum is required, the blood sample should be left
Resting the syringe against the heel of the thumb after
at room temperature for 10-20 min for formation and
insertion of the needle helps to control unexpected
retraction of the clot. Placing the tube in an upright
movements of the leg.
235
Chapter 25:
COLLECTION OF MATERIAL FOR LABORATORY EXAMINATION
Fig. 25.5 Restraint of a dog in sternal recumbency for collection of blood from the right cephalic vein (left). Some dogs may be more easily
restrained in a sitting position Iright.
The needle is inserted at an angle of 20-35°. It can be
and front legs provides better control if the animal
inserted in one movement into the lumen of the vein or
resists restraint, but an additional assistant may be
in two steps, first through the skin and then into the
needed to fix the rear legs.
The external jugular vein passes from the base of the ear
away or flattening of the vein by the advancing needle
to the thoracic inlet and can be distended by pressing
and less likelihood of pa ssing completely through the vein.
When the tip of the needle passes through the skin,
with the thumb at the thoracic inlet. There are three
retract the plunger slightly and if blood is obtained,
ways to locate the vein: (1) applying and removing
the pressure of the thumb may reveal the contour of
advance the needle a little further into the vein. If no
the vein as it collapses, (2) using the same approach, the
blood is obtained, be certain that the vein is not being
collapse of the vein may be palpated, and (3) tapping
compressed at the carpus and then try withdrawing the
needle 1-2 mm while maintaining slight traction on the
across the surface of the neck above the thumb
plunger.
produces a pulse in the vein that strikes the thumb. A
combination of these methods may be used.
When the sample has been obtained and the needle is
being withdrawn from the vessel, the assistant's hand is
When the vein has been located, the thumb is raised to
just below the middle of the neck. Here it serves as a rest
advanced beneath the leg until the thumb on one side 
for the needle as well as to fix and distend the vein. With
and the forefinger on the other can pull the skin
the needle resting on the thumb, it can be inserted at an
downward slightly for about one minute. If necessary,
a bandage is applied.
angle of about 30°. The syringe is handled in the same
manner as for the cephalic vein (Fig. 25.7).
Jugular vein
Sophenous vein
more than ~5 ml of blood is to be collected (Figs 25.6
Blood can also be collected from the lateral saphenous
and 25.7). A dog is restrained in the sphinx or the
vein in dogs and the medial saphenous vein in cats.
sitting position. The assistant stands beside the table
The assistant restrains the dog in lateral recumbency
and reaches over the dog's back to grasp its muzzle in
 and grasps the upper hind leg just above the stifle. This
   s    si a n o
extends the leg and simultaneously distends the vein.
the person collecting the blood. Cats and small dogs
This always makes the saphenous vein visible but
are held in the sphinx position with the front legs over
inserting a needle into its lumen can be hindered by the
the edge of the table. Pulling the leg downward slightly
tendency of the vein to roll away from the needle.
provides enough room for the person collecting the
With the cat restrained in lateral recumbency, the
blood to advance syringe and needle parallel to the
 upper hind leg is moved away so that pressure can be
vein. The assistant restrains the front legs by moving
applied in the groin of the lower leg. The thinness of
the free hand forward under the front legs for fixation
the skin enables good visualization of the medial
with one finger between the legs. Extending the neck
saphenous vein (Fig. 25.7).
236
Urine
Fig. 25.6 In a short-haired dog with a long neck. pressure applied just above the thoracic inlet distends the jugular vein (let). In long-haired and
cbese dogs and in cats. the jugular is visible after clipping the hair.
Fig. 25.7 Distended jugular vein in a dog (left) and a distended medial saphenous vein in a cat (right)
25.4Urine
The first morning urine is usually the most
concentrated and therefore more likely to reveal
Just as for blood examinations, there are certain
abnormalities, although in highly concentrated urine the
requirements  for  examinations of urine.Urine  for
 cells in the sediment may loose some of their cytological
bacteriologic examination should preferably be obtained characteristics. The owner can be asked to collect urine
by cystocentesis and applied to the culture medium 
as soon as possible.6 Only drops are needed for1
urinary concentration during the day.7 Urine samples for
osmometry and to test for glucose, but 10 ml are required
collected at home in order to avoid the effect of stress
for a comprehensive examination of the urine sediment.
associated with a visit to the veterinarian.*
237
 Chapter 25:
COLLECTION OF MATERIAL FOR LABORATORY EXAMINATION
25.4.1 Collection methods
Urethrof cotheterizotion
Voided urine
A lubricated catheter can normally be introduced into
Collecting urine during the middle of micturition
the bladder without meeting significant resistance. The
reduces but does not completely avoid contamination
volume of the urine obtained via the catheter is
from the lower urinary tract. Urine
collected by
measured. If the animal has urinated shortly before the
cystocentesis from healthy dogs is sterile.6
examination, this residual volume should be no more
Some cats allow the owner to collect urine in a shallow
than a few milliliters.
dish during micturition. If not, a modified litter can be 
 Urine obtained by catheter can be used for laboratory
used. The usual litter is replaced by washed gravel for
examination, taking into account that it often contains
use in aquariums or commercially available granules of
synthetic material. Many cats will accept this change in
micturition. It can also be used for bacteriological
the litter if given a day or two to become accustomed to
examination but is easily contaminated by bacteria
it. The urine is decanted through paper filter or gauze
from the lower urinary tract in spite of aseptic
into a small container with hermetic cap.
procedures of catheterization.
In some cats urine can be obtained by bimanual
Catheterization of male dogs and cats (Fig. 25.8). The
compression of the bladder, using moderate pressure
preputial opening is cleansed with a disinfectant cream
while stretching the bladder cranially as much as
and the penis is exposed slightly. The tip around the
possible.
urethral orifice is also cleansed with the cream after
Fig. 25.8 Catheterization
of a male dog (A) and 
male cat (B) with minimal
 contamination.
A
238
Feces
being anesthetized with 10% lidocaine spray. The same
In smaller female dogs a vaginoscope is used to
cream is applied to the catheter as a lubricant. With
visualize the orifice of the urethra. Catheterization can
the penis extended from the prepuce, the catheter is
also be performed completely blindly. Slight traction on
inserted until urine appears. In a healthy male dog the
the vulva stretches the vagina caudally to bring the
insertion of the catheter will meet very slight resistance
vestibulum into a horizontal position. Then a catheter
at the level of the os penis and again as the catheter
used for a medium-sized male dog is carefully
passes around the ischiatic arch, where the urethra
introduced via the dorsal edge of the vulva to avoid
makes a sharp turn. If careful manipulation does not
entering the clitoral fossa and is advanced over the floor
overcome the resistance quickly, the possibility of a
Of the vestibulum. Careful manipulation is necessary
calculus in the urethra should be considered.
because repeated disturbance of the cervix can cause
considera ble resistance. Certainty about the position of
 In the male cat the urethra is stretched out by grasping
the catheter will only be provided by the flow of urine.
the base of the exposed penis and pulling it caudally
(Fig. 25.8). A sufficiently thin catheter can then be
inserted into the bladder without hindrance.
Cystocentesis
The bladder, which should be moderately filled for this
Catheterization of female dogs and cats (Fig. 25.9). Hair
procedure, is located by palpation, with the animal
is clipped from around the vulva if necessary and the
standing or lying on its side. If the animal is standing the
vulva is disinfected. The external orifice of the urethra
bladder is easily located against the ventral wall of the
is not visible externally in female animals but is located
abdomen, but the animal has appreciable freedom of
at or directly cranial to the transition between the
 moverment. If restraint is required, the animal should be
vertical and horizontal parts of the vagina (Fig. 13.3).
placed in lateral recumbency. This is also the best
This is considerably cranial to the clitoral fossa, which
position for small and medium-sized dogs. The neck of
is sometimes mistaken for the urethral orifice. In large
the bladder is grasped between the thumb and forefinger 
female dogs in which the transition from vestibule to
vagina is not too narrow, it may be possible to
to push the bladder slightly in the cranial direction. This
is analogous to holding a somewhat tense balloon
introduce the catheter under the guidance of a finger.
between the thumb and forefinger. The bladder is less
The forefinger is introduced into the vagina until the
 a suuq kg ea s ud uou
easily palpated in dogs in dorsal recumbency but this
the urethral orifice can usually be palpated at the
position is well suited for cystocentesis in cats because
transition from the vertical to the horizontal part of
the animal can be restrained more easily.
The needle is introduced into the bladder through the
the vagina and the tip of the finger is kept just cranial
abdominal wall in the midline, cranial to the pelvis,
to the orifice to guide the catheter. The catheter is
introduced beneath the finger and by slight pressure of
usually at the level of or just cranial to the caudal
the finger it is guided into the orifice. If the catheter
nipples (Fig. 25.10).
can be advanced further without being felt by the
finger, it is in the correct position.
25.5 Feces
 For a rapid test for parvovirus infection, only a drop of
fecal material is needed. Fecal samples on three
7!
consecutive days should be used for examination for
parasite ova. Parasites such as Giardia do not survive
long in the open air and can only be detected in fresh
feces. Bacteriologic  examination of feces seldom
 provides useful information.
Bacteria normally present in feces can affect the
proportions of carbohydrate, protein, fat, and fatty
acids and thus samples for determination of these
should be refrigerated.
25.5.1 Collection methods
Spontoneous defecotion
A sample of fresh feces can be collected in a plastic
container having a small spoon in the cap, taking care
Fig. 25.9 Position of the guiding finger during catheterization of the
to avoid contamination with soil, which may also
female dog.
contain parasites.
239
Chapter 25:
COLLECTION OF MATERIAL FOR LABORATORY EXAMINATION
Fig. 25.10 Cystocentesis in a dog in a lateral position.
Colfection from the rectum
not dissolve or smear in the staining fluids. Thicker
needles do not provide better aspirates. Instead,
Feces can be collected from the rectum by use of a
gloved finger with
a
lubricant.
Defecation
they aspirate thicker clumps of cells which give
can
sometimes be provoked by stimulating the anus with a
thicker smears with more damaged cells, and they are
ball of cotton.
more difficult to stain and to interpret. In addition, the
use of thick needles increases the chance of aspirating
blood.
25.6 Tissue cells
The patient is restrained by the owner or the assistant.
25.6.1 Fine-needle aspiration
The mass to be aspirated is fixed with one hand and the
biopsy (FNAB)
needle is inserted (Fig. 25.11). Retraction of the plunger 
only 1-2 ml is usually sufficient to aspirate material. To
Aspiration biopsy is usually performed with a fine
obtain a representative sample, the needle is moved in
needl.9 The method is relatively easy to learn and
and out at various angles without removing it from the
inexpensive, and in an institution with facilities for
mass and while maintaining the slight vacuum in the
staining, the results can be available within half an
syringe. Usually only a small amount of material appears
hour. FNAB is usually performed without anesthesia,
in the tip of the syringe during this process.
which allows it to be used during a consultation. In
If blood suddenly appears in the syringe, it is better to
veterinary practice, the slides are sent to a laboratory
 replace the needle—and syringe if necessary—and begin
for staining and interpretation. FNAB can also be
 again, for blood interferes with interpretation of the
repeated at intervals for follow-up. The risk of
smear. Before withdrawing the needle from the tissue,
induction of metastases with FNAB is negligible.
the plunger should be released to cancel the negative
A choice can be made between surgical biopsy for
pressure. This ensures that the aspirate remains in the
histological examination and FNAB for cytological
needle and syringe tip and is not drawn into the body
examination. For cytological examination the predictive
of the syringe, from which is difficult to expel without
value of a positive result is higher than that of a negative
great damage to the cells.
result (see also § 3.1.5). In other words, the absence of
 The needle is removed from the syringe, the plunger is
cancer cells in a cytological examination is less reliable
retracted to the 4-ml mark, the needle is reattached, and
than the finding of cancer cells. There can be various
the material in the needle is expelled onto a glass slide.
reasons for false-negative results. Also, FNAB cannot, of
The preparation of the smear is the same as for
course, provide a histological diagnosis.
smearing out a drop of blood. A second glass slide is
placed at an angle of 45° against the material on the
25.6.2 Collection of the specimen
specimen slide and the smear is made in a smooth
Equipment needed for FNAB:
movement.
 1 glass slides with one matted end
The most widely used methods for staining FNAB
2 10-ml syringe
 smears in veterinary medicine are Romanovsky-type
3 thin needle (0.7 mm, color code black)
stainss:
Giemsa, May-Grinwald, Hemacolor. The
aan wu ie ie u  aq pxy a ss
The name and number of the patient is written on the
 and the dried smears can also be stained satisfactorily
matted end of the slide with a lead pencil, which does
after long storage.
 The Russian physician Dimnitri Leonidow Rommanovsky 1861-1921) developed one of the first contrast stains for malaril parasites with a concentrated solution
 of methylene blue and eosin. This principle is also applied in the stains introduced by Wiliam Boog Leishmman (1865-1926: English health officer). Gustav Giemnsa
240
(1867-1948: pharmmacist and chermist at Berlin and Harnburg). and athers. The well-knawn May-Grunwald stain for blood smears is nammed after the Germnan
physicians Richard May (1863-1936) and Ludwig Grunwald (barn 1863).
Thoracocentesis
B
C
w zl paenau 5! laund aun ssew aun shaua apaau aun jay ssew e jo uoeyidse aipaau-auy ioy ahuns pue aipaau aun jo uoiod ll'sz di
[A). The aspirated material is expelled onto a glass slide (B) and is spread with the end of another glass slide (C).
25.7 Thoracocentesis
and of contamination, a closed system is always used.
A 10-20 ml syringe with a three-way stopcock is
If there is pleural effusion, only 10-20 ml of the fluid
connected to a 0.7-mm needle (color code black)
need be aspirated (thoracocentesis) for cytological,
by intravenous extension tubing. Alternatively,
 chemical, and bacteriological examinations.
a
butterfly needle with its flexible tubing can be used
In dogs and cats the mediastinum contains little
(Fig. 25.12).11 The flexible tubing allows freedom of
connective tissue. In several areas it consists of no
movement for both the patient and the person handling
more than two sheets of pleura.10 Pleural effusion
the syringe and needle.
sewep ot speal uao ssaod sunapun aua ropun
to the fragile mediastinum to the extent that fluid
The patient can be standing or in sternal recumbency.
accumulates on both sides. The fluid may also be in
The needle is inserted in the 7th or 8th intercostal
separate ca vities. If it is uncertain whether fluid cavities
q punoy su jo aul au on l aeds
on the two sides are connected, it is advisable for
percussion, which is often below the costochondral
diagnostic purposes to consider each half of the thorax
junction. Thus there is little risk of piercing the heart
as a separate compartment and to aspirate from both.
or the abdominal cavity. When the tip of the needle is
in the subcutis, the plunger is retracted 1-2 ml. This
slight vacuum is maintained as the needle is moved
25.7.1 Method
slowly through the thoracic wall, directly cranial to the
Contamination of the pleural fluid can have life-
rib to avoid the costal vein and artery, which lie caudal
threatening consequences and therefore the site is 
to the rib. Immediately after penetration of the pleura,
thoroughly prepared and disinfected (see also $ 25.2.4).
 fluid will flow into the syringe and there is no reason
Inordertodecrease thechanceof pneumothorax
to advance the needle further.
241
Chapter 25:
COLLECTION OF MATERIAL FOR LABORATORY EXAMINATION
If the fluid is an exudate or urine, its complete removal
may be beneficial. Nevertheless, attention should be
focused on the cause of the problem.
25.8.1 Method
The dog should prefera bly be standing, so that the fluid
will accumulate in the ventral part of the abdomen. The
site is prepared as described in § 2s.7. The equipment is
the same as for thoracocentesis (§ 2s.7.1). With careful
insertion of a 0.7-mm needle the risk of piercing or
damaging the intestine is negligible. The needle is
Fig. 25.12 Equipment for diagnostic thoracocentesis: a 10 or 20 ml
inserted on the ventral midline, a few centimeters
syringe with the needle attached directly (top). or connected by flexible
caudal to the umbilicus, which avoids the falciform
tubing (middle). or replaced by a butterfly needle (bottom).
ligament as well as the urinary bladder, which should
be emptied prior to abdominocentesis. If there has
25.8 Abdominocentesis
been previous abdominal surgery, the needle should be 
inserted off the midline to avoid possible adhesions of
Aspiration of fluid from the abdominal
cavity
abdominal structures to the abdominal wall along the
{abdominocentesis) is usually confined to the amount
 previous midine incision.
needed for diagnostic purposes. Certainly if the fluid is
Only slight suction should be used to aspirate fluid,
a transudate, removal of a large amount 
to avoid drawing omentum or other structures against
contraindicated. Unless the cause of the ascites has
the tip of the needle. Passive flow of fluid through the
been removed, the fluid will be replaced 
1 quickly
needle may be sufficient.
and the abdominocentesis will only have led
to
If there is only a small amount of fluid in the
considerable loss of fluid, electrolytes, and protein.
abdomen, a diagnostic lavage may be helpful.12
References
1 Beijer T. Apeldoorn CGL. Woordenboek van medische eponiemen
7 van Vonderen IK. Kooistra HS. Rijnberk A. Intra- and interindividual
(Dictionary of medical eponyms). Houten (NL): Bohn Stafeu van
 variation in urine osmolality and urine specific gravity in healthy pet
Loghum: 1998.
dogs of various ages. J Vet Int Med 1997: 11:30-35.
2 Lieffers MAM. Mokkink HGA. Desinfecteren van de huid voor
8 van Vonderen IK. Kooistra HS. Rijnberk A. Influence on veterinary
 injecties niet van invloed op het ontstaan van infecties: een
care on the urinary corticoid:creatinine ratio in dogs. J Vet Int Med
literatuurstudie (Disinfection of the skin prior to injections does not
1998: 12:431-435.
influence the incidence of infections: a literature study). Ned Tijdschr
9 Cowell RL. Tyler RD. Diagnostic cytology of the dog and cat. Goleta
Geneeskd 2002: 146:765-767.
(CA): American Veterinary Publications: 1989.
3 Osuna DJ. DeYoung DJ. Walker RL. Comparison of three skin
10 Dyce KM. Sack WO. Wensing CJG. Textbook of veterinary anatomy.
 preparation techniques. Part 1: Experimental trial. Vet Surg 1990:
3rd edn. Philadelphia: Saunders: 2002:408
19:14-19.
11 McGuire MH. Centesis. In: McCurnin DM. Poffenbarger EM. eds.
4 Osuna DJ. DeYoung DJ. Walker RL. Comparison of three skin
Small animal physical diagnosis and clinical procedures.
 preparation techniques. Part 2: Clinical trial in 100 dogs. Vet Surg 
Philadelphia: Saunders: 1991:181-194.
1990: 19:20-23
12 Crowe DT. Diagnostic abdominal paracentesis techniques: clinical
5 Liauw J. Archer GJ. Swabaholics? Lancet 1995: 345:1648.
evaluation in 129 dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1984:
6 Comer KM. Ling GV. Results of urinalysis and bacterial culture of
20:223-230.
canine urine obtained by antepubic cystocentesis. catheterization.
and the midstream voided methods. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981:
179:891-895.
242
26
Preanesthetic examination
L.J. Hellebrekers
veterinarian, the choice of the method of anesthesia is
Chapter contents
determined by the specific problems of the patient. If
 necessary, supportive measures are added.
26.1 Principles 243
The initial examination will not always have provided
26.2B
Basic examination 243
the specific information needed to determine the
 26.3 Further examination 244
anesthetic risk and to choose the best method of
anesthesia. Hence  a  preanesthetic  examination
26.4  Risk categories 244
1S
performed to obtain an impression of the functioning of
26.5 Notation 244
the vital organ systems. Both the initial examination and
the preanesthetic examination may reveal abnormalities
which need to be more fully defined by further
examinations. In this regard there are always two
The history and physical examination are not only used
important considerations:
to clarify or resolve a problem noted by the owner of a
1To what extent is it likely that abnormality of a
 specific variable is due to an abnormal organ
companion animal but can also be performed at the
request of the owner or, as discussed here, prior to
function?
 2  To what extent is it to be expected that the
 general anesthesia.
abnormality will affect the operative and
postoperative course?
26.1 Principles
If the information from the history and preanesthetic
The administration of pharmacological agents to achieve
examination is always assessed in this way, adequate
sedation, analgesia, or general anesthesia can be viewed
characterization of the problem can usually
be
as a controlled intoxication. This leads to both desira ble
achieved with a minimum of additional investigation.
and undesirable changes, the severity and duration of
The preanesthetic examination should preferably be
which are dependent on the general and emotional
performed the day before anesthesia so that there will
condition of the patient, the specific characteristics and
be sufficient time for any additional examinations that
dose of the drug administered, and its metabolism and
may be needed. On the basis of the findings, part or all
excretion by the patient.
 of the preanesthetic examination can be repeated just
By means of the preanesthetic examination one tries
before anesthesia. If the preanesthetic examination has
to determine the anesthetic risk in order to inform the
been carried out more than a couple of days in
 owner and to determine the most appropriate method
advance, it is advisable, even if no abnormalities were
of anesthesia for the patient. The anesthetic risk is then
found, to at least re-examine the functioning of the
weighed against the importance of the indication for
anesthesia. To determine the anesthetic risk one must
the entire prea nesthetic examination should be repeated.
have good insight into the functioning of those organ
systems which, if abnormal, could adversely influence
26.2 Basic examination
the progress of the anesthesia. Often there are several
options to achieve the desired level of anesthesia. Apart
The following elements are included in the basic
from the available knowledge and experience of the
preanesthetic examination.
243
Chapter 26:
PREANESTHETIC EXAMINATION
Signatment: in addition to age and gender, the
One should not only be aware of the predictive value
breed is important because of certain breed
of laboratory results but also have decided upon so-
predispositions fimpaired liver function in
called “action-limits". These values, above or below
which further examination or a change in the planned
English and French bulldogs, sensitivity to some
anesthesia or surgery will be considered, do not
anesthetics in greyhounds).
necessarily have to be the same as the ‘reference limits'
 History: in addition to information about the
for the variable.
 disease or abnormality, questions should be asked
about the animal's exercise tolerance, alimentary
26.4 Risk categories
tract function, and behavior.
General impression: the animal's level of
On the basis of the information from the basic
consciousness, behavior, and nutritional condition
preanesthetic examination, together with information
 are noted.
from any further examinations, the anesthetic risk can
 General examination: special attention is given to
be categorized. For this purpose the classification of
 respiration, pulse, temperature, and mucous
the American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) can be
membranes (color and capillary refill time, see
used.? The definitions of these categories are as follows:
$ 8.3.5).
category 1: healthy individual with no detectable
 Respiratory system: the lungs are auscultated
disease
carefully.
category 2: slight systemic disease without loss of
Circulatory system: in addition to evaluation of
function
the peripheral pulse, the heart is auscultated and
the venous circulation is assessed.
loss of function
category 4: severe systemic disease with
Ifno abnormalities are revealed by this
basic
life-threatening loss of function
examination, no further examination is needed.
category 5: moribund, life expectancy without 
26.3 Further examination
treatment less than 24 hours
If abnormalities have been found, the preanesthetic
The assignment of a risk category serves especially as a
warning. For each category, guidelines can be developed
examination is extended by further examination of one
for special treatment or special supportive measures to
or more organ systems or parts thereof. There may be
be ta ken in connection with the anesthesia.
a need for additional examinations such as an ECG,
diagnostic imaging, or laboratory examinations.
The indication for laboratory examination should be
26.5 Notation
based on relevant information gathered in the history
The indication for anesthesia, the results of the
and physical examination. The routine performance of
 preanesthetic exa mination, categorization of the risk, and
preanesthetic laboratory studies, as in elderly humans,
 u us an n ias an rg s
does not improve prediction of the course of the
noted on a sta ndard form such as that shown on the DVD.
anesthesia.1
References
1 zankis S. Pastor D. Gonzalez C. et al. The prevalence and
2 http://www.asahq.org/clinical/physicalstatus.htm
apia ui sisa oeogel aeadoaid euge j ae aad
surgical patients. Anesth Analg 2001: 93:301-308.
24
27
Health certification
F.C. Stades and A.A. Stokhof
Chapter contents
 an examination by a veterinarian, preferably one chosen
in agreement with the seller. Once the transaction has
27.1 Health certification in young animals and/or
been completed, it is still possible for an examination to
animals changing owners 245
be performed by the veterinarian representing the buyer,
27.2 Notation 245
 possi bly in agreement with the seller.
In this way the buyer's attention is drawn at an early
stage to the presence or absence of pertinent
characteristics or conditions. There may be specific
expectations concerning the fitness of an animal as a
An examination for health certification is usually made
guard dog, the qualities of a show cat, the suitability of
at the request of the owner, often for litters at the age
an animal for training, or the absence of hereditary
of 6-9 weeks, sometimes for newborn animals or litters
diseases. If the expectations have been made explicit
in which congenital abnormalities have been observed.
prior to the transaction and are not met, the buyer
A health examination may also be performed routinely
may wish to stop the purchase procedure, to ask for
with the first vaccination, or as part of a legal
restitution of part of the purchase price, or to cancel
procedure when a new owner is not satisfied with an
the transaction. Early detection of an abnormality
animal, or in any animal intended for purchase or sale.
during a health examination can also improve the
prospects for a good response to treatment.
27.1 Health certification in young animals
When the purchase
examination has revealed
and/or animals changing owners
undesirable characteristics that give rise to an unsettled
The discovery of abnormalities which could lead to serious
dispute, the buyer may claim default by the seller and
 problems later is obviously of great importance to the
attempt to achieve restitution of the purchase price or
 nullification of the transaction via a legal procedure.
owner. The approach to the examination does not differ
To ensure that the examination is performed as
in essence from that described in Chapter 8. It has,
efficiently
and completely as possible, a standard
however, a more screening character, directed to the
checklist or form can be used. After a short case
detection of congenital abnormalities, hereditary or not,
history, the general physical examination is performed
which could adversely influence the life expectancy or the
functioning of the animal. The term congenital refers not
'saha aui oi uaaig si uouae oyads anow uaul pue
ears, respiratory system, circulatory system, digestive
only to abnormalities detected immediately after birth,
tract, urogenital system, and locomotor system.
but also those present at birth but not discovered until later.
Health certification shortly before purchase or transfer 
of an animal decreases the chance of nonconformity with
27.2 Notation
the expectations of the buyer. However, the buyer could
also be dissatisfied with the conditions fwhich should
The form on the DVD can be used simply as a checklist
esul au ie paae (um ui a aeaaid
or as a health certificate. A place is provided for the
In several countries, the new owner is under obligation
signature of the veterinarian.
to examine the animal to the best of his ability for
The third column contains important characteristics
undesired characteristics, preferably prior to the
which should be found in a healthy animal. The ^wad
245
 Chapter 27:
HEALTH CERTIFICATION
of paper' refers to the reaction of a pup or kitten to a
note of the sternum, and congenital heart disease
wad of paper thrown before it. The expected reaction
such as stenoses, valve defects, and shunting!
by a pup is to run after it and possibly even to retrieve
Digestive tract: attention is given to the incisors,
it. A healthy kitten can be expected to play with it.
canine teeth, premolars, molars, and palate. In
The fourth column provides space for important
comparison with the dental formula of the normal
abnormalities; unmentioned abnormalities can also be
animal, the absence of elerments or the presence of
noted. The fifth and the sixth columns give an overview
too many elements is noted. Severely abnormal
of whether or not abnormalities have been found, and
placement of elements is also reported, as well as a
this is summarized at the top of the form by checking
fissure of the palate.
yes or no. If yes is checked, it will be of concern to the
 Urogenital systemm: look for congenital
owner whether the abnormality is considered to be
 a bnormalities. In the pup the testes reach the
severe or less severe and whether further diagnostic
scrotum at around the 3Sth day postpartum.
 examination is desirable. In particular, the estimated life
Locomotion: the toes are examined for the
expectancy of the patient will be important to the
presence of dewclaws and (taking them into
owner in reaching a decision about purchase. A few
account) the presence of the normal number of
 points in the fourth column are explained below:
toes should be confirmed.
Eye examination: ppm means persistent pupillary
The fontanel should be closed at birth. In some small
membrane, aplasia means not formed, dysplasia
breeds of dogs it remains open, which obviously
 means abnormally formed. Other examples are
constitutes a risk. A prominently rounded skull can
microphthalmus, entropion, dermoid, and cataract.
 Nose, respiration, and circulation: when
also be found in small breeds and can be a sign of
hydrocephalus.
examining for deformity of the thorax, also take
References
1 Baumans V. Dijkstra G. Wensing CJG. Testicular descent in the dog.
3 Yakely WL. A study of inheritability of cataracts in the American
Zbl Vet Med C 1981: 10:97.
mocker spaniel. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1978: 172:814.
 2 ACVO Genetics Committee. 1999 and/or data from CERF. All breeds
Report. 1991-1998.In: Ocular disorders. presumed to be inherited in
 purebred dogs. 3rd edn. American College of Veterinary
Ophthalmologists. 1999.
246
28
Birds
J.T. Lumeij
Chapter contents
Molt 255
Hormones 257
28.1 History 248
Color 257
History form 248
 28.5 Physical examination: handling 257
Signaiment 248
Preporotion 257
Gender 248
Exominotion room 258
Problem 249
Stress 258
Housing and feeding 249
Hondling of rocing pigeons 259
Symptoms in contoct persons 249
Hondling of coged ond oviony birds 259
Vaccination 249
Hondling of pheosonts 260
Falcons 249
Hondling geese. ducks. ond swons 260
28.2 Examination of the cage or aviary 249
28.6 Examination of the restrained bird 260
Feces of other onimois 249
28.6.1 Identification 260
Toxic materials 249
28.6.2 Nutritional condition 260
Position 249
28.6.3 Head 261
Freely moving birds 250
Eor 261
General hygiene 250
Eye 261
Daylight 250
Beok. cere. nostrils 263
Design 250
Oral covity 263
Regurgitotion 250
Smear of throot swob 264
Food ond food residues 250
28.6.4 Neck 264
Feces 250
28.6.5 Wings 265
Streoks of blood 251
28.6.6 Legs and feet 266
Down or feothers on the floor 251
28.6.7 Trunk 267
28.3 Physical examination: introduction 251
Skin ond skin odnexo of the trunk 267
 28.4 Physical examination: inspection at a
Thoracoobdominol covity 268
distance 251
Examination of the cloaca 268
 28.4.1 Nervous system and locomotor system 252
28.7 Body temperature and thermoregulation 268
28.4.2 Respiratory system 252
28.4.3 Plumage 254
28.8 Notation 270
Structure 254
28.9 Further examination 270
247
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
About 150 million years ago birds (class Aves) developed
the ‘timneh' (Psittacus erithacus timneb), has a horn-
from lizard-like reptiles. Many of the anatomical and
colored beak and a rust-brown tail. Now and then a
physiological characteristics of birds are similar to
timneh parrot is sold as a young bird of the larger
those of reptiles. An important difference is that birds
subspecies.
 are homoeothermic and reptiles are poikilothermic.
It is also important to know how old the bird is, how
The characteristics which birds have in common are:
long it has lived in captivity, and how long it has been
a plumage, jaws without teeth, extensive systems of air
with the present owner. In macaws and African gray
sacs with connections to the pneumatic skeleton, a four-
parrots the color of the iris can aid in determining the
chamber heart, and the absence of both a diaphragm
age. In the first year of life of macaws, the iris is
 and a urinary bladder. All birds are oviparous.
darkly colored. Between one and three years of age the
There are about 8900 species. On the basis of
iris is white, and in birds older than three years
different anatomical and physiological characteristics
(adults) it is yellow. In African gray parrots the iris
they are divided into 1800 genera, 160 families, and
 color changes from brown to gray to white.
27 orders. This classification is a good starting point
It is of clinical importance to differentiate between
for the veterinarian in making use of the normal
 birds that have been in the possession of the owner for
anatomy
and physiologyasabasis
for
a long time and those that have only recently been
pathophysiology. Knowledge of the veterinary aspects
       
parrots but does occur in those that have already been
utilized in dealing with less well known species in the
in captivity for many years and fed a deficient diet is
same order or family.
vitamin A deficiency (see below).
Gender
28.1 History
         
male or female, although in many species of birds this 
The first contact from the owner of a bird that is ill is
can be difficult or impossible to determine by external
usually via the telephone. In order to achieve the most
characteristics. Occasionally one is confronted with a
from the visit to the veterinarian which can follow,
bird that does not appear to be of the gender the
it is worthwhile to provide the receptionist with a list
of instructions that can be given to the owner by
findings (such as the diagnosis of egg peritonitis in a
telephone (see Addendum at the end of this chapter).
supposedly male emu).
The gender of certain species of birds can be
History form
differentiated on the basis of external sex characteristics.
If the condition of the patient allows time for it, a
Thus in most white cockatoos the gender can be
          
determined by the color of the iris. The iris is red-brown
while waiting (shown on the DVD). The history form
in adult females and brown to black in adult males.
q ond o a on  o i s
 In many species of birds (such as the mallard, see
obtains a fairly complete picture of the functioning of
under Feathers in § 28.3.2) the gender can be
the bird, the living conditions, and the past history. At 
determined by the color of the feathers. In budgerigars
the first consultation the owner is instructed to answer
the gender can be determined by the color of the cere.
all questions and then at subsequent consultations
In some species gender can be confirmed by cloacal
concerned
with the original problem, only
the
examination, because of the presence of a large phallus
questions under A need be answered.
in the males (see Examination of the cloaca in § 28.6).
Often it is difficult or impossible to determine gender
Signaiment
on the basis of the above characteristics and endoscopic
After the iatrotropic problem has been well defined and
examination of the gonads is necessary for this purpose.
has been noted on the examination form (see the DVD)
Gender can also be determined by chromosome analysis
the signalment is checked to be certain that the
(karyotyping) and by DNA analysis. These methods are
signalment recorded by the receptionist is correct. To
based on the difference between the sex chromosomes
which species does the bird belong? In addition to the
of females {zw) and males (zz). The W chromosome on
common name, the Latin name can be important in
the CHD-W gene has been strongly conserved during
order to search for specific information in the literature.
evolution. It occurs in almost all bird species and is
Within many species of birds there are many known
used in the universal method of gender determination
subspecies which can be distinguished on the basis of
in birds. An almost identical CHD gene occurs on
size or color. As an example, the nominate form of the
 Other chromosomes in both male and female birds. The
African gray parrot (Psittacus erithacus erithacus) has a
presence of this CHD-NW gene serves as an internal
black beak and a red tail, while a smaller subspecies,
test control for false-negative results. After PCR
248
Examination of the cage or aviary
primers amplify the CHD-W and CHD-NW genes, they
Foicons
can be separated by electrophoresis, revealing whether
In falcons there are other specific questions of
the bird has only one (CHD-NW) and is thus a male,
importance in taking the history. A serious falconer can
or has both and is thus a female.2
 give you detailed information about any recent change
Problem
in the patient's weight.
By means of a qualitatively and quantitatively
After the signalment of the bird has been verified as far
adapted system of feeding, hunting birds used in
as is possible and has been noted, the history form
falconry are held at a lower body weight during the
filled in by the owner is used to determine whether
hunting season than during the molt. This system,
there are important points requiring clarification.
which must lead to an optimal balance between good
Housing ond feeding
physical condition for hunting and as great as possible
a capacity to hunt and return to the falconer, has
Then information about housing is noted and questions
disadvantages. These must be managed by a number of
 are asked to determine whether the feeding is adequate.
measures, including the daily weighing of the bird.
For example, a frequently occurring feeding error is
 During molting there is less daily contact between the
feeding Psittaciformes a diet that is deficient in calcium
falconer and the bird. The bird is not used for hunting,
and vitamin A. Parrots are often fed a diet of seeds
is not weighed and is fed ad libitum with nourishing
alone, sold in pet shops under the name of ^complete
 prey, such as pigeons. Behavioral abnormalities which
parrot food". The affected birds often have a distinct
could indicate poor health are generally noticed less
preference for sunflower seeds and peanuts. The calcium
quickly in this period than in the hunting season.
content of such food is too low and the Ca/P ratio is
incorrect. This can lead to demineralization of the
28.2 Examination of the cage or aviary
skeleton. Fractures can occur if such a parrot resists
handing for examination, which is extremely
Examination of the cage or aviary and its immediate
undesirable during a consultation. In carnivorous birds
surroundings often provides important diagnostic
in captivity nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism
information. During a house call the aviary can be
(all-meat syndrome) can also lead to inadequate
inspected. A bird cage can be brought to the office of
mineralization of the skeleton. Complete parrot food is
the veterinarian. Various points can be taken up by
now commercially available as extruded pellets.
using a checklist on the examination form.
Feces of other onimois
Symptoms in contoct persons
In aviaries which can be contaminated by feces of wild
The question of whether symptoms of illness have been
birds
or
of rodents,
infection with
Yersinia
observed in contact persons not only serves the
pseudotuberculosis (rodentiosis) is found occasionally.
purpose of obtaining information necessary for the
Infections
with
Mycobacterium
{avian
diagnosis in the bird but also makes the owner aware
tuberculosis) or Syngamus trachealis (gape worm) can
of the fact that keeping birds is not completely free of
 Occur in the same manner.
danger to his or her health. Chlamydiosis (psittacosis)
is occasionally found in recently-purchased parrots and
Toxic moteriois
the disease can be transmitted to people. The signs very
Various toxic materials can cause problems in birds. The
closely resemble those of the flu. Chlamydiosis can be
most frequently occurring and most frequently reported
fatal in people and it is the responsibility of the
intoxication in wild and captive birds is lead poisoning.
veterinarian in case of suspicion of this disease to
An important risk group is formed by the psittacine
contact the physician of the owner or advise the owner
birds. Because of the destructive way in which they treat
to do so. Chlamydiosis is a notifiable disease, both in
their surroundings they are predisposed to ingestion of
humans and in birds. There is also a genuine risk of
lead. This heavy metal is still widely encountered in the
infection for veterinarians who are regularly in contact
household environment. It can be important in taking
with birds. Fortunately the prognosis is favorable if
the history to go through the following list of possible
treatment with tetracycline is started promptly.
sources: lead weights in curtains, air rifle pellets, lead
solder, lead foil from wine bottles, lead weights for
Voccination
fishing, lead-containing toys (self-righting puppets),
If the owner has indicated on the history form that a
Christmas tree decorations, lead paint, lead weights of
vaccination has been given, information about this
various kinds, leaded glass windows, linoleum.
should be given on the examination form, including
what type of vaccination, the date and method of
Position
vaccination, the type of vaccine, and whether or not
The position of the cage or aviary is important with
there was a vaccination reaction.
regard to the influence of the weather and of
249
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
temperature changes. Hence a bird in a cage on the 1
 pressure points on the bird's foot will vary and the bird
window sill is exposed to great changes in temperature, (
can choose its perch. Perches that are covered with
to humidity, and often to direct sunlight, sometimes :
sandpaper ‘to keep the nails filed down' promote foot
without the possibility of escaping into shadow.
 sole ulcers. Smooth plastic perches are too smooth to
Combustion products of butter and fat and of
 enable birds to get a good grip on them. Ribbed plastic
polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE), the nonstick coating
 perches provide a constant source of infection for the
used for cooking utensils, can be lethal for birds, as
foot sole because feces accumulate between the ribs.
can many kinds of household aerosol sprays.
The best solution seems to be smooth wooden perches.
Cracks on the underside and at the ends of the perch
Freely moving birds
should be examined for the presence of the 'red mite?
If birds can move freely in the room, there are other
(Dermaryssus gallinae). These parasites also remain
potential dangers such as the closing of doors,
during the day in nesting boxes, on the cuttlebone, or
windows, pans with hot cooking oil, hot-plates and
under the bottom of the cage. It is helpful to use a
stoves, threads, and possibly predatory animals in the
magnifying glass to detect them. The location of the
house. If an animal bite is not directly fatal, sepsis can
perch is of importance in connection with possible
still be caused by Pasteurella multocida. Immediate
contamination of food and water dishes.
treatment with an intramuscularly or intravenously
Regurgitation
order to save the bird.2
Cage ‘enrichment'’ with mirrors and plastic birds
sometimes
causes  maleparakeets  tobegin
Generot hygiene
regurgitating. This is a component of the display
behavior and should not be mistaken for an illness.
It is important to form an impression of the general
hygiene of the place in which the bird is kept. Is the
 Some species of birds regurgitate undigested parts of
construction such that good cleaning and disinfection is
the food in the form of castings or pellets. This is
possible and is this also indeed carried out? It is
known to occur in crows, sparrows, thrushes, falcons,
and owls, among others. In the case of birds used for
impossible in an outdoor aviary with a sand floor to
maintain good hygiene.
falconry, it is necessary to ask how long it was after
Daylight
prey was adequately digested, and whether it was
mixed with mucus or blood.
 In birds several physiological processes are determined
by the length of the period of daylight. Birds that are
Food ond food residues
kept in the living room of a home are (unconsciously)
exposed to an unnatural daylight length because lights
In addition to the information given by the owner about
are turned on in the evening. In the average living
the bird's food, it is worth looking at the food and the
room the daylight length in the summer is about the
e auiaum aas oi aseo aui ui juasaid pooy jo sanpisa
same as in the winter. In some species of birds it has
ofthe food is eaten or whether the bird has a
been shown that manipulation of the daylight length
preference for certain seeds. A frequent problem is that
can lead to problems in molting. Reproduction is also
although a reasonably balanced diet is provided, the
determined by daylight length in many species of birds.
bird very selectively picks out the parts it prefers and
Lengthening of the daylight in the winter months is,
leaves the rest, after which the owner provides the next
for example, used to bring about egg production in
"complete meal. During the taking of the history and
chickens during the entire year.
the examination of the cage one can see whether the
bird has an appetite.
Design
The safety of the cage or aviary is assessed by looking to
Feces
The macroscopic appearance of the feces varies greatly
the bird cannot get its head or wings between them.
 among species of birds and experience is required to
The distance between the bars should also be the same
assess what is normal or abnormal. The presence of
overall so that the bird cannot get part of its body
blood, mucus, tissue, or pseudomembranes is obviously
through at one place and then become trapped.
abnormal. In order to examine the feces of hospitalized
The perches must be of such a diameter that the bird's
birds, the floor of the cage can be covered with a sheet
foot cannot completely encircle them. If the perches are 
of waxed paper. The urine and the feces are excreted
too thick, pressure sores can develop on the soles of
together from the cloaca. The urine of birds contains
the feet and these can become infected (bumblefoot). If
 uric acid as the end product of nitrogen metabolism
there are perches of different diameters in the cage, the
and it is normally visible as a "white flag' on the feces.
250
Physical examination: inspection at a distance
When there is polyuria, a pool of clear fluid is seen
fecal part of the excreta (melena) may indicate bleeding
around the normal feces. A bird that is restless {for
in the proximal part of the gastrointestinal tract, as can
example, as a result of being brought to the
 occur with a tumor of the proventriculus or ventriculus.
veterinarian  for examination)  may defecate more
      s
frequently, with the result that the feces appear like
temperature) for flagellates or nematode ova and
those of a bird with polyuria, because the resorption of
protozoan oocysts (preferably after sedimentation and
urine from the ureter in the terminal intestine is reduced.
flotation with zinc sulfate or saturated sugar solution)
The number of excretions per 24 hours can provide
belongs to the routine examination of birds presented as
an impression of a bird's appetite. A parakeet can
 patients. This examination can take place before the bird
produce 25 to 50 excretions per 24 hours. Racing
is taken out of the cage, by obtaining some feces through
 "snou t iad suoauxa s on dn anpd suoa
the bars of the cage by use of an inoculating loop.
a pigeon sitting on a nest of eggs, this is reduced to no
more than 10 excretions per day.
Streoks of blood
In birds with a well-developed cecum {such
as
Streaks of blood on the walls of the cage are usually an
 aq u ss yo sa ome s
indication of blood loss from a wing, often due to a
noncecal feces and cecal feces. The noncecal feces form
damaged flight feather in the growth phase.
the larger part. In the chicken these are grayish green
and are covered with a white layer of urates. The cecal
Down or feothers on the floor
feces are only excreted a few times per day. They are
The presence of down and/or feathers on the floor of the
very homogenous, fairly sticky, and slightly thinner
cage or aviary can provide useful information. Keepers
than noncecal feces; the color is chestnut brown and
of racing pigeons sometimes come with the complaint
the surface is smooth and glistening. Cecal feces give
that 'the pigeons don't shed their down anymore'. The
off a typical slightly aromatic odor.
If birds have little or no appetite, a green
sq aut f! suo rea le suoaaid ui sanuo iou umop
discoloration of the feces is often observed. This is
are ill the stagnation of the down molt is often the
caused by biliverdin, the main bile pigment of birds. In
first sign (see under Plumage). In parrots the presence
of down or feathers under the cage can be an early
almost all species the bile produced in the left half of
the liver is delivered via a bile duct to the intestine.
indication of feather picking and parrots which are
The bile produced in the right half of the liver can be
stored in a gall bladder in some species (chicken and
feathers during the same period. If this is not recognized
 duck) but in others (pigeon and parrot) it is handled in
in time and preventive measures taken, there is a chance
that the bird will return home picked bald.
the same way as that from the left half of the liver.
Because the production of bile continues in spite of
anorexia and the bile cannot be partly stored in a gall
28.3 Physical examination: introduction
bladder, the feces produced by a bird with anorexia
will consist largely of bile.
In searching for the cause of signs of disease in birds we
Someabnormalities in the fecesare fairly
make a distinction between diagnosis in the individual
pathognomonic for a certain disease in a certain
and diagnosis in a group or flock. In the individual
species. Undigested grains in the feces of a racing
bird
the
 physical
examination  and  subsequent
Aq pasneo Aensn) suse ouewneu e aieoipu uoaaid
laboratory'
or radiographic examinations have an
a nail), while blood in the feces of racing pigeons
important
place, while in flock problems the
postmortem examination plays an important role.
("intestinal flukes").
Often one or more affected birds from a flock can be
If undigested material is observed in the feces of
sacrificed for necropsy. This is especially important in
Amazon parrots, the first possibility to be considered is
proventricular dilatation disease or neuropathic gastric
is limited (small Passeriformes, such as finches).
dilatation. If hemoglobinuria is observed, lead poisoning
is the most probable diagnosis. Mixing of hemoglobin
28.4 Physical examination: inspection
with urates can give the urine the appearance of tomato
at a distance
soup.
Undigested grains in the feces of birds in general
 By inspection at a distance the examiner tries to collect
usually indicate a functional disturbance of the gizzard,
as much diagnostic information as possible without
while red discoloration of the excreta (hematochezia)
contacting the bird. If possible, birds that are presented
indicates a disorder of the caudal part of the
in a box are removed and placed in an observation
gastrointestinal tract, or the oviduct or cloaca, or it
 area, such as a cage. After allowing the bird a short
indicates hemoglobinuria. Black discoloration of the
period to become familiar with this new situation, the
251
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
examination is started. A protocol is included on the
location of the lesion. If the lesion is distal to the
examination form and is explained below.
shoulder joint the tips of the flight feathers are held
Aspects which must be given attention at this stage of
lower than those of the wing on the healthy side.
the examination can in principle be divided into four
When there is a lesion of the shoulder joint and the
main groups: nervous and locomotor:
systems,
coracoid, the proximal part of the wing droops but the
respiratory
system,
plumage, and
immediately
tips of the flight feathers on the affected side extend
noticeable abnormalities.
above those on the healthy side.
28.4.1 Nervous system and
28.4.2 Respiratory system
locomotor system
The walls of the infraorbital sinus in birds are bordered
 In evaluating a bird's level of consciousness we take into
by soft tissue. The connection with the nasal cavity lies
 account that a seriously ill bird in strange surroundings
in the dorsal wall. The latter results in poor drainage
  re a  o e 
of the sinus, whereas the former allows bulging of the
surrounded by people in white coats. On the other
lateral wall when there is a sinusitis. A bulging
hand, a bird that sits hunched up or with its head in its
between the beak and the medial canthus of the eye is
feathers or a bird that repeatedly falls asleep in the
examination room is obviously suspected of being ill.
overfilling of this sinus. Bilateral sinusitis can take
The behavior of the bird gives indications about the
extreme forms. In Galliformes it sometimes results in
relation between the bird and its owner and about the
what is referred to as an 'owl head' (Fig. 28.1).
length of time that the bird has been in captivity: a
In parrots there is a connection between the infraorbital
parrot that is easily handled and can talk has clearly
been in captivity for a long time.
sinus and the air sacs located under the skin of the head
and neck. This cervicocephalic air sac system is not
Attention is given to the presence of signs that
connected to the pulmonary air sac system (Fig. 28.2).
indicate an abnormality of the nervous system. Often
When there is narrowing of the connection between
on the basis of the nature of the nervous signs and the
the infraorbital sinus and the cervicocephalic air sac,
species, a probable diagnosis can be made. In racing
the connection can act like a valve, causing the air sacs
pigeons torticollis is usually caused by an infection
with Salmonella typhimurium var. copenhagen or the
to become overfilled, increasing the circumference
of the neck. This overfilling should not be mistaken for
pigeon paramyxovirus.
the escape of air from a ruptured air sac.
Ducks presented for examination in the middle of the
summer with paralysis of the neck muscles (limber
The vocal organ in birds is not the larynx (vocal cords)
neck') are most likely to have botulism. In swans with
as in mammals but the syrinx at the bifurcation of the
lead poisoning there is also paralysis of the neck
trachea. Abnormal vocal sounds in birds thus generally
muscles, via which the neck can no longer be held
indicate a more deeply located disorder.
vertically but is bent backward to rest on the back.
The lungs of birds are rigid and the air transport
 Older budgerigars with a unilateral paresis or paralysis
through the lungs is dependent on volume changes in
of a leg often have a kidney tumor that compresses the
nerves to the leg.
Rhythmic lateral movements of the head can be seen
in some species of birds (especially falcons and owls)
with disorders of the vestibular organ. This sign is
comparable to nystagmus in mammals. In many species
of birds the movements of the eye are limited and are
 compensated for by movements of the head.
Although the manner in which the wings are held
may not be directly visible at the time of the
examination, a disorder of the wing can be indicated
pue h um aueg  isno aul jo sus aq
feces. If the bird is placed in a quiet area and is
unaware of being observed, the affected wing will be
seen to slide over the ground.
A drooping wing can be due to a neurological
abnormality but more often there is an abnormality of
the skeleton, joints, ligaments, or muscles. The manner
Fig. 28.1 Owl head’ in a peacock. due to overfilling of the infraorbital
in which the wing droops can give an indication of the
sinus.
252
Physical examination: inspection at a distance
outside the body, while oxygen-poor air from the lungs
flows into the cranially located clavicular and cranial
thoracic air sacs (Fig. 28.4). During expiration the
oxygen-rich air flows out of the caudally-located air sacs
through the lung, while the oxygen-poor air from the
cranially-located air sacs flows to the outside. In
contrast to mammals, birds have no diaphragm. In birds
the coelomic cavity is subdivided by peritoneal, pleural,
and pericardial reflections fone pericardial, two pleural,
and five peritoneal cavities), in addition to the eight
ca vities that are formed by the air sacs.
Dyspnea in birds can be caused not only by disorders
in the respiratory tract but also by proceses outside
the tract. An example is the hyperplastic thyroid
enlargement (goiter) that causes compression of the
trachea in budgerigars. External compression of the
trachea does not otherwise cause problems so quickly in
Fig. 28.2 The position of the subcutaneous cervicocephalic air
birds as, for example, in dogs, because birds have closed
sac system in a parrot: A cephalic part. B cervical part. and
tracheal rings. Another cause of dyspnea by external
 C infraorbital sinus.
Apoq au ut ssaooid sudno-aoeds e si uoissaiduon
cavity. Because the abdominal air sacs cannot then fill
the pulmonary air sac system connected to the lungs
completely with air, the air stream through the lungs
(Fig. 28.3).
decreases. Space-occupying processes can include an
These volume changes are possible via a cranioventral
increase in size of abdominal organs (e.g., hepatomegaly,
movement of the sternum during inspiration and a
uterus with an egg), or tumor (e.g., of the testicle), or
caudodorsal movement during expiration. The air
inflammatory tissue (e.g., egg peritonitis).
stream in the lungs is predominantly unidirectional.
One must differentiate between thermal polypnea and
During inspiration the caudally-located abdominal and
dyspnea. By means of thermal polypnea the bird rids itself
caudal thoracic air sacs fill with oxygen-rich air from
of excessive warmth mainly by evaporation of water from
Clavicularair sac
 Cranial thoracic air sac
Caudal thoracic air sac
  Abdominal air sac 
Lung
Fig. 28.3 The position of the lung and the pulmonary air sac system in a racing pigeon.
253
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
Lung
Inspiration-
Lung
Expiration
Fig. 28.5 Racing pigeon with the wing spread out as described in the
text. The tops of the fingers are held against the flight feathers. while
the thumb lies on the leading edge of the wing. The wrist joint 
(intercarpal joint is then extended by applying pressure with the palm
of the hand. The junction between (a) primaries and (b) secondaries is
clearly visible. The primaries are attached along the metacarpal bone
and the phalanges. while the secondaries are attached along the ulna.
Fig. 28.4 Schematic representation of the air fow in the respiratory
system in birds. During inspiration the caudally located air sacs
Structure
(caudal thoracic and abdominal) are filled with fresh air from the
The plumage consists of different types of feathers. The
 primary bronchi. while the air that has already passed through the
lungs (paleopulmo) fows to the cranially located air sacs (cranial
contour feathers are the most immediately noticed and
thoracic and clavicular). During expiration air flows from the caudally
determine the outer color of the bird. Contour feathers
placed air sacs to the lungs. while air in the cranially located air sacs
can be divided into flight feathers of the wing, covering
flows via the primary bronchi and trachea to the outside. In the
feathers of the wing, tail feathers, and body contour
 parabronchi of the lungs the air thus always flows in one direction.
(Modified from: King AS. McLelland J. Birds. Their structure and
feathers. The flight feathers of the wing are divided
function. 2nd edn. London: Bailliere-Tindall. 1984:139.)
into primaries and secondaries. The primary flight
feathers are fixed to the carpometacarpal bone and
the oral mucosa. In this case the respiration is rapid and
phalanges, while the secondary flight feathers are fixed
superficial, with an open mouth. Many species of birds
to the ulna (Fig. 28.5).
can increase the effectiveness of this mechanism by rapid
The transition between primary and secondary flight
rhythmic movements of the walls of the oropharynx (see
feathers is clearly visible if the wing is spread out.
Body temperature and thermoregulation).
 In birds with blood circulation through decorative
Primary flight feathers are numbered from medial to
lateral, while secondary flight feathers are numbered
parts of the head (such as the comb of the chicken),
from lateral to medial. Species of birds that are able to
the color of this part can give an impression of the
fly have between 9 and 12 primary flight feathers per
Oxygenation of the blood.
wing. The racing pigeon has 10 or 11.
Dyspnea in birds is characterized by rapid and deep
In most species of birds contour feathers are not
respiratory movements.  A well-known example of
u uo mo in oq a iao pn 
secondary respiratory movements in birds
 is tail
certain areas, the so-called feather fields (pterylae).
bobbing. In very extreme dyspnea cloacal movements
 These are readily visible on a bird that has been plucked.
can be observed during inspiration and expiration.
The areas of skin between them are called apterylae.
 In some birds certain signs are almost pathognomonic
A contour feather consists of a main shaft (rachis), a
for a certain disease: clicking sounds in an aviary of
vane {vexillum), and the bare part of the shaft
canaries indicates an infection with tracheal mites,
while yawning and head shaking indicate an infection
{calamus), which is embedded in the feather follicle.
The calamus is a hollow tube with a round opening
with tracheal worms. In parrots the loss of voice and a
tracheal stridor are usually caused by a fungal infection
{umbilicus proximalis) at the tip. In this opening is a
protrusion of the dermis of the feather follicle, the
at the level of the bifurcation of the trachea.
dermal papilla, which undergoes transition into the
28.4.3 Plumage
pulp. In a full-grown contour feather the calamus is
P si i raiey ouoo Sumo e un inq mo
saqeua pu uonsu huiodu ue si aund au
with pulp in which an artery and a vein are located. In
most species of birds to fly. In a number of species the
the maturation of the contour feather these vessels
color of the plumage plays a role in reproduction.
regress and the pulp is resorbed. The calamus extends 
254
Physical examination: inspection at a distance
distally over the rachis. This has a groove on the body
species
down is only found  in the pterylae
side and gives the contour feather its stiffness. On the
(Tinamiformes), the apterylae (most Galliformes), or is
opposite edges of the shaft there are barbs attached at
completely absent (Passeriformes, Columbiformes).
an angle of about 45°. These barbs are asymmetrical
The barbules of the so-called
1powder
down
on flight feathers and symmetrical on tail feathers. On
(pulviplumae) continually break off during growth,
the opposite sides of each barb there are two barbules
resulting in a “feather powder', consisting of small
which project at an angle of 4s° from the axis of the
keratin granules with a diameter of less than 1 μm. The
barb. The barbules of two adjacent barbs are thus at
an angle of 90 to each other. The distal barbules have
contour feathers and also aids in keeping them clean.
hooks (hamulae) which go around the proximal
The powder down is mainly encountered in species
barbule of the adjacent barb. In this manner an almost
which do not have a tail gland, but it does occur in some
airtight vane is formed. If the hooks become loose, the 
other species. Those who keep pigeons are pleased to see 
bird can correct the problem by pulling the vane
the bath water of the pigeons covered with a white layer
through its beak. The connection of barbs and barbules
of feather powder. If racing pigeons are kept in good
is somewhat comparable to a zipper (Fig. 28.6).
condition, the feather powder makes them feel very soft
and it comes off onto the hands and clothes.
The maintenance of the structure of the contour feathers
is very important for keeping the plumage waterproof.
Hair-like feathers {filoplumes) are distributed over
the entire body. They have a proprioceptive function
For water birds this is of vital importance, for these
and serve to hold the contour feathers in optimal
birds drown if the plumage is not waterproof. One is
position. Barbs, if present, are typically at the distal
occasionally confronted with “leaking' water birds. In
these the plumage is inadequately water-resistant and
end of the filoplume.
Bristies are observed around the mouth of some
the birds thus sit too deep in the water. The contour
species of birds (e.g., the European night swallow),
feathers on the ventral side should always be inspected,
around the nostrils (e.g., the honey buzzard), or eyes
because they are in contact with the water, and it
should be noted whether the feathers are soiled and
{an ostrich has real eyelashes). The bristles have a
filtering and tactile function. Barbs on bristles are at
whether they are dry. Water placed on the feathers
the proximal end of the rachis.
should run off like pearls.
Another category of feathers is the down (plumae).
    u g s as
Molt
contour feathers. Down feathers have no shaft and no
Birds change their feathers regularly. The molt serves to
vane. Some birds, such as ducks, have down feathers
replace worn feathers with new ones. In some species of
distributed over the entire body, but among other
birds the molt also serves to provide the birds with an
attractive covering in the mating season (breeding or
nuptial plumage). After a bird emerges from the egg it
goes through a number of changes of feathers which
result in the adult plumage. In most species of birds
An albatross only obtains its adult feathers after seven
to eight years. The adult feathers are changed at least
once per year, usually after the nesting season. In some
species the molt occurs two times per year and in some
even three times. The molt is initiated by external
influences such as daylight length and temperature,
which stimulate essential hormonal changes. The
thyroid and gonads play particularly important roles.
In most birds not all of the feathers are replaced at
the same time. The flight feathers and tail feathers
usually molt in pairs, so aerodynamic characteristics 
are maintained.
In ducks and geese there is a special form of molting.
Pairing of mallards occurs in the fall. Mallard drakes
have their characteristic breeding plumage in this
 period: silver-gray flanks with chestnut brown breast, a
green head with white neck bands, and a black curl in
Fig. 28.6 Drawing of a contour feather.
the tail. The females are speckled brown.
255
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
Copulation takes place during the entire fall and
the racing season. The timing of the molting period
winter. The eggs are produced at the end of February
can be manipulated by mating the birds very early or
at the very earliest. Most ducklings are not seen until
very late.
April. The female hatches the eggs and remains by the
 The secondary flight feathers and tail feathers are
ducklings until they are self-supporting. The drakes
only changed when the seventh primary flight feather
have hardly any function in this season unless
has been lost. Usually only a few secondary flight
ducklings are lost. In this period one often sees groups
feathers are changed each year. The tail feather molt
of a few drakes following female ducks that have just
begins with the innermost pair or with the pair
left the nest. Around May the drakes gather together
adjacent to them and proceeds from inside to outside.
and the molting of the contour feathers occurs. The
The two outermost tail feathers are, however, molted
 attractive breeding plumage disappears and makes way
before the pair adjacent to them. The last feather that
for the brown eclipse plumage.
the pigeon molts is thus the one just inside the
At first glance the eclipse plumage of the drakes bears
outermost tail feather.
a strong resemblance to the plumage of the female. Yet
The molting of the contour feathers also begins about
there are clear differences between the female and the
the time of the loss of the seventh flight feather. In
drake in this period: (1) the brown of the drake is less
general this is a gradual process but the molting of the
mottled than that of the female, (2) the head of the
contour feathers of the neck often involves many
drake is definitely beige-gray, (3) the head and neck of
feathers at the same time.
the drake more sharply contrast with the breast than
About mid-December the entire molting process must
they do in the female, {4) the breast of the drake is
be complete. This is often used as the time when the
fox-brown, without much pattern, (5) the mottling on
birds must be vaccinated against various infectious
the flanks of the drake is vague and less sharp than
diseases,
for the administration
ofvaccine
Or
in the female, (6) the beak of the drake is green, and
medications during the flight feather molt can cause
(7) the skull of the drake is black and lacks the
developmental disorders of the flight feathers.
 pronounced eye stripe of the female.
The pulviplumae and filoplumae are changed
 In their eclipse plumage the drakes leave in masses
throughout the year and cessation of this molting of
after the first half of June to areas of reeds and rushes,
the down is an indication to the pigeon keeper that
where they molt all of the flight and tail feathers at the
something is out of order.
same time. As a result they are not able to fly for
Apart from cessation of the down molt, a few
about four weeks. The eclipse plumage gives the drakes 
other abnormalities can concern the molt. Especially
a camouflage in this period. The flight feather molt in
important are abnormalities in the development of
drakes occurs between mid-June and mid-August. The
flight feathers. Because of the regular progression of
female ducks must take care of the ducklings and the
the molting of the flight feathers it is possible to back-
molt of their fight feathers begins in July and lasts
date occurrences by it {each flight feather needs three
weeks to fully grow out and the next flight feather is
drakes can again be seen in their colorful breeding
only shed when the one medial to it is three-fourths
 plumage, first the young drakes and later the older ones.
developed.
 In racing pigeons knowledge of the molt, especially of
Inadequate nourishment for the developing flight feather
the flight feathers, is important for the racing flights,
can be manifest in different ways.
because the best performances can be expected from
 An abnormality that has been known for hundreds of
birds with a “full wing", a wing in which all flight
years by falconers is the constriction of the shaft of the
feathers are present. In racing pigeons the first flight
flight feathers, associated with thinning of the vane in
feather usually molts after the first nest of chicks is
a band or strip at right angles to the shaft. Falconers 
"weaned’ (around April/May). In young pigeons the
call such stripes in the flight feathers hunger traces'
first flight feather emerges at around the age of seven
At the site of the hunger traces the flight feather is
weeks. If growth proceeds normally the next emerges
weakened and can break when the wing is stressed.
when the first has reached three-fourths of its length,
This abnormality has also been observed in other
and so on until all ten flight feathers are changed {the
 species of birds. It is important only in species in which
a os pue ano on auun wog si suw jo aunbas
the ability to fly is important. It is seen especially in
outermost feather is the tenth. Often when the fifth
young birds. Because the flight feathers of the left
feather is lost a reduction in flight performance is
and right sides develop fairly symmetrically, the
observed.
abnormality is usually visible on both sides at about
If the pigeons are separated (*widowhood'), the
the same location. In racing pigeons the flight feathers
molting of flight feathers is delayed. Use is made of
with this abnormality are called ^work feathers'. Apart
this in order to have pigeons with “full wings" later in
from inadequate provision of nutrients during the
256
Physical examination: handling
growth of the flight feathers, stress also plays a role in
The influence of sex hormones in feather
the development of this abnormality. In pigeons a very
development is on:
difficult flight will be reflected as a stress line in the
structure: a rooster, in contrast to a hen, has
flight feathers which were developing at that time.
lancet-shaped feathers on the neck, the saddle, and
After corticosteroids have been administered one can
the tail
also observe a stress line in the flight feathers that were
growth
developing at that time.
 pigmentation: the influence of sex hormones on
Retained feather sheaths have a different significance.
pigmentation differs according to the species 
While hunger  streaks result from  deprivation  of
However, in all species, increasing levels of sex
nutrients to flight feathers during a very short period,
hormones in the plasma first affect pigmentation and
retained feather sheaths indicate a longer period of
only later affect structure and growth.
undernutrition. In retained feather sheaths there is
insufficient development of the vane.
A blood feather is one whose shaft is filled with
Color
blood. This phenomenon is encountered in the flight 
Colors occur via the presence of melanin, carotenoids,
feathers but contour feathers can also be affected.
 and porphyrins. Melanin pigment is present as granules
Blood feathers can occur after trauma to the feather
in skin and feathers and is responsible for dull yellow,
follicle.
reddish brown, brown, and black colors. Carotenoids
 In racing pigeons one often sees a flight feather that is
are diffusely distributed in the feathers, dissolved in fat
too short when the molt has not been optimal.
globules. Carotenoids arise from plant material and are
A developmental disturbance of the feathers which is
responsible for some of the yellows (canary yellow),
encountered especially in inbred lines of canaries results
orange, and red. In the absence of nutritional
in feather cysts or “lumps', filled with a keratinaceous
carotenoids an abnormality can develop in the color of
material. They can be confused with an inflammation
the feathers in some birds. Especially for birds
in
 or tumor. These cysts can also occur in other species.
captivity it is necessary to provide special carotenoid-
containing foods (red factor” in colored canaries).
 Porphyrins are synthesized by the birds themselves and
Hormones
are diffusely distributed in the feathers. Porphyrins are
The hormones of main importance for growth and
responsible for green and red colors in some species of
development of the feathers are thyroid hormone and
birds (Turaco).
the sex hormones. The juvenile feathers can only
Colors are produced by an interplay of reflection,
develop with an adequate concentration of thyroid
 absorption, scattering, and iridescence of the incoming
hormone in the blood; the sex hormones do not yet
light. The iridescence of the contour feathers of
play a role. At the time of the development of the
peacocks is caused by the fact that the barbs of these
adult feathers the bird is under the influence of both
feathers are covered with three thin layers of keratin
thyroid and sex hormones. The role the sex hormones
B u se dn uaoq si  suaa an ym yno
soap bubble. The diverse colors of the light spectrum
on the species of bird. They can be divided into two
are thus made visible.
 sauu xas au ym u s (hi sdnon
determine the external sex characteristics (such
as
28.5 Physical examination: handling
Galliformes and Anseriformes) and (2) birds in which
When the veterinarian has collected the maximum
the sex hormones have no influence on the external sex
characteristics (such as Passeriformes).
amount of information without having handled the
au ieut ieaau I dnoe ui spu jo saiads ui saipns
patient, a decision must be made about the manner in
development of the feathers in both sexes is male, or in
which further examination will take place, for the
period during which the bird is held in the hands must
other words that the male feathers are neutral. A
castrated rooster develops the same type of feathers
be reduced to a minimum so that the bird is exposed
again after molting, while a castrated hen loses the
to as little stress as possible.
female feathers and develops the male, i.e., neutral,
feathers. If estrogens are administered to a castrated
Preparation
rooster or castrated hen, female feathers appear after
If the bird is difficult to catch or to handle, it is important
the molt.
to first prepare everything that will be necessary for the
The role of thyroid hormone is the most important in
planned
examination (mouth spreader, swabs for
the physiology of feathering: sex hormones can only
bacteriological examination, blood collection system,
exert their influence when the thyroid hormone level is
blood tubes, material for sedating the bird if necessary,
above a certain threshold.
etc.). This will avoid having to put the bird back into the
257
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
cage and take it out again, or having to look for various
materials while also holding the bird. This is especially
    o   ia   
wild birds. Racing pigeons, which are regularly taken
in the hand of the owner, can be held in the hand of
the examiner during a large part of the physical
examination. If racing pigeons are handled correctly,
there is no noticeable increase in the respiratory or heart
rate, which is an indication that these birds quickly
 of a bird that is presented as a patient is the first thing
required of a veterinarian practicing avian medicine. It is
important that the patient experiences no undesirable
consequences of the handling and that the veterinarian is
not injured by the bird. In addition, handling the bird in
the correct manner will contribute to the owner's trust in
the veterinarian. If psittacine birds must be examined in
quarantine, it is advisable to wear a mouth and nose
mask to avoid the risk of Chlamydiosis. Because parrots
make a great deal of noise, it is worthwhile to avoid
damage to hearing. Ear protectors used in sport shooting
 are very suita ble for this.
Exominotion room
Because birds, with the exception of Sphenisciformes
(penguins) and Ratiles, are able to escape into the air,
it is of great importance that the physical examination
 a  o s  e u d s
Fig. 28.7 Falcon wearing a hood and sitting on a gloved hand.
world. In the examination room itself there must be no
objects that are dangerous to birds, such as electric
In Falconiformes and Strigiformes it is the claws that
fans into which they can be drawn or heaters on which
they can be burned. In the event that a bird escapes
are the most dangerous to the examiner, while in
handling vultures and the bald eagle one must be most
from the hands of the examiner, it is useful to have a
careful of the beak. If a falcon grasps the examiner
net ready in order to catch the bird quickly. The
with its claws, it is usually impossible to get free
windows of the examination room should represent a
without someone else's help.
clear visual barrier to the bird by being blacked out or
The ostrich and the cassowary have strong feet
covered over or having nontransparent glass. The
provided with large claws and are able with one stroke
ability to darken the examination room facilitates
removal of birds from the cage as well as catching a
to fatally wound the examiner. These birds should not
u uaxei suiaq saunsau leoads inouim pauoeoidde ag
bird that has esca ped.
With the exception of a few species, birds remain
advance.
sitting still in the dark. If necessary, a red light can be 
In Ciconiformes, such as the crane and stork, one
used in the room to enable the examiner to see.
must avoid being pecked in the eye. Hence the first
concern in handling these birds is immobilization of
A method used by falconers to quiet a hunting bird is
the head and beak. A cork can be placed on the sharp
to place a leather hood over its head (Fig. 28.7). The
point of the beak. The beak can be held closed with
bird then sits, as it were, in the dark and becomes
completely quiet. It is even possible to teach hunting
adhesive tape but care must be taken not to cover the
birds to eat with a hood on.
nasal openings. Fish-eating water birds and penguins
Birds can wound the examiner in various ways. One
are able with their sharp beak to tear pieces out of the
skin of the examiner. Especially in handling swans or
must remain very aware that parrots have strong
penguins, it is the wings for which the examiner must
beaks. Both macaws and Moluccan cockatoos are able
have adequate respect.
to crush a finger. The first concern of the examiner of
Psittaciformes is thus the immobilization of the bird's
head. In handling the carnivorous kea, also a member
Stress
of the Psittaciformes, one must also be careful of the
The handling of obviously ill birds, especially of the 
claws.
small species, involves a definite risk. The stress of the
258
Physical examination: handling
handling, certainly if it is not done correctly, can result
in the death of the bird in the hand of the examiner. It
is thus advisable to warn the owner of this risk in
advance. However, the risk is not a justification for
avoiding handling the bird but simply prescribing a
treatment without carrying out an examination.
If the owner has much experience with handling his
bird, it may be better to have him catch the bird.
Many owners, however, do not really know how to
hold a bird securely. Sometimes an owner does not
hold the bird firmly enough, out of anxiety about
Fig. 28.8 Restraint of a racing pigeon. Both wings are held against the
body with the tips of the flight feathers of the two wings crossing each
causing the bird pain.
other over the back of the bird. The feet are held preferably between 
Birds that are not accustomed to being handled will
 the forefinger and middle finger.
resist. In restraining them one must avoid hindering the
bird's respiration. One must especially take care that
adequate caution. Some parrots have a preference for
the external respiratory openings are not compressed,
 persons of one gender.
that the neck lies reasonably straight, and thus that the
aul aaowau 0l aqesape 5l ll spi paseo le 1o
perches from the cage before taking the bird out.
excursion of the sternum must not be hindered.
Budgerigars and canaries can easily be removed from a
The greatest of care must be used in handling of birds
cage with unprotected hands. Sometimes it helps to put 
with long, thin legs. Flamingos have hard but very thin
the examination room in darkness. Budgerigars should
bones which are easily fractured and splintered. The
be restrained in such a way that the back of the bird
fracture of a leg in these birds is always accompanied
lies in the palm of the hand, while the thumb and
S! pue siassa poolq pue saausu oi asuep auaas Aq
thus associated with an extremely poor prognosis.
forefinger encircle the head at the level of the lower
half of the beak (Fig. 28.9). The hand grip is nearly the
The following is a detailed description of the manner
in which the most frequently encountered species of
same for small songbirds, except that the thumb and
forefinger are placed a little lower and do not enclose
birds should be handled.
the lower beak. Medium-sized Psittaciformes are most
Handting of racing pigeons
easily removed from the cage with a gloved hand in
Racing pigeons are usually brought for examination in a
the manner described above.
basket or carrier. In removing the bird from the carrier
one must take care that the bird is brought out head
first and that the flight feathers of the wings are not
dragged “against the grain' over the edge. Usually it is
 oy  a  au a   1s
carrier. The bird is restrained with its head always
turned towards the examiner. The bird is enclosed with
the full hand, the four fingers curved around the
ventral surface of the body and the thumb on the back.
Both wings are held against the body with the tips of
the flight feathers of the wings crossing each other on
the bird's back. The feet can be stretched backward, if
one wishes a better grip on the bird, by holding them
between the forefinger and middle finger (Fig. 28.8).
Hondfing of coged ond oviory birds
In handling caged birds or those from an aviary, one
should first inquire about the character of the birds
and their relation with the owner. This is especially
important with parrots. Some parrots are so tame that
they continue chattering while blood is being collected
from the jugular vein, while other parrots attack
Fig. 28.9 Restraint of a budgerigar. The bird's back lies in the palm
viciously with the beak if the owner or examiner so
 of the hand. while the thumb and forefinger partly encircle the head at
the level of the lower beak. The outward excursions of the sternum.
much as puts a hand in the cage. Even apparently quite
which allow the pulmonary air sac system to fill with air. must not be
hindered by the restraint.
259
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
Larger parrots can be handled with the help of a towel,
Ploy oi puey auo Suisn Aq dn paxoid aq ues syong
spread over the hand in such a way that there is a fold in
the neck and the other hand to hold the legs or wings.
the towel between the thumb and forefinger. The bird
Geese can be handled in the same manner except that
will not know where the fingers are located and will
they may not be lifted up by the neck and legs.
usually bite the fold of the towel, allowing the
Especially heavier geese must be carried with a good
examiner to grasp and enclose the head of the bird.
grip around the body, for otherwise the cervical
The head can be held from behind with the base of the
vertebrae
may
be
damaged.
When
holding
lower beak between the thumb and forefinger. With
Anseriformes, protect your clothing by taking care that
the other hand, one throws the rest of the towel
the cloaca is always directed away from you (Fig. 28.11).
around the wings so that they cannot be damaged
while the bird is being taken out of the cage (Fig.
28.6 Examination of the restrained bird
28.10). Once the bird has been removed from the cage
it is better to transfer it to the unprotected hand so
This section covers identification, nutritional condition,
head, neck, wings, legs, and trunk (also see the
that it can be manipulated more easily. One must
always take care that the wings are held against the
Examination form for birds on the DVD).
body and that the feet are stretched backward. When a
28.6.1 Identification
psittacine bird is put back in the cage, the upper beak
can be hooked over a horizontal bar. The bird will
It is sometimes important to identify birds individually.
grasp the bar with the beak and the examiner can
The most reliable methods are the numbered metal leg
remove his hands unharmed from the cage.
bird is hatched, and the implanted transponder with a
Hondfing of pheosonts
unique number. It is good practice to note the number
Pheasants are often difficult to handle and always offer
of an identified bird on the examination form.
resistance. They are usually brought for veterinary
Unringed birds or birds without a transponder can be
examination in a cardboard box. One must be aware
identified by a photograph of the scale pattern on the
that when the box is opened these birds can fly out
feet (pedigram). The scale pattern is unique for each
very explosively.
bird and comparable to fingerprints of people.
Handfing geese, ducks, and swans
28.6.2 Nutritional condition
Anseriformes can be caught with the aid of a blunt hook
around the neck or they can be seized with the hand.
After picking up a bird one first evaluates its nutritional
condition. This is done by palpating to the left and right
and then other parts of the body can be held.
of the crest of the breastbone {carina; see Fig. 28.16, u}
A
Fig. 28.10 A The restraint of a large parrot with the aid of a towel. The head is encircled fromm behind and restrained by holding the base of the
mandible between the thumb and forefinger. B Once the bird has been taken from the cage. it should be transferred to the unprotected hand so that
it can be more easily examined.
260
Examination of the restrained bird
features on the head which could be mistakenly
interpreted as abnormalities. Asymmetry of the head
is often seen in parrots due to accumulation of
meta pla stic
 epithelium
theinfraorbital
supraorbital sinus, caused by vitamin A deficiency. The
skull can be palpated for asymmetry, deformities, and
fractures (be careful with your fingers!). Discharge
from the nostrils or eyes often causes soiling of the
head feathers. If there is a discharge, material should
be collected at this time for culture or cytology.
Eor
In contrast to most mammals, birds have no pinnas. The
external acoustic meatus can be seen in most species of
birds caudoventral to the eye or in some species (e.g-.
the wood snipe), ventral to the eye. In most species of
birds the external opening of the ear canal is covered
by special contour feathers, the ear cover feathers.
In owls, hearing is very important for locating prey in
the dark. In the barn owl (Tyto alba), there is a shield of
feathers caudal to the external ear opening to reflect the
sound. Rostral to the external ear orifice there is a
Fig. 28.11 Restraint of a goose. Ducks. geese. and swans are
vertical flap of skin, called the operculum or concha.
sometimes inclined to release a large amount of feces when they are
Perpendicular to the edge of the operculum there is a
restrained. Hence the bird's cloaca should be directed well away from
Aq ao a aq u wado ai sag jo mo
the person who is holding the bird.
muscles in the skin in order to localize sounds better.
In owls the feathers have thus taken over the function
to determine the size of the muscle mass which is formed
of the pinnae.
by the superficially located m. pectoralis and the deeper
During the physical examination, attention should be
m. supracoracoideus. Evaluating the size of the muscle
 given to the condition of the feathers covering the ear.
mass takes into consideration the degree of activity of
Sometimes in racing pigeons these do not lie closely
the bird. In well-trained racing pigeons in good
    o   os
nutritional condition the pectoral muscles and the crest
condition may be related to sinusitis.
of the breastbone form a single rounded mass.
The external ear canal is examined for excessive
Sometimes the pectoral muscles even bulge out beyond
cerumen production, inflammation, swelling, and
the crest of the breastbone. In caged birds and others
ectopara sites.
with little training, the crest of the breastbone is
slightly
prominent. In birds in poor 
Eye
nutritional
condition the crest is easily felt, resembling the keel of
The iris of most species of birds consists of striated
 a boat. Laying hens have poorly developed pectoral
muscles, in contrast to the breeds developed for meat.
Consequently the size of the pupil in birds is under
Although evaluation of the musculature provides a
control of the voluntary nervous system. Usually there 
good indication of the nutritional condition, small
is only a moderate pupillary response to light stimuli in
changes cannot be detected by palpation. For this
purpose
itisnecessary
toweigh
the
bird.
alternating miosis and mydriasis. Also in racing
Unfortunately, there is usually no reliable antecedent
pigeons which are being held in the hand, one always
record of the bird's weight. If an obviously ill bird is
sees alternating enlarging and narrowing of the pupils.
presented for examination, it is advisable to record its
Because the iris is striated muscle, the mydriatic used
weight at the first examination. This is also important
in mammals (atropine) does not produce mydriasis
for calculation of the dose of medications that may
in
birds.
Instead, a freshly-prepared solution of
eventually be used.
d-tubocurarine (3 mg/ml)  in 0.025% benzalkonium
chloride is used. Multiple applications during a period
28.6.3 Head
Of 15 minutes can sometimes bring about mydriasis.
Injection of tubocurarine in the anterior chamber is
 n  d     
more reliable, but because of potential complications,
Some species of birds have extensive decorative
it is not a routine procedure.
261
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
The presence in birds of a very definite pupillary
passes along the dorsomedial wall of the infraorbital
reflex to light is an indication of the loss of the
sinus to exit in the nasal cavity.
influence of the cerebral cortex, hence an indication of
 In sea turtles the glands of the orbit (Harder's gland
cortical blindness. Because birds have a complete
and lacrimal gland) are able to produce a fluid with a
crossing-over of the fibers of the optic nerve in the
higher osmolality than sea water, which enables these
optic chiasm, there is theoretically
no consensual
animals to drink sea water. These glands are thus
pupillary reflex (see also § 18.2.4 and § 19.4.11).4
called salt glands. Birds that live in a sea water
However, birds' eyes are very large and are very close,
environment, such as seagulls, penguins, and ducks,
u hnsau kew u on aka auo jo aunsodxa pun
also have a salt gland. This is not a modified Harder's
exposure of the contralateral eye internally
and
gland or lacrimal gland but a special gland that drains 
consequently a pupillary reflex.
into the nose: the lateral nasal gland or salt gland. This 
 In some species of birds the age or the gender can be
gland varies in size, according to the species, from 0.1
determined by the color of the iris ( 28.1). In young
to 2% of the body weight. The salt gland is located
racing pigeons the iris is dark brown, while in older
dorsomedial to the eye (Fig. 28.12). The presence of a
racing pigeons it is orange-red. Some breeds of pigeons
'salt water gland’ explains the discharge from the nose
have light yellow irises. A change in color of one or
or mouth occasionally observed in sea birds. The salt
both irises indicates an infection {from which the bird
gland needs a period of adaptation in order to function
may have already recovered) or very severe physical
maximally after a period of disuse. Before marine birds 
exertion. The original color almost always returns in
are released after being in fresh water for some time,
1-2 months. In some breeds of pigeons it is normal
they must go through a period of adjustment to
that one iris is dark and the other is brightly colored.
  n    s 
An important difference between the avian and the
Examination of the eyes should always begin by
mammalian eye is the presence of a pecten in birds.
 The pecten is a bulging of the choroid into the vitreous
comparing the eyes with each other. A unilateral
exophthalmos is often noted only when the two eyes
body. It plays a role in the nutrition of the retina. A
are compared. The examination of the eyes should
practical consequence of its presence is that the papilla
proceed from outside to inside. First the periorbital
cannot be examined with an ophthalmoscope because
area is inspected and then the eyelids and the
it is covered by the pecten.
conjunctiva and only then the eye itself. Many lesions 
 In many species of birds the eyelids are only closed
during sleep and the moistening of the eye is provided
of the eyelids are observed in birds, often due to
trauma or infection. In parakeets with an abnormality
by the nictitating membrane or third eyelid. The
of the edge of the eyelid a scraping should always
nictitating membrane in birds, in contrast to that of
be made 
mammals, contains two striated muscles which enable
for
examination for sarcoptic
mites
(Cnemidocoptes pilae). In pigeons the edge of the
it to move over the surface of the globe. In most bird
eyelid is often the first place where an infection with
species the nictitating membrane is transparent.
 pox virus can be detected.
Harder's gland (gland of the nictitating membrane) is
 The third eyelid can normally be seen flicking very
located at its base. The mucoid secretion is drained
quickly over the eye and is not constantly visible.
away by a simple canal in the conjunctival sac.
Harder's gland has not only a cleaning and moistening
When the eyelids are moved apart by the thumb and
index finder, the bird's attempt to cover the eye with
function but also plays an important role in local
the third eyelid makes it visible. In some species of
immunity of the eye and the upper airways. After
application of antigen to the eye there is an increase in
birds parasites can be located behind the third eyelid
antibody-producing plasma cells in Harder's gland,
{filaria, leeches).
followed by secretion of antibodies in the tear fluid.
In birds, in contrast to mammals, the gland of the
nictitating membrane is much larger than the lacrimal
gland. The latter is on the caudolateral side of the eye.
The gland has no specific function other than
 moistening of the eye.
The tear fluid is drained via the lacrimal puncta
which are located close to the medial canthus in the
upper and lower eyelids. In the chicken the dorsal
lacrimal punctum is about 3 mm in diameter and the
lower is about 1 mm. A few mm from the puncta the
Fig. 28.12 Position of the salt gland dorsomedial to the eye in a
two canals join to form the nasolacrimal duct, which
seagull.
262
Examination of the restrained bird
Beok, cere, nostrils
The nostrils are usually at the base of the beak. They
Among the diverse species of birds there are some great
should be examined for asymmetry, discharge, and
differences in the beak, mainly determined by the type
obstruction. In racing pigeons the cere should be
pressed to check for discharge. In parrots the nostrils 
of food that is eaten and the manner of eating. In
parrots the beak is also used in locomotion.
are often obstructed. The feeding of a diet of seeds
Birds do not have teeth. The function of the incisor
alone leads to vitamin A deficiency, the consequence of
which is metaplasia of the epithelium and secondary
teeth is taken over by the cutting edge of the beak,
while in seed-eating birds the function of the molars is
bacterial or mycotic infections. In chronic rhinorrhea
the feather growth may be retarded above the cere.
          
contractions of the wall of the gizzard the seeds are
Occasionally a groove in the beak can be seen as a
result of chronic nasal discharge.
ground fine as though between millstones. The only
'tooth' seen in birds is the “egg tooth'. This is a hard,
sharp protrusion on the rostrodorsal side of the upper
Orol covity
beak in birds that have just hatched. The egg tooth
The parakeet's mouth can be opened by making use of a
helps the chick to break through the eggshell.
 paper clip (Fig. 28.13). In larger Psittaciformes, such as
The beak is formed by bone from the upper and lower
the African gray parrot, one half of the handle of a
jaws, covered by horn. The rate of growth of the horn of
pair of scissors serves the same purpose quite well (Fig.
the upper beak of a budgerigar is about 7.5 cm per year.
28.14). In cockatoos and macaws there is a danger of
In some species of birds the rate is twice as great. In
damaging the edge of the beak in this manner because
addition to trauma to the beak, abnormalities can
excessive pressure is applied to a small surface. For
develop because of disturbances in its growth or in the
these birds choose an instrument that applies pressure
wearing of the horn. An example of this is the abnormal
over a larger surface area.
beak in parakeets with an infestation of sarcoptic mites
To open the mouth of a racing pigeon grasp the entire
{ Cnemidocoptes pilae) around the base of the beak.
beak between the thumb and forefinger from below.
Damage to the germinal layer on one side of the
Then push the head backward and downward, while
upper or lower beak can result in curved growth, so
that the upper and lower beaks no longer match and a
 and middle finger hold the lower beak, allow the upper
beak to slide through the fingers, keeping the index
occurrence of a crossed beak is normal (for example,
finger resting on the tip of the upper beak. The beak
the bird called the crossbill, Loxia curvirostra). These
birds use their beaks to hold apart the layered scales of
     s  O  
 pine cones in order to obtain the seeds.
between the thumb and forefinger and the upper beak
m Papiaoud pUe Aliaideo u Sula Spun ul
prepared food, the wearing of the periphery of the
 io  an 1i o ia  u 
the beak. This is seen especially in species of birds
which under natural conditions are real *nut crackers'
the normal wearing of the beak, it is advisable to
provide the bird with suitable material for this purpose
(hard food, cutlebone, chewing wood, stone).
Calcium-deficient food can result in soft beaks {rubber
beak), especially in young birds.
After examination of the beak, attention is given to
the cere. In some species, such as the crow, the cere is
covered with feathers. The cere of a racing pigeon
should be chalk white. A brown discoloration can be
   sss   po s  
occur during the period in which young pigeons are
being reared.
In male budgerigars
a
brown
discoloration of the blue cere can be an indication of
feminization due to an estrogen-producing testicular
tumor. In older female budgerigars the so-called brown
Fig. 28.13 Holding open the beak of a budgerigar by use of a large
hypertrophy of the cere is a well-known change. No
pauan uau pue Aeuozuou paonpou! s! do jaded aul do jaded
 pathologic significance is attached to this.
upward by 90°.
263
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
Fig. 28.14 Opening the beak of a parrot by using one half of the handle
of a pair of scissors. ln large cockatoos and macaws there is a danger
of damaging the edge of the beak because of the application of
excessive pressure over a small surface.
 is stabilized with the tip of the forefinger. It is important
Fig. 28.15 Using a throat swab in a pigeon. Note the way in which the
to hold the lower beak along its entire length and not
head is being held.
just at the tip.
The  oral
mucosa is evaluated for color, odor,
moisture, and the occurrence of ulcers or parasites. In
prepared by the examiner so that the cotton is twisted
some species of birds the oral mucosa is pigmented.
tightly onto the stick. The owner holds the pigeon while
There should be no thickening or other abnormality of
the examiner holds the bird's head with one hand and
the mucosa and there should be no strings of mucus.
uses the other to obtain the sample from the throat. The
The cleft in the palate should be open. By using a good
bird's head is held from behind by grasping
the
light source, such as a head lamp, one can look into
underside between the middle finger and ring finger,
the cranial part of the trachea. Sometimes in birds
while the thumb and forefinger grasp the beak at its
infected with gape worm (Syngamus trachealis) the
base. The neck is stretched to make a straight line from
parasites can be seen moving in the trachea. There are
the lower beak to the point of the breastbone. The beak
normally papillae on the edge of the soft palate in
 of the bird is opened by a finger of the hand holding
racing pigeons. After an infection in this area, the
the cotton swab and it is then held open by pressing on
irregularity of the edge is often lost. In many cases the
the corners of the mouth with the thumb and forefinger
cause is the protozoa, Trichomonas gallinae. In an
of the other hand. After the neck of the bird is stretched
 s ma ad se r  a
the cotton swab is inserted with a rotating motion,
befound in the oral cavity.
Thesemust
be
about 5 cm into the esophagus (Fig. 28.15). One drop
differentiated from white nodules which are salivary
of fluid from the swab is then placed on a microscope
calculi and have no clinical significance. In the past it
slide, covered with a glass cover slip, and examined
was thought that these white nodules were scars of
immediately (body temperature) under a microscope at a
previous Trichomonas infection. Examination of the
magnification of 100x. The presence of epithelial cells
oral cavity must always include the area under the
in the preparation is an indication that the smear
tongue, by using thumb forceps. In swans there is
has been made correctly. Other infections may also be
diagnosed by means of a throat smear, after staining the
tongue. In birds of prey a tracheal ring of the prey can
 smear if necessary.
be pushed up on the tongue and cause necrosis.
To make a throat smear from a parrot, a cotton swab
on a metal stick must be used, so that the parrot cannot
Smeor of throot swob
bite off the end of the stick and swallow it.
Making and directly examining a smear (at body
temperature) of a throat swab should be included in the
routine examination in birds. In the racing pigeon this is
28.6.4 Neck
especially intended for diagnosis of infection with
The neck is examined by inspection and palpation.
Trichomonas gallinae (canker'). The smear is taken
The plumage of the ingluvial region on the underside
with a cotton-tipped swab that has been slightly
 of the neck is occasionally abnormal in racing pigeons
moistened with warm water. The swab should be
("bald breast'). One must differentiate between broken
264
Examination of the restrained bird
feathers and feathers that have fallen out. In the first
case the cause is usually a sharp edge on the drinking
pan, while in the second case the cause can be the
o   a   s  o
examination of the contents of the shaft of a feather
that has fallen out.
The esophagus of birds, in contrast to that of
mammals, passes down the right side of the neck. Some
a Jo uisuixa a-oes e aaeu spi ro saroads
esophagus at the thoracic inlet, which is the crop or
ingluvies. In both male and female pigeons, the so-called
'crop milk' is produced during the first few days after
the young are hatched. It consists of a thick porridge' of
fat-laden epithelial cells of the crop which serves as food
for the young. Overfilling of the esophagus due to
esophageal paralysis is seen in water-birds as a result of
lead poisoning. In free-range chickens that consume
 s  e      
hay), crop impaction can occur. In the racing pigeon the
Fig. 28.16 Clinically important commponents of the avian skeleton:
aw al iahe snou aaun kidua a pinous dou
a scapula. b coracoid. c clavicula. d humerus. e ulna. f radius. g carpals.
Thickening of the crop of racing pigeons is occasionally
h carpometacarpal bonesIll and Ill.i phalanx I and j phalanx Il of digit Il.
caused by Trichomonas gallinae infection.
k pollex. I ilium. m ischium. n pubis. o femur. p patella. q tibiotarsus.
The thyroid of birds is located in the thoracic inlet
r fibula. s intertarsal joint with lateral and medial menisci.
t tarsometatarsus. and u carina.
and is normally not palpa ble. Only when exceptionally
enlarged, as sometimes occurs in budgerigars as the
result of iodine deficiency, can the thyroid be palpated.
coracoid. The two claviculae are joined on the ventral
The trachea is easily palpated from the head to the
thoracic inlet.In canaries in which there is a clicking
side and together they form the furcula (wishbone). The
symphysis of the furcula is joined to the cranial part of
sound during respiration one can sometimes see black
the sternum by a strong cord of fibrous tissue. Dorsally
points in the trachea if the neck is held close to a
the claviculae join the medial surfaces of the ends of the
a a sg a  a  uo
coracoids. The clavicula is lacking in a few species of
moistened with alcohol and wiped aside. These black
birds, including some parrots. The foramen triosseum is
points are tracheal mites (Sternostoma tracheocolum),
located at the junction of the scapula, coracoid, and
engorged with blood.
clavicula. Through this foramen passes the terminal
 Nodules can sometimes be palpated in racing pigeons
above the neck between the shoulder blades, as a result
tendon of the m. supracoracoideus fwhich lies under the
m. pectoralis), which is attached to the dorsal side of
ofa subcutaneous
vaccination in this location
the humerus. It allows the m. supracoacoideus to move
(*vaccination nodule').
The cervical vertebrae can be palpated easily and
the wing upwards. The pectoral muscle (m. pectoralis)
moves the wing downwards. The m. supracoracoideus
typically form an S-shaped curve.
is surrounded by a strong fibrous tissue capsule
which prevents the muscle from expanding. Sudden
28.6.5 Wings
hyperactivity of the muscle can lead to accumulation
of interstitial fluid, via which the pressure inside the
The shoulder skeleton of birds differs markedly from that
muscle sheath increases. This can lead to circulatory
of mammals (Fig. 28.16). The pectoral girdle consists of
disturbances, even to ischemic necrosis of the muscle.
the scapula, the coracoid, and the clavicula. The scapula
This abnormality is known in turkeys and broiler
extends caudally from the shoulder joint and in most
chickens by the name of Oregon muscle disease. It
flying birds it is long and narrow. In some birds the
is also known in human medicine as compartment
scapula even reaches to the ilium. In penguins, which
use their wings to swim, the scapula is very wide. In the
syndrome.
ostrich the scapula is very small and is united with the
The skeleton of the wing consists of the humerus, ulna/
coracoid. The coracoid is the sturdiest of the three
radius, carpal and metacarpal bones, and digits.
bones and extends on both sides from the craniodorsal
The humerus contains air and is connected to the
point of the sternum to the shoulder joint. This bone
clavicular air sack. When the humerus is fractured, air
prevents compression of the thorax during contraction
is usually palpable under the skin and blood or
of the pectoral muscles. The clavicula lies cranial to the
exudate from the fracture can enter the clavicular air
265
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
sack. The ulna is larger than the radius in birds, in
among various species of birds. Usually the tibiotarsus is
contrast to mammals.
longer than the tarsometatarsus. In the canary the
 In birds that are pinioned to prevent flying, the wing is
tarsometatarsus is thin and long and in this species
usually amputated just distal to the proximal connection
it fractures more readily than does the tibiotarsus. In
between the major and minor metacarpal bones.
the budgerigar the tarsometatarsus is short and thick
The wings must be spread out for examination (see
and hence in this bird also the tibiotarsus fractures
Fig. 28.5). To spread the wings of a pigeon, the tips of
more easily. In many species of birds a spur develops
the fingers are held under the flight feathers and the
on the medial side of the distal extremity of the
thumb is placed on the leading edge of the wing. The
tarsometatarsus, especially in males.
carpal joint is then extended by pressing with the palm
The anatomy of the avian foot varies considerably.
of the hand. In racing pigeons the wings should not be
The maximum number of toes is four. Some species
spread by grasping the outer flight feathers between the 
have three toes and some, such as the ostrich, have
thumb and forefinger and pulling on them. The flight
only two. The classification of the toes is strongly
feathers should be inspected for abnormalities (see
dependent on function. A general distinction can be
Feathers). Growth disturbances of the flight feathers
made between grasping toes (for climbing and for
must be differentiated from damage to them.
grasping branches or prey), walking or wading toes,
The underside of the wing is inspected for
and swimming toes. Birds with grasping toes have four
ectoparasites. They can often be found by slightly
toes, either three pointing forward and one backward
blowing away the feathers which cover the underside
{canary, hawk), or two forward and two backward
of the flight feathers. In the racing pigeon the long
(parrot). In birds with walking or wading toes the last
louse (Columbicola columbae) and the shaft mite
one is rudimentary or absent {loss of the grasping
(Falculifer rostratus) can be found. Shaft mites are
function), while there is often a superficial enlargement
found primarily along the shaft of white flight feathers
of the remaining toes {longer, webs between the toes,
and they are most easily seen by holding the outspread
and in the snow grouse even feathered toes).
wing close to a strong light. The parasites are then
Swimming  toes have  a  well-developed swimming
visible as spots along the feather shaft.
membrane
betweenfour forwardly-directed
toes
While the wings are spread the skin of the axillae must 
{cormorant) or well-developed swimming lobes on four
also be examined. This is the most thinly feathered area of
forwardly-directed toes (coot).
the body and sometimes becomes inflamed.
The skin of the avian foot strongly resembles the skin
After the feathers and skin of the wing have been
of reptiles. In some species of birds the lower part of the
inspected, the passive movement of the wing is
leg is feathered.
evaluated. Each joint is compared with its contralateral
The examination of the feet consists of inspection of
counterpa rt.
the skin and nails, inspection and palpation of the
Then the separate joints of the wing are palpated. The
musculature, and inspection, palpation, and passive
shoulder joint cannot be palpated easily. In racing pigeons 
movements of the skeleton. Just as for the wings, the
rupture of the tendon of the m. supracoracoideus can lead
left and right legs are compared. If a neurological
to subluxation of the shoulder joint. Overfilling of the
abnormality is suspected, this examination can be
elbow joint in racing pigeons is fairly pathognomonic for 
followed by a neurological examination.
paratyphoid infection. In this species, however, tumors,
If the bird is ringed, the ring must be checked to be
hematomas, luxations, and old fractures can closely
 o s a " ot ou si 1 i 
resem ble chronic arthritis.
accumulation of dirt under the ring, which results in
the ring fitting too tightly. Problems with the ring
28.6.6 Legs and feet
 ae  ui si n u o  
leg is feathered than in those in which it is not. Any
The pelvis has no ventral symphysis in most species and
dirt under the ring should be removed. Pinching off of
B inq u sa Suunp hede aaou sauoq qnd a
the circulation can occur acutely and can lead to loss 
large walking bird, the ostrich, does have a pelvic
of the distal part of the foot.
symphysis.
A skin abnormality that occurs frequently in birds
The skeleton of the leg is very simple, compared with
involves thickening and scaling of the skin of the lower
that of mammals, as a result of fusion of the tarsal bones
leg as a result of sarcoptic mites (Cnemidocoptes).
with both the tibia and the metatarsus. The resulting
Hence when such abnormalities are found in this
bones are called the tibiotarsus and tarsometatarsus,
location, a skin scraping should always be made for
respectively. The joint between these two bones is the
microscopic examination. The underside of the foot
intertarsal joint. In almost all species of birds it contains
should
not
beomittedin
this examination.
a lateral and a medial meniscus. The relative length and
Abnormalities that can be observed include freezing,
strength of the tibiotarsus and tarsometatarsus differ
burning, and abscess formation (bumblefoot).
266
Examination of the restrained bird
An abnormality of the joints that occurs often in
birds, in contrast to other species of animals, is gout.
Sometimes the accumulation of urate crystals can be
seen shining through the skin.
In chickens the spreading reflex of the legs can be
examined in the following way. The chicken is held
around the wings and is suddenly and rapidly lowered.
A normal response is extension of the toes. Another
reflex can be tested by holding the bird in the same way
and raising it rapidly by a quick movement of the wrist,
keeping the wrist itself more or less at the same level.
The normal response is to dra w the legs close to the body.
Fig. 28.17 Spreading of the tail feathers
28.6.7 Trunk
moving t
the two outermost tail feathers laterally
Examination of the trunk includes examination of the
between the thumb and forefinger of both hands, so
plumage,
the  skin,  and 
the
thoracic
ca vity.
Examination of the cloaca can also be performed if
that the tail is spread out like a fan (Fig. 28.17). The tail
feathers are evaluated in the same manner as the flying
there is an indication for it.
feathers. Birds kept in cages with horizontal bars or a
Skin ond skin odnexo of the trunk
wire mesh floor often have frayed or broken tail feathers.
Many birds have a tail gland, the uropygial gland, on the
During examination of the ventral side of the bird
back just cranial to the implanting of the tail feathers.
attention is given to the presence of old down or
This gland is strongly developed in some water birds.
covering feathers, the skin over the pectoral muscles,
 s  si i s ro ss  
and the color of the pectoral muscles.
developed (e.g-, the Amazon parrot), and in some it is
A racing pigeon is examined on the ventral side by
completely absent (e.g, the ostrich). Sometimes there is
turning it over from the normal restraint position {see
a ring of feathers around the opening of the gland. The
§ 28.5). To aid in this, the bird is held with the other
oily secretion of the gland is used to prevent drying out
hand over its back in such a way that the toes can be
of the keratin of the feathers. In addition, the secretion
held stretched out with the thumb and forefinger of
has antimicrobial activity.
this hand. Now this hand can be turned so that the
The
secretionof
thetailgland
1contains
bird is on its back, lying on the palm and wrist of the
7-dehydrocholesterol. After the secretion has been
examiner. The examination is made by wiping the full 
spread over the feathers by the beak, this compound is
hand against all of the covering feathers. The ‘old
converted by ultraviolet light to provitamin D3, which
down’ is visible as feathers that are darker than the
is in chemical equilibrium with vitamin Ds. Hence if
rest. The presence of *old down? indicates that the bird
exposed to sunlight, birds are able to synthesize
has not been in good condition for a period of time.
vitamin D3.5 Uptake of the vitamin occurs while the
The skin over the pectoral muscles can be evaluated
bird is caring for the feathers. Caged birds not exposed
in many species of birds by pushing aside the feathers 
to sunlight have a greater requirement for vitamin D3
that cover the crest of the breast bone. Normally this
than do members of the same species living in the wild.
skin is very thin. In some species of birds a “brood
The tail gland is inspected by lifting the covering
patch' develops during the brooding period, under the
feathers. This is made easier by pressing
the
tail
influence(
of prolactin, and it is characterized
1by
feathers ventrally and pushing forward the covering
hyperemia or edema. The brood patch serves for the
feathers, which have thus been made to stand out a
transmission of warmth from the parent to the eggs.
little. Abnormalities of the tail gland (tumor or
 Depending on the species, the brood patch is found on
inflammation) occur especially in budgerigars.
In
the male, the female, or both. In penguins the eggs are
incubated on top of the well-vascularized and flat feet
covering feathers held down around the gland as they
in a fold of abdominal skin. In ducks and geese the
are released one by one. The inspection is for the tail
skin over the pectoral muscles is covered with down
louse (Campanulotes bidentatus compar). This parasite
feathers and no brood patch develops; the eggs are
can cause severe restlessness  in
pigeons.
The
Pul s ieu isau e un wau sunu Aq wm idax
with down plucked from the breast.
parasites crawl away rapidly in the light.
Pigeon fanciers place great value on examination of
 In racing pigeons the tail feathers are checked by
the skin and underlying musculature. The skin must be
bringing the wing tips under the tail feathers and then
thin and transparent and there should be no epidermal
267
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
scales. In pigeons in good condition a vein can be seen in
Auscultation of the thoracoabdominal cavity may
the skin crossing the crest of the breast bone. This vein is
reveal abnormalities.
visible as a red stripe against the white crest of the breast
bone and is called the form dot' by pigeon fanciers. The
Exominotion of the ciooco
muscles are visible through the skin and in the racing
The feathers around the cloaca are inspected for soiling.
pigeon they should be pink. The pigeon fancier does
with feces or blood. The skin is examined for signs of
not like to see bluish-purple colored breast muscles, for
inflammation 
and
any
immediately
obvious
he associates this with poor physical condition for
abnormalities are noted (prolapse of the oviduct or
flying (*blue muscle'). The cause of the blue coloring is 
cloaca in female birds; prolapse of the penis in males of
not known.
some species, such as ducks). The gender of canaries can
be determined by the outward appearance of the cloaca.
Thorocoobdominat covity
Cloacal palpation can be performed only in the larger
When there is a space-occupying process in the
 species of birds and is undertaken if there is an
 abdomen, a subcutaneous process (excess fat, tumor) is
indication for it. This examination is performed with a
differentiated from a mass within the abdominal cavity
finger using a finger cot or a rubber glove and a
by following the crest of the breast bone caudally. If
lubricant. In some species of birds (e.g., Anseriformes,
the process is in the abdominal cavity, there is usually
Struthioniformes) one can determine the gender
a sharp transition at the caudal end of the breast bone,
because of the large size of the phallus of the male bird
while subcutaneous processes often continue over the
(Fig. 28.18). In addition, a space-0ccupying process in
pectoral muscles.
the abdominal cavity can also be characterized better
Especially in small species of birds, organs can often 
by the aid of cloacal palpation. Concretions can be
be seen through the relatively thin abdominal wall if
found in the cloaca as well. If egg-laying is not
the feathers on the ventral side, caudal to the breast
proceeding, the cloaca is examined to determine the
bone, are blown aside. In canaries it is normal to see a
nature of the egg shell and the position of the egg. In
2-mm wide edge of the liver just caudal to the caudal
small species of birds in which cloacal palpation is not
edge of the sternum. In an infection with Lankesterella
possible, the interior of the cloaca can be examined
(synonym: Atoxoplasma) the liver can become enlarged
with an otoscope.
and hence the popular name “fat liver disease' for
atoxoplasmosis in canaries. In a bird with an enteritis
28.7 Body temperature and
the reddened small intestine is often visible through the
thermoregulation
abdominal wall.
The distance between the pubic bones and the caudal
The body temperature is not routinely measured in birds
end of the sternum, which is measured by palpating
but it can be important under certain circumstances.
these structures with the middle of the fingertips of the
forefinger and middle finger and then measuring the
distance between the middle of these fingernails with a
ruler, can indicate the presence of a space-occupying
process in the abdominal cavity. In the racing pigeon
 and the African gray parrot this distance is normally
not more than 3 cm. In the canary, budgerigar, and
Gould's amadine it is not more than 1 cm.
Usually during palpation of the abdomen only the
stomach is felt. In seed-eating birds the gizzard is firm.
Sometimes one can feel the grit grating in the ventral
blind sac of the gizzard. In meat-eating birds the
se ui yanop peaiq a ieumuos tayos s! piezzia
 species of birds the edge of the liver can sometimes be
palpated just caudal to the sternum. The other organs
 are usually not palpable, except that sometimes an egg
can be detected in the oviduct just before laying.
The distance between the two pubic bones is
normally just a few millimeters. In female birds the
bones spread apart at the time of egg laying.
 Pathological processes in the abdominal cavity (in both
Fig. 28.18 Determining the sex of a wild duck. The spiral shaped
male and female birds) can also cause them to be
phallus of the drake can be exposed by pressing with the thumb and
widely separated.
forefinger lateral to the cloaca.
268
 Body temperature and thermoregulation
Less is known about the elevation of body temperature
glands but can still evaporate water via the skin to a
and its clinical relevance in birds than in mammals. In
limited extent.
particular little is known about the progress of changes
Birds
can
protect
themselves
against
lotw
in body temperature in the course of diseases. Some
environmental temperature by different mechanisms.
bacterial and viral infections can cause fever, certainly
The most extreme form is the yearly migration of certain
if there is septicemia. Hyperthermia can also be caused
wild species to southern regions. Another phenomenon
by the inability to discharge heat into the surroundings.
for protection against cold is to sit “rufled up'. By
Thereare
also
physiological
puB
 pathological
contraction of the mm. arrectores plumarum the down
conditions under which hypothermia can develop.
feathers are lifted up from the skin, via which the
The normal body temperature is generally higher in
thickness and thus the insulating action of the plumage
birds than in mammals, but there are many exceptions
increases. Some birds which are adapted to living on or
to this. In most species of birds the body temperature
in water (ducks and penguins, respectively) have in
ranges between 40° and 43°C. The body temperature
addition to the plumage a thick layer of subcutaneous
of the large walking birds (ostrich, emu, nandu) is
fat. A special form of insulation is found in the brown
lower (37-39°C). This applies also to a few diving bird
pelican, in the form of an extensive system of
 species, such as the penguin.
subcutaneous air sacs over its entire trunk.
The lethal body temperature in birds lies between 46°
Vascular adaptations to reduce heat loss are seen
and 47°C. The brain is the most sensitive to bigh
especially in birds that remain standing for long periods 
temperatures. Some birds, including the pigeon, are
in cold water. A very specialized adaptation consists of
able to keep that sensitive tissue relatively cool while
a vascular structure in the legs, the rete mirabile. This
the rest of the body has a higher temperature. This is 
is of a network of arteries and veins lying close together,
achieved by cooling the arterial blood that flows to
in which blood flows in opposite directions. Via the
the brain by means of venous blood coming from the
countercurrent mechanism heat is transferred from the
head, eyes, and upper airways, in the rete mirabile
incoming arterial blood to the return flow of cool
ophthalmicum. Like dogs and cats, birds 
protect
venous blood. As a result of this mechanism, the
o a  a r 
temperature of the distal end of the extremity is lowered,
moisture in the respiratory tract. In this regard, two
limiting the heat loss to the surroundings. Heat loss by
types of respiration can be distinguished: thermal
the same extremity can occur if the venous blood flows
polypnea (or thermal tachypnea; see also Chapter 8)
back via subcutaneous veins.
 and buccopharyngeal fluttering.
The cloacal temperature has a circadian rhythm in
 Because of their extensive pulmonary air sac system,
birds.
The
difference
betweendayand
 night
birds are quite able to increase total ventilation
temperatures depends on body weight, among other
without increasing para bronchial ventilation. However,
factors. Hence the difference between day and night
the movement of the respiratory muscles leads to more
temperature in a hummingbird (3 g) is 8°C,6 while in
heat production.
the ostrich (100 kg) it is less than 1°C.7 The body
Buccopharyngeal fluttering produces rapid rhythmic
temperature is highest during that part of the day during
movements of the mucous membranes in the throat,
which most activities take place and so the body
which are perfused with more blood. These movements
temperature of owls is higher at night. The fluctuation of
are
very
superficial
and
the
chance
of
the body temperature is correlated with the fluctuation
hyperventilation and thus an influence on blood gasses 
of the duration of daylight and is regulated by the pineal
(respiratory alkalosis) is minimal. The energy needed
gland. In some species of birds there are seasonal
for the movements in the throat is small and hence the 
fluctuations in addition to dailyf
fuctuations
in
resulting heat production is also small. In species of
temperature. The European nightjar is an example of
birds in which both forms of respiratory discharge of
this.
 This species goes into real winter hibernation,
heat occur simultaneously, the frequency of the
associated with a decrease in body temperature, and it
buccopharyngeal fluttering is usually higher than that
can survive a body temperature of 5-8°C. Spontaneous 
of the thermal polypnea.
arousal is only possible when the environmental
Other forms of discharging heat into the environment
temperature rises to between 13° and 20°C.
can also be important under certain conditions.
Ina
addition to  the physiological decreases  in
Especially during flying the heat loss via convection
temperature described above, against which birds must
au ue aiaod sum pauaixa aui rear aq u
 protect themselves to prevent exhaustion of their energy
in the body surface area. The underside of the wings is
reserves, a decrease in body temperature is observed in
poorly feathered and well vascularized. In some species
all species of birds after a period of fasting. For this
of birds the heat loss via the well-vascularized feet is
important. Sitting birds can increase the heat loss via
 It is important in avian medical practice that most
convection by raising their wings. Birds have no sweat
species of birds can maintain a constant expenditure of
269
Chapter 28:
BIRDS
energy within a certain environmental temperature
important
during prolonged anesthesia (and if
range, known as the thermoneutral zone.
necessary, the bird should be warmed!).
 In order to cause as little stress as possible to birds
Because of the great temperature variation and the
that are ill, it is desirable to house them in a
relatively high body temperatures in birds, the mercury
temperature that lies between the upper and lower
thermometer is unsuitable. What is very suitable is an
limits of the thermoneutral zone {upper and lower
electronic thermometer provided with a flexible probe
critical temperature). For many small species of birds,
of a small diameter. Measuring the temperature in
such as the zebra finch (10 g), the thermoneutral zone
birds is not entirely without risk because the wall of
is between 32° and 40°C. In larger species of birds the
the cloaca can easily be perforated with a thermometer
thermoneutral zone is lower. For the racing pigeon
if care is not taken.
(400 g) it is between 18° and 32°C and for the chicken
(2000 g) it is between 10° and 25°C. These limits
28.8 Notation
for the thermoneutral zone apply to birds with
an
intact plumage. The lower critical temperature is
The information from the history form, together with
         
the information obtained by additional questions, can
plumage. The same certainly applies to surgical
be recorded on the examination form for birds. On this
 patients in which a part of the plumage is removed for
form the findings from the physical examination can
surgical reasons.
also be recorded (see the DVD).
Dehydrated birds are not in a good state to discharge
excessive heat by evaporation and therefore should not
28.9 Further examination
be handled in a place that is too warm.
The body temperature should always be measured in
Just as for the dog and the cat, various methods (with
birds that are presented in stupor or coma, in water
reference values and reference illustrations) have been
birds that are ‘wet” (see Feathers), and birds which for
developed for birds. These include diagnostic imaging,
one or another reason have lost the insulating effect of
blood
1examinations (hematology, biochemistry10),
their plumage. Monitoring of the temperature is also
References
1 Del Hoyo J. et al. Handbook of the birds of the world. vol. 1.
8 McMillan MC. Imaging techniques. In: Ritchie BW. Harrison GJ.
Barcelona: Lynx: 1993.
Harrison LR. eds. Avian medicine. Principles and application. Lake
2 Lessels K. Mateman C. Molecular sexing of birds. Nature 1996:
Worth (Fl): Wingers: 1994:246-326.
38.3:761762.
9 Campbell TW. Hematology. In: Ritchie BW. Harrison GJ. Harrison
 3 Van Nie GJ. Lumeij JT. Dorrestein GM. et al. Tuberculose bij
LR. eds. Avian medicine. Principles and application. Lake Worth (Fl):
roofvogels l. (Tuberculosis in raptorial birds I). Tijdschr
Wingers: 1994:176-198.
Diergeneeskd 1982: 107:563-572.
10 Lumeij JT. Avian clinical biochemistry. In: Kaneko JR. Harvey JW.
4 Williams D. Ophthalmology. In: Ritchie BW. Harrison GJ. Harrison
Bruss ML. eds. Clinical biochemistry of domestic animals. 6th edn.
LR. eds. Avian medicine. Principles and application. Lake Worth (Fl):
San Diego: Academic Press: 1997:857-884.
Wingers: 1994:676.
11 Taylor M. Endoscopic examination and biopsy techniques. In: Ritchie
 5 Hou HC. Relation of preen gland of birds to rickets Ill. Site of
BW. Harrison GJ. Harrison LR. eds. Avian medicine. Principles and
 activation during irradiation. Chin J Physiol 1931: 5:11-18.
application. Lake Worth (Fl: Wingers: 1994:223-245.
6 Lasiewski RC. Body temperature. heart rate and breathing rate and
12 Lumeij JT. Ritchie BW. Cardiology. In: Ritchie BW. Harrison GJ.
 evaporative water loss in hummingbirds. Physiol Zool 1964: 37:212.
Harrison LR. eds. Avian medicine. Principles and application. Lake
7 Crawford EC Jr. Schmidt-Nielsen K. Temperature regulation and 
Worth (Fl): Wingers: 1994:695-722.
evaporative cooling in the ostrich. Am J Physiol 1967: 212:347.
Addendum: Instructions for the owner
1 If the bird is kept in a cage, the cage as it is (not
2 If possible, the bottom of the cage should be
cleaned) should also be brought along with the
bird for examination by the veterinarian. The
visit to the veterinarian. This will enable the
examination of the cage often provides valuable
veterinarian to see the number and appearance of
information to help in ma king the diagnosis.
the bird's excretions. It is also easy to collect
270
Addendum: Instructions for the owner
samples in this way if further examination is
6 During transport the cage should be covered with
needed.
a blanket or towel, to prevent the bird from
3 Before the visit to the veterinarian, make a list of
becoming chilled during transport and to keep it
the foods which the bird receives, including special
quiet.
foods or treats and the amounts of each. If the bird
7 If the bird is very weak, has been injured, or has
is drinking more than it has normally done,
signs of a nervous disorder, the perches should
aiene se aep iad syup ii hunowe aui aunseau
be placed lower in the cage and any objects on
as possible with the help of a measuring cup. Also
which the bird could injure itself should be
bring the food package with a small amount of the
removed.
food, and samples of any additional foods or treats
 8 For racing pigeons, birds kept in an aviary, or
that the bird receives.
 other birds that are not kept in a cage, it is
4  Make a list of any medications the bird has been
important to collect a representative sample of the
given (the name and the dose). Bring along any of
feces from the different houses or aviaries.
the medications that you still have.
9 If the bird is not one of the common types,
5 Before moving the cage, empty the water dish or
information about the subspecies or breed, and the
bottle and return it to its usual place in the cage. If
sex and age of the bird, should be obtained or
there is a dish of grit in the cage it should be
looked up at home in advance, to avoid possible
removed before transporting the bird, to prevent 
 misunderstandings in giving information to the
the possibility that the bird begins eating grit
veterinarian.
excessively as a result of stress during the trip.
271
29
Small mammals: rabbit, guinea
pig, chinchilla, golden hamster,
mouse, rat, gerbil, ferret,
and mink
J.T. Lumeij
 Chapter contents
Rot 287
Gerbil 287
29.1 Handling and techniques 272
Ferret 287
Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) 273
Mink 287
Guineo pig (Covio porcellus) 274
29.3.7 Nervous system 288
Chinchilla (Chinchillo loniger) 275
29.3.8 Eyes 288
Golden homster (Mesocricetus ourotus) 275
29.3.9 Ears 288
Mouse (Mus musculus) 275
29.4 Notation 288
Rat (Rattus norvegicus) 276
29.5 Further examination 288
Gerbit (Merionus unguiculatus) 276
Ferret (Mustela putorius furo) ond mink
(Mustelo vision) 276
29.2 History 277
29.3 Physical examination 280
The history and physical examination in small mammals
29.3.1 General impression 280
does not differ in principle from that in the dog or cat.
29.3.2 General examination 280
There are small differences in the examination and
Respiratory movements 280
the possibilities for examination that are determined by
Puise (ond heort ouscultation) 280
the difference in size among the different species and
Temperature 280
differences in anatomy and/or physiology. There are
Coot. hoir. ond noiis 281
differences concerning housing and feeding and thus
these aspects must receive the necessary attention when
Mucous membrones 281
the history is taken.
Abdominal poipotion 282
This chapter does not present ready-made protocols
29.3.3 Respiratory tract 282
for examination species-by-species. Instead, it gives
29.3.4 Digestive tract 282
differences from the dog and cat. The general principles
29.3.5 Kidneys and urinary tract 283
of the examination and a detailed description of how to
29.3.6 Genital tract 284
perform the examination will be found in what has been
General 284
described for the dog and the cat. The first concern of
Robbit 284
this chapter is the handling of various small mammals.
Guineo pig 286
29.1 Handling and techniques
Chinchilla 286
Homster 287
 Some rodents have a well-developed escape mechanism
Mouse 287
in order to escape predators and this must be taken
into account in handling them. Animals having such an
272
Handling and techniques
escape mechanism include the mouse, rat, gerbil, and
the arm and the body (Fig. 29.1a). The animal can also
chinchilla.
be held with its head between the elbow and the body
In the first three species the skin of the tail can be
while the hand of the same arm encloses the caudal
stripped off if the animal is grasped by the end of the
part of its body (Fig. 29.1b). Rabbits should never be
tail. Especially in the gerbil this is not uncommon. The
lifted by their ears. If one attempts to lift a rabbit with
phenomenon of *fur slip' occurs in the chinchilla as a
both hands around its thorax, it will usually begin to
result of stress during handling. Adrenalin acting on
strike with its rear feet and can injure the examiner.
the mm. arrectores pilorum causes large patches of hair
For collection of a blood sample or insertion of a gastric
to fall out. It takes about five months for this hair to
be replaced by new hair of the same length.
tube without the assistance of someone to restrain the
animal, the rabbit can be placed in a specially-designed
box (Fig. 29.2) or in a nylon restraint bag for cats.
Robbit (Oryctoiogus cunicuius)
A rabbit can be brought into a state resembling
The skeleton of the rabbit is very fragile. The total
q sh uo sua ino paas i Suio Aq sisouday
weight of the skeleton is about 8% of the body weight 
Then the ventral side of the thorax and abdomen can
(in the cat it is about 13%). If rabbits are manipulated
be sofly petted in the caudal direction and the head
incorrectly, fractures or luxations of the lumbar
bent back slightly.
vertebrae (most often L7) can easily occur and can
Both arterial and venous blood can be collected from the
result in posterior paralysis. Rabbits must always be
ear. Blood can be collected in different ways. For routine
adequately restrained in order to prevent struggling.
blood collection the rabbit can be restrained by an
Although it seldom happens, old bucks and does with
assistant or placed in the restraining box and by use of
a strong territorial behavior can bite people. One must
a vacuum blood tube with a 27G needle (0.45 mm),
usually be more concerned about the risk of being
blood can be collected from the marginal ear vein after
scratched by the rabbit's claws. For this reason it is
the hair over the site has been clipped or plucked and
advisable not to have your sleeves rolled up when
the skin has been disinfected with alcohol. The
handling rabbits. A rabbit can be grasped by bringing
auricular artery, which lies in the middle of the ear, can
one hand along the side of the animal and then under
also be used. Although it is more difficult to do, blood
its rear legs, while the other hand grasps the skin on
can also be collected from the jugular vein. After
the top of the neck. The rabbit is then lifted up and in
clipping the hair and disinfecting the skin with alcohol,
the same movement its head can be pressed between
blood can be collected in the same manner as in the
dog and cat or the rabbit can be laid on its back with
its head just over the edge of the table and then blood
can be collected from the jugular vein. In this position
the rabbit is in a state resembling hypnosis, as
mentioned above. Intravenous injections can be given
in the cephalic vein, the saphenous vein, or the lateral
ear vein. For intravenous catheterization, use the
marginal ear vein, the saphenous vein, the cephalic
vein, or the jugular vein. The bone marrow can be
B
Fig. 29.1 A Correct way of picking up a rabbit. B Holding a rabbit.
Fig. 29.2 Restraining a rabbit in a restraint box
273
Chapter 29:
SMALL MAMMALS
catheterized via the proximal humerus, proximal femur,
Guinea pig (Cavia porcellus)
Or tibial crest.
Guinea pigs are sometimes difficult to catch. They
Oral administration of medications with a tuberculin
should be picked up with a full hand under the thorax
 syringe via the diastema {the space between the incisors
while the rest of the body is supported with the other
and the premolars) is usually easy. Medications can
hand (Fig. 29.4). Grasping the thorax or abdomen
also be administered via a gastric tube, for which a
from the dorsal (spinal) side can cause damage to
flexible plastic urinary catheter with a diameter of 2 to
the lung or liver. Guinea pigs seldom bite but they
3.5 mm can be used. The distance from the mouth to
wiggle and struggle a great deal and are very noisy,
the last rib is marked on the catheter. Then a wooden
like piglets.
or plastic block with a central hole is placed in the
diastema. To stimulate swallowing during introduction
In some guinea pigs it is possible to collect blood from
of the catheter, one can blow through the catheter
the jugular vein. The method is identical to that used
when the tip reaches the pharynx. The catheter is
in dogs. Blood can also be collected from the so-called
inserted very carefully until it is in the stomach. If
femoral triangle. For this purpose the animal is held
resistance is felt it is possible that the catheter has
lying on its back. The blood will be either arterial or
entered the trachea. Before fluid is introduced through
venous.
Intravenous injections are given in the
the catheter, the position of the tip is checked by
saphenous vein and sometimes in the ear vein.
aspirating to be certain that gastric juice is obtained
Transillumination and a very fine needle (27G) are
(Fig. 29.3) As in cats, a thin stomach tube can be
needed for the latter technique. For both blood
introduced via the nose.
collection
pue
intravenous
administration
of
medications the cephalic vein and the saphenous vein
The urinary bladder of rabbits is easily catheterized. To
can be used. The skin of the guinea pig is very thick,
catheterize the buck a catheter with a diameter of 1 to
especially on the back, and this should be considered
2.5 mm is used (for a weight range of 1 to 5 kg). The
when giving subcutaneous injections.
 penis should be well exposed. The catheter is sprayed
Oral administration of medications is easy with the
with xylocaine before it is introduced. A catheter with
use of a tuberculin syringe via the diastema. By use of
a diameter of 2 mm is used to catheterize the doe. By
a flexible catheter and a wooden or plastic block or
pressing with the thumb below the vulva or by gently
blunt cannula the stomach can also be intubated.
pulling on the tuft of hair below the vulva, the
Catheterization of the bladder is possible in both
entrance to the vagina can be exposed. If the catheter
males and females by use of a feline urinary catheter.
is sprayed with xylocaine and inserted so that it glides
In males, however, catheterization almost always
over
the ventral vaginal mucosa directed slightly
causes an ejaculation, which results in obstruction of
ventrally, it will enter the urethra. If resistance is felt,
the catheter. Cystocentesis with a 25G needle is also
the catheter is then lowered to a horizontal position
possible.
and introduced further. It should pass without any
resistance. Cystocentesis with a 23-25G needle (see
§ 25.2.2) is also possible (see § 25.4).
Fig. 29.3 Passing a stormach tube in a rabbit with a block held in the
diastema.
Fig. 29.4 Correct way of holding a guinea pig.
274
Handling and techniques
Chinchilla (Chinchilla loniger)
the mouse is held with the ring finger or fifth finger
(Fig. 29.6). If not enough of its neck skin is grasped
In handling chinchillas, one must be conscious of the *fur
slip’ described above. The best way to pick up the
the mouse can turn over and bite the fingers. If the
mouse is held stretched out too much its respiration
    o  n  t  n  
swing it up onto the forearm (Fig. 29.5). A chinchilla
ca n be impaired.
can be grasped in the same way as a rat, around the
Blood can be collected from the tail vein. For this
thorax. Keep in mind that chinchillas can squirt urine
purpose the mouse can be placed in a special holder
up to about 75 cm if they feel threatened.
(Fig. 29.7). Blood can also be obtained by puncture of
the retrobulbar plexus with a capillary hematocrit
The ear veins can be used for blood collection and for
giving injections with a 25G or 27G needle. Oral
tube, but for this the mouse must be anesthetized.
administration of medications with a tuberculin syringe
Then by grasping the skin of the neck, both jugular
is easy via the diastema. If the animal will not sit still,
veins can be compressed to cause venous congestion in
it can be rolled up in a hand towel. Cystocentesis with
the head. A capillary tube with the tip broken off (to
a 25G needle is possible.
give a cutting edge) is then introduced via the medial
canthus along the globe into the retrobulbar plexus
Golden homster (Mesocricetus ourotus)
(Fig. 29.8). When the venous congestion is relieved and
the capillary tube is removed, the bleeding stops
Hamsters must be handled regularly in order to keep
spontaneously. This method of blood collection can
them tame. They are nocturnal animals and if during
have harmful consequences for the animal's vision. An
the day they are suddenly awakened or picked up
inelegant but effective method for repeated blood
roughly they may bite. Solitary housing is needed to
sampling in mice is to slice off the very tip of the tail.
prevent fighting. The hamster can be picked up in the
same way as the rat, with a full hand around the
Medication can be administered orally via a short
thorax. In general males are easier to handle than
females. Hamsters can be moved easily by using a can,
is restrained with its neck stretched out, as described
into which they usually crawl spontaneously.
above, a shortened cannula is carefully introduced
Blood can be collected from the retrobulbar plexus
along the palate (Fig. 29.9). Quantities of up to 0.1 ml
after local or general anesthesia. Small amounts of
can be administered orally via the diastema with a
blood can be collected from the tail by use of a
medicine 
dropper.
Intramuscular
injections  are
vaccinostyle or needle. Blood can also be collected
from the jugular vein. Intravenous injections can be
given in the saphenous vein. In giving subcutaneous
injections it should be remembered that the cheek
 pouches extend to the shoulder.
Medications can be administered orally with a blunt
cannula via the diastema.
Mouse (Mus musculus)
The best way to pick up a mouse is to lift it by the tail
(but not by the tip, as explained above) and then place
it on a rough surface. When the mouse is pulled by the
Fig. 29.6 Correct way to grasp and restrain a mouse
tail it will try to resist by holding firmly with its front
feet. With the thumb and forefinger of the other hand
the mouse can now be grasped by the skin of the neck
and lifted up. The hand is then pronated and the tail of
Fig. 29.5 Correct way to hold a chinchilla.
Fig. 29.7 Inserting a needle in the tail vein of a mouse.
275
Chapter 29:
SMAll MAMMALS
Fig. 29.10 Restraining a rat.
Fig. 29.8 Obtaining blood from the retrobulbar plexus of a mouse via
the medial canthus.
jaw one can prevent the rat from biting. If the rat is
heavy and pregnant, the caudal part of the body must
be supported with the other hand. A plastic cylinder
can also be used to restrain a rat. The cylinder has
   s   o 
and blood samples can be collected.
Blood can be collected via orbital puncture, as described
for the mouse, but in the rat the capillary tube is
introduced through the dorsal conjunctiva  in  a
caudomedial direction. The lateral tail vein can also be
used for blood collection.
Medications can be administered orally with a blunt
cannula, just as described for the mouse.
Intravenous injections can be given via the lateral tail
vein but the vein is much more difficult to see than in the
mouse, especially in older rats. Rubbing the tail for two
minutes with alcohol removes the superficial layer of
keratinized epithelium and the vein is made more
Fig. 29.9 Introducing a short cannula into the stomach of a mouse.
visible. The saphenous vein and the jugular vein can
also be used for intravenous injections.
inadvisable because of the small volume of muscles.
Gerbil (Merionus unguiculotus)
 Subcutaneous injections can be given in the fold of
 One of the reasons why gerbils are used as experimental
neck skin by which the animal is restrained. The lateral
tail vein lends itself to intravenous injections after the
animals is that some strains have a genetically
           
determined predisposition to epileptic seizures. The
handling of a gerbil can sometimes induce an epileptic
light bulb. The mouse is placed in the special holder
for this purpose. To obtain urine the mouse can be
seizure, which can last from 15 to 30 seconds and is
held upside down, which usually will cause it to
quite impressive. The seizure stops spontaneously and
urinate spontaneously. Sometimes even holding the
handling,
collecting
blood,
andadministering
animal is enough to cause urination.
medications are the same as for the mouse. Because the
Rat (Rattus norvegicus)
gerbil has a strongly pigmented tail, the use of the tail
vein for clinical purposes is very difficult, in contrast to
Most strains of rats are tame and easy to handle. The
that of the mouse. In the gerbil intravenous injections 
first step is to allow the animal to adjust to the
can be given most easily in the femoral vein.
presence of the examiner. Then the rat can be grasped
by the base of its tail, not at the tip. The rat will try to
walk away and this will stretch out its body. With the
Ferret (Mustela putorius furo) ond mink
qunun aun yim pads aq mou ue iu aui pueu iauo
(Musteio vision)
under the chin and the forefinger held around the neck
 In contrast to what many people think, ferrets are not
(Fig. 29.10). It is especially important to place the
wild animals. Like guinea pigs, they have been
thumb correctly, for by pressing it against the lower
domesticated for thousands of years. Most ferrets kept
276
History
 as companion animals are accustomed to being handled
joint, and from the cephalic vein on the front leg. The
and pose no problems during examination. However,
 cephalic vein is preferred for the insertion of indwelling
Adaap aeauad u pue deus pue uo are yia 
catheters. For clipping and disinfection of the skin, see
paedand aq isnu nauxa al pue rus aui yanou
25.2.4.
for less compliant individuals. Especially jills and kits
The caudal artery, on the ventral side of the tail, is
should be handled with care.
most easily punctured when the ferret has been in a
au suidseis kq papuey aq ueo siauay sieu all
warm environment for some time. With the animal
thorax with one hand and placing the thumb under the
restrained in dorsal recumbency, a 26G needle is
chin. Troublesome animals are best held by grasping
inserted for 2-3 cm in the ventral furrow of the tail,
the neck skin with one hand, allowing the body to
toward the body. This allows 3-5 ml of blood to be
hang down freely. Handled in this way, most ferrets
collected, after which pressure is applied over the site
relax completely, allowing physical examination.
until bleeding stops. Blood should not be collected
An additional advantage is that the abdominal organs
from ferrets by puncturing the retro-orbital plexus or
shift slightly downward, which makes them easier to
by cutting a toenail.
palpate.
Urine can be collected from ferrets after spontaneous
The attention of troublesome ferrets can be distracted
urination on a smooth surface or l
bymanual
by allowing them to lick the tip of a syringe containing a
compression of the bladder. Cystocentesis with a 26G
pasty food (such as Nutri-Cal). Most ferrets like this so
needle is also used. Bladder catheterization is difficult
much that they can be examined at the same time. If
in ferrets but not impossible. It is carried out under
the ferret bites the examiner, the bitten hand should
anesthesia, using a 3.S French catheter. In females the
not be pulled back. The ferret's mouth should be
urethral opening is about 1 cm cranial to the clitoris
opened by an assistant, pressing in the corners of the
and the catheter is used with a stylet (see also $ 25.2.1).
mouth with the thumb and forefinger. To handle
In the hob the J-shaped curve at the distal end of the
nonsocialized mink, such as those raised for fur
baculum (os penis) may cause problems during
 production, heavily reinforced gloves should be worn.
catheterization and hence the catheter is used without
In ferrets venous blood can be collected from the
a stylet.
jugular vein, the cranial vena cava, or the saphenous
 Intravenous injections can be given to ferrets via the
vein. Arterial blood can be collected from the caudal
cephalic vein, the saphenous vein, and the jugular vein.
artery on the ventral side of the tail. In some ferrets it
Intravenous catheters are inserted under anesthesia. For
is advisable to use isoflurane anesthesia for blood
intraosseous catheterization, a 20G spinal needle is
collection. For collection from the jugular vein, the
ferret is restrained by rolling it in a towel. An assistant
marrow of the femur.
holds the ferret in sternal recumbency with its front
In anorexic ferrets it is possible to place an
legs over the edge of the table and its neck extended
esophageal tube under anesthesia. The technique is
upward (see also § 2s.3.1). After the hair is clipped
similar to that used in anorexic cats.
and the skin disinfected with alcohol (see also
§ 25.2.4), the jugular vein is distended by applying
29.2 History
slight pressure on the side of the neck close to the
thoracic inlet. Blood is collected via a 26G needle into
The history form for the owner is used to obtain a
a 3-ml vacuum tube.
history
that is as complete as possible. Because
Subcutaneous fat sometimes masks the jugular vein.
infectious diseases may play a role, the history should
In that case, blood can instead be collected from the
include not only information about the individual
cranial vena cava after the ferret has been anesthetized
animal that is ill but also about other animals with
and placed in dorsal recumbency. A 26G needle is
which the patient has been in contact.
inserted at the cranial junction of the left first rib and
In a group problem additional questions must be
the sternum. After the needle penetrates the skin, either
asked about morbidity and mortality, about the age
a vacuum tube or a syringe is attached and then the
 and gender of the affected animals, and about the signs
needle is directed toward the contralateral hind leg at
 of disease. The absolute number of animals with signs
an angle of approximately 30° to the body. The needle
is also important.
is advanced until blood appears in the tube or syringe.
In taking the history of an individual animal,
If blood does not appear when the needle is inserted
questions are asked about the feeding {source and
fully, it is then retracted slowly. If blood suddenly
composition, storage, date of preparation, additions,
appears, the needle should not be moved until the
amount, recent changes) and about the housing (type
desired amount of blood is collected. Small amounts of
of cage, placement and style, provisions for food and
blood can be collected from the saphenous vein, on the
lateral side of the hind leg just proximal to the hock
temperature, humidity) (Ta bles 29.1 and 29.2).
277
SMALL
Chapter
MAMM
6
Table 29.1 5ome physiological and animal husbandry data in small mammals
species
tife spon
odult
resp.
pulse
recto!
housing
relative
dry food
woter per
in yeors
weight (g)
freq.
freq.
temp. (°C)
temp.
humidity
per doy
doy
(max)
(c)
[%]
(g/100 g)
(mt/100 g)
rabbit
5-10 (15)
0006-006 
32-60
120-135
37.5-39.5
15-19**
50
3-4
5-10 (90 in 
(breed-
(rationed)
lactation)
dependent)
ad lib hay
 6id eauin6 
4-5 (8)
 900-1200
42-104
230-280
37.2-39.5
18-23
50-70
5-6
 700-900
dinchilla
10 (20)
o 400-500
700-750
36.1-37.8
15-21
 500-600
Jasey
14-2 (4) 
 85-130
33-135*
250-500*
35.5-38.9
19-23
40-60
10-12
8-10
 95-150
asnou
1-2 (4) 
o 20-40
94-216
325-780
36.5-38.0
19-23
45-70
15 (ad lib)
心
 20-60
eJ
2-3 (5)
 267-500
63-179
250-500
35.6-38.9
19-23
60-80
10 (ad lib)
10-12
 225-325
gerbil
2-4 (8)
o 50-130
90-160
200-600
35.8-39.0
18-24
<50
5-10 (ad lib)
4-7
 50-55
ferret
5-8 [13)
o 1350-2700
30-40
180-250
37.8-40.0
15-19**
ad lib
 450-900
YU
(11)
 1700-2200
38.8
 800-1000
*Respiration. pulse frequency. and rectal temnperature decrease considerably in hamsters during hibernation.
+Rabbits and ferrets are sensitive to high termperature: never place them in full sun.
History
Table 29.2 Guideline for housing mice as experimental animals. Source: Preliminary recommendation of the European
Council ET5 123; GT 123(2000) 57. Tables with similar data for rats, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, rabbits, and
ferrets are in Appendix 1 of this book
body weight
minimum floor orea
minimum coge height
floor area per animat
(g)
(cm²)
(cm)
(cm)
In stock and during procedures
20
330
12
60
21-25
330
12
70
26-30
330
12
08
>30
330
12
100
During breeding
330
12
 Monogannous pair or trio.
 For each femmale with
litter. add 180 cm²
Stacked by breeder* cage size
<20
056
12
40
zU2 056
 Cage size 1500 cnn²
<20
1500
12
30
*Weaned mnice can be kept in a high density for a short period. provided there is sufient roomn and the cage is adequately enriched. There may be no
 evidence of harnn to health and/or welfare.
Like primates, guinea pigs are unable to synthesize
reduce the chance of their chewing hair (*hair barbering').
vitamin
C
because
of
a
genetically
determined
Chewing of hair by dominant animals is also seen in mice
deficiency of the liver enzyme L-gluconolactonoxidase
 and gerbils. In exceptional cases it is important to know
{one of the enzymes necessary for the formation of
who cares for the animal(s). Small children can forget to
L-ascorbic acid from D-glucose). Commercially prepared
give their animals food or water, which can sometimes
diets for guinea pigs are available in which vitamin C
have fatal consequences. The availability and 
the
is present in a suitably stable form. If the food is held
consumption of food as well as water should always be
for longer than three months, however, the vitamin C
checked thoroughly in cases of weight loss, dehydration,
content will be too low to cover the requirement of
 Or death without other indication of the cause. Sometimes
16 mg/kg daily. The vitamin C requirement of guinea
the drinking water is chlorinated (2 ml of a 5.25%
 suaia kq Paiaod si siad asnou se idax si
hypochlorite solution per 10 liters of drinking water) or
cabbage and carrots. Vitamin C can also be given in
acidified to a pH of 2.5 (2.6 ml concentrated HCl per 10 1
the form of half a 50 mg tablet once daily.
 water) to prevent the spreading of Pseudomonas infections.
Guinea pigs, like rats, are very choosy eaters. During the
 Some types of cages predispose to disease. Foot sole
frst few days of life the guinea pig learns to discriminate
problems in guinea pigs and rabbits occur frequently
between what is food and what is not. For this reason,
on mesh or grill floors. Leg fractures occur easily in
changes in food later in life can lead to anorexia because
guinea pigs that were not accustomed to grill floors
the new food is not recognized (neophobia). Especially in
when young. Under poor conditions of hygiene rabbits
the terminal stage of pregnancy, when the
energy
requirement is great, this can lead to severe problems
anogenital area. To prevent fights, buck rabbits must
(acetonemia). Sudden changes in food in all animals with
be housed separately after breeding. The does should
a complex gastrointestinal flora, such as rabbits and
be separated from each other at the age of 3 months. If
rodents, can lead to digestive problems because 
the
various adult male mice are kept together, extensive
gastrointestinal flora must adapt to the
echange
in
wounds can be expected as a result of fighting.
substrate. For this reason changes in the composition of
The animals should be housed in adequately large
the food should be made gradually over a period of at
cages at the correct temperature and humidity (see
least five days. Rabbits which are fed ad libitum with
Tables 29.1 and 29.2). Rabbits, guinea pigs, and ferrets
pellets are often very fat and tend to have thin
feces
cannot withstand temperatures above 28°C. These
because digestion does not progress normally. It is better
animals can die of hyperthermia if left in full sunlight
to ration the food of these animals to a maximum of 25 g
in the summer. Long exposure to high temperatures is
d oi p rad am aq y rad sad jo
    o   
enteropathies there must be sufficient raw fiber in the diet,
rabbits and of embryonal deaths in pregnant does.
Sh Aeu yanou eu 1o sse ysay Aq papiaoud se yons
The ventilation should be sufficient to provide a
not strictly necessary in the diet of guinea pigs, it does
complete change of air about ten times per hour.
279
 Chapter 29:
SMAll MAMMALS
 The light regimen can clearly influence reproductive
an attempt must be made to awaken them before one
results. Hence a shortening of the light period in the fall
concludes that there is something seriously wrong. In
has a negative effect on reproduction in rabbits, while
intact ferrets there is aseasonalvariationof the
Kep ad snou 9l ot tl jo pouad uo suisuoy e yi
amount of body fat. In the winter they may weigh
female rabbits can be bred during the entire year.
 40% more than in the summer.
"Ring tail’ is a disorder in rats 7-15 days old that are
hm au un  u se yns Kiiq mol u Piu
29.3.2 General examination
months in heated rooms. The tail of the rat also has a
role in thermoregulation. In a relative humidity below
Respiratory movements
20% the regulation of the microcirculation of the tail
can be disturbed, leading to the ring-shaped constriction
After obtaining the general impression of the patient, one
looks first at the respiratory frequency, type, and rhythm,
due to ischemia. Necrosis of the tail distal to the
and only then should the animal be manipulated.
constriction can follow.
This should preferably take place in an environment
It should be ascertained whether a quarantine
in which the animal feels secure. The respiration
 procedure is followed when new animals are introduced.
is evaluated to determine whether it is normal or
Establishing the age of the patient is essential because
abnormal under the given circumstances. This can only
many small mammals have a rather short life span (see
Table 29.1). In some species questions should also be
be assessed if one has often observed the respiration of
healthy animals. Table 29.1 gives a few reference values.
asked about the vaccination status. Rabbits can be
vaccinated against myxomatosis and rabbit hemorrhagic
disease; mink and ferrets against canine distemper, rabies,
Puise (ond heort ouscuftotion)
 , i       
Palpation of the peripheral pulse is often prevented by
the small size of small mammals. In addition, counting
enteritis' (with feline panleukopenia vaccine).
the heart frequency is only possible in the rabbit,
because it is too high in the other species listed in
29.3 Physical examination
Table 29.1. In the rabbit the pulse can be palpated in
the femoral artery or the auricular artery (central
29.3.1 General impression
artery of the ear) (Fig. 29.11). The pulse frequency in a
Especially in species in which an extensive physical
rabbit at rest is 120-150/min but when the animal is
examination is difficult to perform because of the size
excited it can increase to 200-300/min. In the rabbit
of the animal, a minute observation of the animal is
the ictus cordis is palpable in the left and right second,
very important, preferably in an environment in which
third, and fourth intercostal spaces (L>R). The heart
the animal feels secure. The points of the General
can be auscultated in the fourth intercostal space on
impression (Chapter 7) should be followed closely. One 
the left side and in the third space on the right side. In
can assess the locomotion of the animal only if it is
ferrets the ictus cordis can be palpated between the
indeed allowed to walk. In evaluating the locomotion
sixth and the eighth ribs.
one must know how this species of animal moves
normally. The rabbit, for example, is a plantigrade
Temperature
cursorial animal with a unique style of locomotion,
The temperature must be taken with a suitable
called half bounding: the two hind feet touch the
thermometer, preferably digital {see also § 4.2). Because
ground almost in unison but the forefeet alternate.
of the high metabolic rate and the large body surface area
Ferrets also have a peculiar way of walking: their front
and hind legs move slightly diagonally and seem not to
be cooperating. When walking, their long bodies are
arched in the air, which adds to the impression of two
bipedal individuals in a ferret suit. During play they
 an pe ua   aib aq du
carried by their momentum, which adds to the
attractiveness of pet ferrets. In the rat and the rabbit
there is occasionally a tilting of the head as a result of
an illness. If the animal is not observed carefully this
important abnormality could be missed. A hibernating
10 ewoo e ul aq oi sieadde pue dn palou sal raismnu
even dead. Hamsters go into hibernation at a
temperature of 6°C or lower, for periods of one to
three days. Such animals must first be warmed up and
Fig. 29.11 Counting the pulse in the auricular artery of the rabbit.
280
Physical examination
in relation to body weight of small mammals, taking the
areas where lymph nodes are located (mandibular,
temperature is especially important during anesthesia,
axillary, popliteal, and inguinal lymph nodes) are also
when the temperature can decrease rapidly unless
examined.
appropriate measures are taken. When inserting the
 The mammary glands are also examined at this time
thermometer in the rabbit, one can observe the skin folds
flled with secretion in the perineum on both sides, the
mice and rats. Mastitis can be overlooked if the
so-called inguinal fossae. This secretion is produced by
mammary glands are not examined carefully (rabbit
the inguinal glands. It contains pheromones which serve
and guinea pig). Because the mammary tissue 
in
for marking territory. In male guinea pigs there are glands 
murine species can extend quite far, mammary tumors 
on both sides of the anus which empty out in the anus.
 ai ie s s s in a ui no u
Especially in older males, these glands occasionally lead
of the scapula or adjacent to the vulva. In animals that
to problems because of the accumulation of secretion in
possess cheek pouches (hamster), a differentiation must
the anus. Ferrets have well-developed anal sacs with
be made between physiologic filling of the pouches and
strong-smelling yellow contents.
abnormalities. Examination of the lymph nodes is also
carried out at this time.
Coot, hoir, ond noits
In the rat there are depots of brown fat in the ventral
In addition to what has already been given for the dog
cervical region that can be mistaken for salivary glands
or lymph nodes. If a mite infestation is suspected, the 
and cat, there are a few specific items of importance.
lesions can be examined in the same manner as in dogs
In ferrets the synchronization of hair growth is under
and cats but in the mouse it can also be useful to pluck
the influence of estrogens and many hairs are in the
a few hairs with a forceps from around the nose or
telogen (rest) phase. During the breeding season jills in
behind the ears for microscopic examination, for mites
heat lose many hairs and only after cessation of heat
(e.g, with mating), does new hair growth commence
are often concentrated in these areas.
The evaluation of the skin color in white animals can
and the coat become thicker.
 In rabbits, especially older females, there is a well-
provide important information about respiration and
circulation. Especially during anesthesia, the color of
developed fold of skin under the neck called the
the nose and soles of the feet is an important
dewlap. In elderly does the dewlap may become very
indication of the oxygenation of the blood. Yellow
large  and  may  be  confused
with
an
abscess.
 Occasionally in these dewlaps warm and hard pieces of
coloring of the skin {icterus) is seen when there are
elevated circulating levels of bilirubin. In a dermatitis,
fat can be palpated. Slightly cranial to the dewlap
lies
the chin gland. Like the inguinal (perianal) glands, this
coloring of the skin can give an indication of the
etiology. In an infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosd
produces pheromones.
the bacterial pigment pyocyanin causes a blue-green
Adult buck hamsters have darkly pigmented patches
at the level of the hips. The skin in the area is slightly
color (*blue fur disease' in the rabbit).
 During the general examination of small mammals
rough and has stiff, dark hairs. This is the location of
the skin turgor should always be checked, because in
the hip glands. In sexual excitement the coat around
0 suaq le au pe iso so s as
some diseases (or because the drinking nipple of the
water bottle has become obstructed), the animals can
scratch and scrape around the area. The odor from the
dehydrate rapidly.
hip glands serves, among other purposes, for marking
Because of the way in which some small mammals
territory. In female hamsters the hip glands are much less
developed and are probably active only during estrus.
are housed, their nails grow very long and must be
clipped regularly. The soles of the feet of guinea pigs 
In the gerbil there is a similar gland on the ventral
surface of the abdomen adjacent to the umbilicus,
and the hocks of rabbits should be examined for
lesions that can develop because of inadequacies in
producing yellowish-brown secretion with a musky
husbandry.
odor. This gland is sensitive to androgens and therefore
The external ear of the ferret, the rabbit, and the rat
larger in the buck than in the doe.
should be examined for crusts caused by mite infestation.
In ferrets sebum production increases during the
breeding season, giving the animals a strong odor, a
fatty coat, and yellowish discoloration of the secondary
Mucous membranes
hairs of the undercoat.
The mouth and conjunctivae are examined routinely.
Because subcutaneous abscesses or tumors
occur
The genital mucosa is also examined, more than in
frequently in small mammals, the entire animal should
dogs and cats, in order to: (1) confirm the gender,
be palpated routinely in order to detect such
(2) determine the time of estrus in the female, and
abnormalities. The extent of such processes should be
(3) exclude spirochete infection in the rabbit. The color
palpated and carefully described (see also § 4.1.2). The
of the sclerae is also evaluated, if possible. Rabbits
281
Chapter 29:
SMAll MAMMALS
have a well developed third eyelid, on the bulbar side of
A nasal discharge in a rabbit is not always visible by
which is Harder's gland, consisting of a small white
physical examination because the rabbit keeps its nose
ventral lobe and a large colored dorsal lobe. This gland
clean with its forefeet. It can often be concluded that
is larger in bucks than in does, especially during the
there is a nasal discharge because the hair on the inside
breeding season.
of the forefeet is matted.
The mucous membranes of small rodents are difficult
Inspection of the nasopharynx in small companion
to evaluate. In these animals the color of the skin must
animals is only possible under anesthesia and with the
often be used instead, but in rabbits and ferrets the
use of special instruments {a mouth spreader and a
capillary refill time can also be checked ($ 8.2.5).
cheek spreader) and a good light source (head lamp).
 Percussion of the thorax is actually possible only in
Abdominol poipotion
the rabbit by means of the finger-finger method.
In contrast to what has been said about the dog and cat
Percussion can be performed on both sides of the
(§ 2.5), abdominal palpation should be part of the
thorax along two horizontal and three vertical lines, as
general examination in small mammals because it
described for the dog and cat. The borders of the lungs
requires little time and is very informative.
for the three horizontal lines (mid-scapula, shoulder
In the rabbit the large intestine occupies the entire
joint, mid-humerus) are the 10th, ninth, and seventh
right half of the abdomen as well as the ventral third
intercostal spaces {the rabbit has 12 ribs). Because of
of the left half. The small intestine is in the dorsal part
the small surface area, definition of the relative
of the left half of the abdomen. In healthy rabbits the
damping of percussion by the heart is not possible.
large intestine is a soft and doughy mass. The
transverse and descending colon is recognized by the
29.3.4 Digestive tract
presence of formed pieces of feces which are palpable
like  the 
links of a chain. When the animal
A difference between the Lagomorpha (to which the
constipated a great mass of feces can be palpated in the
rabbit l
belongs) and the Rodentia is that the
large intestine. In rabbits, as in cats, both kidneys can
Lagomorpha have a second pair of incisor teeth behind
be palpated as smooth, bean-shaped organs. The right 
the first pair in the upper jaw, while Rodentia have
kidney is usually within the rib cage but can usually be
only one pair. The second pair of incisors in the
moved caudomedially with the middle finger. The left
Lagomorpha have no cutting surface and are called
kidney is in the medial mesogastrium and is relatively
pivot teeth. Neither Rodentia nor Lagomorpha have
easily moved. In female rabbits pregnancy can usually
canine teeth. Between the incisors and the oral cavity
be determined by palpation (see below). The bladder is 
there is a haired cheek or lip fold that closes off the
palpable in the ventral hypogastrium. It should most 
certainly not be palpated too roughly, for it is easily
relatively difficult in both orders. For inspection of the
damaged. The stomach and liver are not palpable
mouth in mice, rats, hamsters, and guinea pigs,
under normal circumstances. In the mouse and the rat
Macedo-Dobrinho and colleagues (1978) described a
the liver is indeed palpable.
technique in which use is made of a tube-shaped
 In the mouse, normal ‘space-occupying processes"
instrument. For examination of the mouth of the
such as testicles and fetuses can be mistaken by an
anesthetized rabbit, guinea pig, and chinchilla a mouth
inexperienced person as abnormal findings. In ferrets a
spreader is placed on the upper and lower incisors to
large spleen can often be palpated but its clinical
 open the mouth. The cheeks are spread apart with a
significance is not clear.
cheek spreader and the mouth can then be examined
with a head lamp (Fig. 29.12). In Rodentia and
29.3.3 Respiratory tract
The examination of the respiratory system in small
u se yauuu as aui u aldruud u spaaid sn
dogs and cats (Chapter 9). Because of the smaller size,
however, large parts of the examination are technically
impossible. A few specific points are discussed here.
A red nasal discharge in the rat and the gerbil is
usually not due to blood. In these animals tear fluid
produced by Harder's gland is rich in porphyrins which
give the tears a red color. When production of the
colored tear fluid is excessive (chromodacryorrhea),
there is a red nasal discharge via the nasolacrimal duct.
The tear fluid fluoresces under ultraviolet light.
Fig. 29.12 Use of the mouth spreader to inspect the teeth of the rabbit.
282
Physical examination
Lagomorpha the incisor teeth form a segment of a circle.
The incisors grow continuously and normally the upper
and lower incisors wear against each other.
Enamel is deposited on the outer side of the incisors,
whereas the inner side is primarily dentine. Enamel is
harder than dentine and so the wearing of the two
surfaces is unequal, which results in a sharp outer
edge. When the surfaces of the upper and lower
incisors no longer meet, a so-called elephant's bite can
develop. In the rabbit this is occasionally seen as a
hereditary defect. The lower incisors then project out
in front of the uppers (mandibular prognathy). The
Fig. 29.13 Inspection of the cheek pouches of the hamster.
molars of Lagomorpha and some Rodentia (guinea pig
and chinchilla) also grow continuously. In the absence
of the normal wearing process, abnormalities of the 
An anatomical distinction of the hamster is the presence
 molars can occur. The continuous growth of the molars
of cheek pouches. They can be everted for inspection.
is seen only in species with open molar root canals
The examiner holds the hamster in one hand, with the
(rabbit, guinea pig, chinchilla). There is no continuous
ventral side of the animal facing himself and the thumb
growth in species with closed molar root canals
under its lower jaw. The little finger of the free hand
(mouse, rat, hamster, gerbil). The dental formulas of
presses the cheek pouch from caudal to rostral while
various small mammals are given in Table 29.3.
gradually pulling the corner of the mouth laterally with
the thumb. This technique can be used without
In Lagomorpha and Rodentia coprophagia is a normal
anesthesia (Fig. 29.13). In small species a cotton swab
occurrence. It plays a role in the provision of essential
 a oi y       u
amino acids and vitamins that are synthesized by
cheek pouches.
intestinal bacteria. In rabbits this process is called
cecotrophia.
The feces
thatare
eaten, called
Rabbits, guinea pigs, and rats, like horses, cannot vomit.
cecotrophs, are smaller and darker than the other feces
 In the rat the stomach is divided into two compartments:
 u s  r e    
the forestomach (without glands) and the corpus (with
cecotrophia has a circadian rhythm. The domesticated
glands), the two parts being separated by a wall. The
rabbit produces cecotrophs during the night and wild
esophagus opens into the stomach via a mucosal fold
rabbits produce them during the day.
at the location of this separating wall; this is the reason
for the inability to vomit. In the golden hamster there
is also a division into forestomach and glandular
stomach. The rabbit and the rodents described in this
ICPM
chapter are monogastric. The stomach of the rabbit is
Table 29.3 Dental formulas of small mammals
ICPM
never empty. In caring for the coat, hair is swallowed
which cannot, as in the cat, be vomited. This is the
2033
rabbit
1023
stomach of the rabbit. These trichobezoars have also
1013
been described in the hamster. In the guinea pig a
 6id eauin6
1013
gastric torsion can occur, as well as a torsion of the
1013
chinchilla
1013
cecum. The appendix and the sacculus rotundus, which
are located at the ileocecal
l junction, are very
1003
hamnster
 pronounced lymphatic structures of the gastrointestinal
1003
tract of the rabbit.
1003
asno
1003
1003
29.3.5 Kidneys and urinary tract
1003
The urine of rabbits and some rodents is normally
1003
alkaline and cloudy (Table 29.4). In rabbits the
gerbil
1003
cloudiness is caused by crystals of calcium carbonate
3131
ferret
and struvite. In fasting rabbits and nursing kittens
3132
(*carnivore’) the urine is clear and has a neutral or acid
3131
pH. Also in acetonemia in rabbits and guinea pigs the
YU
3132
urine is acid and clear. In rabbits the color of the urine
283
Chapter 29:
SMALL MAMMALS
normal nursing period of this species is 10-21 days,
Table 29.4 Macroscopic appearance and pH of urine of a
but young guinea pigs can also grow without nursing
few small mammals
from the mother. In all Mustelidae {including ferrets
species
oppeoronce
pH
 and mink) ovulation is induced by coitus, just as in the
rabbit and the rat. Reproductive information of diverse
rabbit
cloudy
8.2
small mammals is summarized in Table 29.s. The
 guinea pig
claudy
8.0-9.0
following is  a brief  description  per  species
of
dinchilla
clear
6.0
reproduction, sex differentiation, and examination of
hamster
claudy
8.0
the reproductive tract.
mouse
clear
6.0
rat
clear
6.0-7.5
Robbit
gerbil
clear
6.5-7.5
In contrast to rodents, rabbits have a very regular and
ferret
clear
6.5-7.5
6.8-7.5
obvious estrous cycle. There is a certain rhythmic
mink
jeap
period of 4-7 days in which the doe will allow
copulation, followed by an inactive period of 1-2 days.
varies markedly, from light yellow to reddish brown or
The optimal period for breeding can be determined
orange. The latter color is caused by porphyrins and
reasonably well on the basis of the color of the vaginal
metabolic products of bilirubin. The color increases
mucosa (Ta ble 29.6). For mating, the doe is brought to
as the pH increases and the specific gravity increases.
the buck, to prevent her from defending her territory.
If the drinking water becomes frozen in winter,
Ovulation is induced by copulation and occurs between
the urine can become intensely red-orange in color
10 and 13 hours after copulation. If conception does
and it is possible to confuse this with hematuria or
not occur, a 14-18 day period of pseudopregnancy can
hemoglobinuria. The latter abnormalities may only be
follow. Prenatal mortality, especially during the first
diagnosed by  the finding of erythrocytes  and/or
20 days of pregnancy, is a regulatory mechanism in
hemoglobin in the urine.
rabbits in the wild under stress conditions, such as
 a      
overpopulation. The embryos are resorbed by the
abdominal palpation and by radiography. Making an
uterus in three days. The doe lactates and comes into
intravenous pyelogram is possible in the rabbit and the
estrus as though a litter had been delivered normally.
ferret.
Fetal death after the third week of pregnancy results
The technique of catheterization of the urinary
in abortion.
bladder and collection of urine in various species has
 The average duration of pregnancy is 31 or 32 days. If the
already been described (see § 29.1)}.
pregnancy lasts longer than this, there is usually a
problem. Just before the delivery the doe plucks the fur
29.3.6 Genital tract
from her chest and abdomen, exposing the nipples to
enable the young to nurse and using the fur to line the
Generot
nest. Young rabbits that wander outside the nest are
One of the differences between the Rodentia and the
usually lost, for in contrast to the rat and mouse, the
Lagomorpha concerns the position of the scrotum. In
doe does not bring them back to the nest. The doe
the Lagomorpha the scrotum is cranial to the penis and
nurses her young for a few minutes only once daily. In
in the Rodentia it is caudal. In both the Rodentia and
the wild, until the young rabbits can leave the nest by
the Lagomorpha the testicles can be located in the
themselves, this occurs about an hour before sunrise.
abdomen or in the scrotum. Also, the Rodentia have
After the young can come and go, around the 21st day
an os penis and the Lagomorpha do not. In both
of life, the period of nursing is shifted to about two
Rodentia and Lagomorpha the testicles can be located
hours after sunset.
in the abdomen or in the scrotum. The inguinal canal
To determine the gender of newborn rabbits, the
is fairly large in diameter, which has consequences for
examiner holds the animal upside down in the palm of
the technique of castration. In Caviomorpha (guinea
the left hand with the head facing toward the examiner.
pigs and chinchillas) there is no definite scrotum. In the
The thumb of the left hand and the forefinger of the
guinea pig the testicles are subcutaneous and in the
right hand apply pressure around the genital opening.
chinchilla they are in the inguinal canal. The
The round penis of the buck can be caused to bulge out
Caviomorpha have a relatively long pregnancy and
equally on all sides. The slit-shaped vulva of the doe
small litters. Consequently, the offspring come into the 
bulges out ventrally but the dorsal side close to the anus
world well developed, with a full coat, and open eyes.
is1
not everted. Around the time of weaning the
Young guinea pigs are able to run around directly after
differentiation is much easier. In adult bucks the hairless
being born and can immediately eat hard food. The
scrotal sacs are easily recognized.
284
Table 29.5 Reproductive data for small mammals
fertile
puberty
estrus
durotion
pregnoncy
titter
birth
weaning
weaning
mammary glands
estrus
cycle
of estrus
(days)
size
weight
weight
oge
postpartum
(doys)
(hours)
(g)
(g)
thorocic
obdomino!
rabbit
w 0-9 
47 days until receptive. then
31-32
4-10
70-100
46 w
8-10
DW 6-5 
1-2 days of inactivity, induced
(28-35)
[1-23}
 ovulation
 6id eauin6 
+ 
15-17
6-11
56-74****
1-3
60-115
180
2-3 w
+
0
2 ×1
(13-20}
(8)
(0-4)
(mnin 4 d)
dinchilla
十
++D 8-7
41
105-115
2
30-50
6-8 w
2 ×1
2 ×1
(30-50)
[1-6}
(2-3)
lateral
hamster
 10-14 w
4-5
8-26
15-18
5-9
14-3
30-40
 20-25 d
12-17
 6-10 w
(2-16)
mause
P5
4-5***
920
18-21
5-12
1-1
8-14
18-21 d
3×2
2 × 5
 60 d 
(02)
e
+
65-110 d 
4-5
14
02-6
6-12
4-6
40-50
3×2
2x6
(02)
gerbil
o 70-126 d
4-7
12-18
22-26
4-6
24-3
20-30 d
2×4
 65-85 d 
[3-8)
ferret
 4-10 ma
 cantinuously rece ptive in 
41-42
5-15 
8-10
6 w
8-10
 season (1st spring season 
after birth). induced avulation
YU
12 ma
8-10
48
38-76
[13)
6-8 w
induced 
 ovulation
*o puberty at 10 wks.  puberty at 3-4 wks
**dependent on date of birth
+**+see text for explanatian
Cal
tior
Chapter 29:
SMAll MAMMALS
Table 29.6 Color changes in the vaginal mucosa in relation to the optimal time of mating (from Havenaar, 1986)
color of voginot mucoso
occurrence (%)
receptive (%)
pregnancy after mating (%)
white
1
pink
35
51
31
red
63
84
pa/anq
1
100
For determination of the gender of an adult rabbit the
paired uterine horns, a short uterine body, and a single
 animal is restrained as described previously (see § 29.1).
cervix (uterus bicornis).
The fingers of the hand on which the rabbit is lying are
 Pregnancy can be detected in guinea pigs beginning
placed between the rear legs and the skin fold below
on the 16th day after breeding. By this time the
the genital opening is pushed forward. With the other
ampullae have a diameter of 1 cm and can be palpated.
hand the tail is lifted up and pulled slightly cranially
After 23 days the diameter of the fetus is about 2 cm.
over the back.
After the 30th day of pregnancy in the guinea pig a
A special characteristic of female rabbits is the
torsion of the uterus can occur. Pyometra also occurs
presence of not only two uterine horns but also a
in guinea pigs and tumors of the ovaries occur often.
double cervix {uterus duplex).
Ten days before parturition the two halves of the
q paap a uo iq al u ua
pelvis begin to separate and by 47 hours before
abdominal palpation. In pregnant animals by 10-14
parturition the distance between the pubic bones is
days after breeding one can palpate round objects,
 about 1.5 cm. During parturition this distance varies
about 1 cm in diameter, dorsally in the abdominal
between 1.8 and 2.2 cm. If the sow is 7-8 months of
cavity. Standing in front of the rabbit, grasp the skin of
age or older when she is bred for the first time, there
its neck with one hand and palpate the caudal
are often problems. The symphysis widens less easily
hypogastrium with the other hand. The palpating hand
and fat can hinder the passage through the pelvic canal.
is extended ventrally between the hind legs, with the
In boars the vesicular glands are very large. An
thumb on one side of the abdomen and the fingers on
inexperienced person seeing these 10-cm long and
the other. The uterus can be palpated with light
transparent organs at necropsy may mistake them for a
 pressure and careful movement of the hand cranially
uterus.
and caudally. Abnormalities of the uterus such as
pyometra or endometrial carcinoma can also be
Chinchillo
detected by palpation. In such cases there may be a
 pur ulent or hemorrhagic discharge from the vagina.
 In the breeding of chinchillas a harem system is used in
The penis and prepuce of the buck can be inspected by
 e     
pushing the penis out. Both testicles lie horizontal and
that prevents them from leaving their cages. The male
wears no collar and via a passageway behind the cages
cranial to the penis beneath the abdomen. The testicles
descend from the age of 12 weeks, but the inguinal
can gain access to the individual females. Reproductive 
activity occurs mostly in the winter but also in other
canal remains open during the entire life of the animal
seasons. After copulation, the copulation plugs, about
and sometimes the testicles pass back into the canal.
2.5 cm long, can be found on the floor of the cages.
There is an estrus following parturition and three
Guineg pig
litters per year are possible, but normally there are
After copulation a plug up to 3.75 cm long is formed in
a u aaui inq uoq ae sudso omi Ansn com1
the vagina by coagulation of the ejaculate. It falls out of
up to five. If there is only one fetus, there are often
the vagina 1-2 days later.
problems in its delivery. Sometimes the fetus becomes
 The gender of guinea pigs is easily determined after
mummified. Differentiating between the sexes is not
the first day of life. In sows the anogenital area is
easy. The clitoris is pointed and is situated ventrally in
Y-shaped and in males it is slit-shaped and the os penis 
the vagina. It can be confused with a penis, especially
m Suissaud kq pasodxa sq ues suad au1 alqedied s!
because the male has no scrotum, the testicles being in
the thumb cranial to the prepuce. In sows the vaginal
the inguinal canal. The vagina is not very noticeable
opening is separate from the urethral opening. The
and except during estrus and parturition, it is closed
vagina is closed by a membrane except during estrus
off by a membrane. The most reliable method of
and at the time of parturition. The anal-urethral
determining the gender of chinchillas is to look at the 
aau said eaung "smos pue sinoq ur lenba si aoueisip
distance between the anus and the genitalia. The
286
Physical examination
distance between the anus and the penis in the male is 
 from the eighth day after copulation. Determination of
twice as great as that between the anus and the clitoris 
 gender is done in the same way as in the mouse.
in the female. The female has a double cervix {cervix
duplex). As in all rodents, the male has an os penis.
Gerbit
If a gerbil is bred during the postpartum estrus,
Hamster
implantation can be retarded and as a result pregnancy
Hamsters, like rabbits and chinchillas, have a double
can be increased up to 42 days. Pseudopregnancy (16
cervix. The day after ovulation {every fourth day) there
days) also occurs in the gerbil. Determination of
is an excessive, opalescent, mucoid vaginal discharge,
gender is the same as in the mouse.
not to be confused with that of a bacterial infection of
the genital tract. The pregnancy is extremely short and
Ferret
can be confirmed by palpation after 6-7 days. If pups 
The reproductive season of the ferret lasts from March to
are endangered in the first days of life, the doe can
August. The testicles of the hobs are then larger and an
take up to 12 of them at the same time in her cheek
enormous swelling of the vulva occurs in the jills. The
pouches. However, the pups can also suffocate in the
vulva swells up to a pale pink ball with a diameter of
about 8 mm. For breeding it is best to place the jill in
can also occur if she is disturbed, especially during the
the cage of the hob. As in mink, copulation is a rather
first days postpartum. Determining the gender of the
aul jo uiys aut Aq l! aui sdses qou aui "ssanoud yanou
 pups is done in the same way as described for the mouse.
neck and drags her around the cage. Actual copulation
lasts from one-half to three hours. About one week later
Mouse
the vulva changes in appearance and shrinks.
The period of heat in solitary does lasts 5-6 days. Does
Jills are more susceptible to diseases if not bred than
housed in the vicinity of a buck have a heat period of
if used for breeding. This is related to the fact that the
4 days. This difference is caused by a pheromone from
 jill remains in estrus during the entire season, until she
the buck. Large groups of does housed together go into i
anestrus (Whitten effect). If they are then housed with a
hyperestrogenism. The exposure to high concentrations
buck, the estrous cycle resumes: almost half of the does
of estrogens may lead to suppression of the bone
are in estrus on the third day after introduction of a
marrow with signs including pale mucosae and
buck (synchronization method). Pairing is characterized
petechia. In addition, bilateral symmetrical alopecia
by multiple copulations and one ejaculation. For 24
may develop (hairs in telophase!). Because the cervix
hours after copulation there is a copulation plug in the
 remains open during estrus, there is a greater risk of
vagina. Ovulation is spontaneous and there is a
metritis. In contrast to most other Mustelidae, there is
postpartum estrus. If conception occurs during this
no retardation of implantation in ferrets.
estrus, implantation is retarded. The total duration of
 Jills in estrus but not yet bred should not be housed
pregnancy can be up to 31 days. Some does become
together, for playing may induce ovulation, leading to
pseudopregnant if housed in groups (Lee-Boot effect). If
pseudopregnancy. Pseudopregnancy lasts as long as
        
 pregnancy, 41-43 days. Determination of the gender of
first and fourth day of pregnancy, the pregnancy is
ferrets is not difficult. Just as in the dog, the penis
blocked (pheromones). If she remains longer with the
{with an os penis) is located ventrally. The distal end of
buck, a new ovulation and conception can occur (Bruce
the os penis is J-shaped and it can be caught when the
effect).
 animal passes through a small opening.
Determining the gender of mice is not difficult. The
distance between the anus and urethra in bucks is
Mink
twice that in does. In does the opening of the urethra is
Mink reproduce once yearly, during the first 312 weeks of
separate from that of the vagina. In juvenile does there
March. They are monestrous (see also § 13.1.1). The
is a membrane over the vagina.
actual duration of pregnancy is 30 days but the time
between breeding and parturition can vary from 38 t0
Rot
76 days, due to delayed implantation. The pups are
The Bruce effect and the Whitten effect do not occur in
born in May. Usually one male is kept with 5-10
rats, as they do in mice. Conception during the
females. The female must be placed with the male for
postpartum estrus causes, as in the mouse, retardation
breeding. Because it is not possible to determine
of implantation (up to 10 days, depending on the size of 
 whether a female is in estrus, she is put with the male
the uterus). After copulation there is a waxy copulation(
 once every four days until copulation occurs. If this does
plug in the vagina. Sometimes the plugs are found in the
not succeed within a few weeks, the interval is
cage. Pregnancy examination by palpation is possible
shortened to 2 days. Copulation can last up to 14 hours
287
Chapter 29:
SMALL MAMMALS
and is accompanied by screeching and fighting. Around
nose. Sometimes the entire head is colored red. This
the time of parturition mink must be left alone as much
increased tear production, which is also sometimes
as possible to prevent the mother from eating the young.
observed in the gerbil, is called chromodacryorrhea.
There is an orange-red fluorescence from the dried tears
29.3.7 Nervous system
under ultraviolet light. Because of the red color, the
excessive tear production is often thought to be more
A fracture or luxation of the lumbar vertebrae occurs
severe than it actually is.
occasionally in rabbits and the most obvious clinical
sign is posterior paresis or paralysis. After inspection
29.3.9 Ears
and palpation of the vertebral column, a neurological
examination as described for the dog, performed
Examination of the ears should be a part of the general
within no more than 24 hours after the onset of
examination in rabbits, rats, and ferrets {see § 29.3.2),
paralysis, is essential for a correct prognosis. The
because of the frequent occurrence of mite infestations,
0l sdaoy suisn Aq paisail uoudanad uied jo auasn
which can be detected by otoscopic examination.
Si auaui j uis ousououd peq Aiaa e si (aot e youd
 Purebred rabbits may have a tattoo in the pinna, right
pain perception, recovery is by no means excluded.
or left or both, depending on the country.
29.3.8 Eyes
29.4 Notation
There is often a tendency to think that disorders of the
eyes in small mammals must have an infectious cause,
At the end of this chapter there is a form on which the
but a well-performed examination, as described for the
owner can give the signs, past history, and living
dog and cat, often reveals primary disorders of the eye.
conditions.
This forms the basis for additional
An exceptional feature of the rat is the presence of
questions to define the iatrotropic problem, which is
Harder's
 gland, whichunder 
parasympathetic
placed on a form on which the results of the physical
stimulation produces a secretion rich in lipids and
examination are also recorded.
porphyrins (protoporphyrin IX and coproporphyrin II).
This gland is larger than the globe and is located medial
29.5 Further examination
to it. Under stress, in various infectious diseases, and in
specific disorders there is increased tear production. The
Many aspects of the further examination described for
presence of the porphyrins gives these tears a red color
the dog and cat can also be carried out in the small
and the dried tears can be seen around the eyes and the
mammals.
References
1 Baker HJ. ed. The laboratory rat. vol. 2. New York: Academic Press:
6 Fox JG. Cohen BJ. Loew FM. eds. Laboratory animal medicine.
1979.
Orlando: Academic Press: 1984.
2 Barnes RD. Special anatomy of laboratory animals. Davis (Call:
7 Fox JG. Biology and diseases of the ferret. 2nd edn. Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins: 1998.
of California: 1971.
8 Green E. Biology of the laboratory mouse. 2nd edn. New York:
 3 Cook M. The anatomy of the laboratory mouse. New York: Academic
Blakeston. McGraw Hill: 1966.
Press: 1965.
9 Harcourt-Brown F. Textbook of rabbit medicine. Oxford:
4 Cooper G. Schiller AL. Anatomy of the guinea pig. Cambridge:
Butterworth-Heinemann: 2002.
Harvard University Press: 1975.
10 Harkness JE. Wagner JE. The biology and medicine of rabbits and
5 Foster H. et al. The mouse in biomedical research. vol. 4. New York:
rodents. 2nd edn. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger: 1983.
Academic Press: 1982.
288
30
Reptiles
I. Westerhof
evolution, the testudines are the oldest reptiles and the
Chapter contents
snakes are the most recent.
Many problems in reptiles are caused by improper
30.1 Taxonomy (Appendix 2) 289
housing and/or malnutrition. Each species has specific
30.11  Chelonians 290
requirements for husbandry, nutrition, and care. In order
30.1.2 Snakes 290
to give correct advice about the requirements of a reptile,
30.1.3 Lizards 290
identification of the species or family is essential. Because
of the large number of reptile species this is not always
30.2 Laws and regulations 291
easy, but determination tables can be very helpful.1-3
30.3 Signalment 291
This chapter gives a global overview of the most
30.3.1 Gender 291
commonly kept reptiles.
30.3.2 Age 291
30.4 History 292
30.1 Taxonomy (Appendix 2)
30.4.1 latratropic problem 292
The most striking characteristic of the order Chelonia
30.4.2 Present functioning 292
(approximately 250 species) is the shell, with its shape,
30.4.3 Past history 292
color, and size differing per species. Members of the
30.4.4 Living conditions 292
order Serpentes (2500) are essentially legless and have
Housing 292
an elongated body and a remarkable forked tongue.
Feeding 293
30.5 Handling and restraint 295
developed legs and include some snake-like lizards such
as the slowworms (Anguis fragilis) that are legless and
 30.6 Physical examination 296
 ioe     s
30.6.1 General impression 296
generally have a mobile, protrusible, fleshy tongue,
Level of consciousness. behovior. posture.
sometimes with a forked end.
and locomotion 296
30.6.2 Inspection from a distance 297
30.6.3 Examination of the restrained animal 297
30.7 Fecal analysis 301
30.8 Further examination 302
Blood collection 302
There are more than 7000 species of reptiles and they
have been divided into three major orders: Testudines,
(turtles, terrapins, tortoises), Squamata {lizards [Sauria]
Fig. 30.1 Slowworm (Anguis frogiis). of the family Anguidae. in its
and snakes [Serpentes]], and Crocodylia. In terms of
 natural habitat. forests and mea dows.
289
 Chapter 30:
REPTILES
30.1.1 Chelonians
Poisorous snakes have venom glands in the upper
jaw. The venom varies with the species, season, and
The common names of chelonians (Testudines) vary
age, and is transported from the venom glands through
throughout the world and among languages. In the
hollow fangs (Fig. 30.2). Some species do not have
United Kingdom they are called terrapins (freshwater
discrete venom glands but other oral toxic secretions.
chelonians), tortoises {terrestrial chelonians), and
Well-known venomous snakes such as cobras and
turtles {marine chelonians). In the American literature
all chelonians are referred to as turtles.
Some Elapidae are able to spray their venom as an
Chelonians are roughly divided into those living on
aerosol more than 2 meters into the face and eyes of
land and those living in water. Terrestrial chelonians
their victim. Members of the family of the vipers
have feet with separate toes, whereas
aquatic
(Viperidae and Crotalidae) can be recognized by the
chelonians have flipper-like feet with webbed toes. All
 zigzag lines on the back, the large triangular head, and
chelonians are oviparous (egg-laying).
the large fangs.
More information on the chelonians seen most often
in northwestern Europe is provided in Appendices 2.1
Native snakes. Three species are native to northwestern
and 2.2.
Europe (Appendix 1.4).
30.1.2 Snakes
30.1.3 Lizards
Snakes and lizards are classified together in the order
Appendix 2.5 gives an overview of the reptiles seen most
Squamata. Snakes are placed in the suborder Serpentes.
     
An overview of the snakes seen most often
in
Europe. Iguanas are especially frequent. They are
veterinary practice in northwestern Europe is given in
divided into three groups: Iguanidae {dominant group
Appendix 2.3.
in the New World), Agamidae {dominant group in the
The classification is constantly being changed. The
Old World), and Chamaeleonidae (also in the Old
largest group of snakes is placed in the family
World). The chameleon can be recognized by its long,
Colubridae, which includes both poisonous (venomous)
retracta ble tongue.
and nonpoisonous snakes.
The geckos belong to the suborder Gekkota and the
family Gekkonidae, whose characteristic is the large
adhesive lamellae or pads underneath the toes (Fig. 30.3).
The eyes are usually covered by a transparent spectacle
and are cleaned with the tongue. There are day-active or
diurnal geckos (Phelsumas) and crepuscular or nocturnal
geckos (most of the Gekkonidae).
The subfamily Eublepharidae, also called fat-tailed geckos,
have freely-moveable eyelids and toes without lamellae.
These sturdily-built geckos are nocturnal or crepuscular.
 Reptiles in the suborder Platynota, such as the genus
Varanus (monitors), have a forked tongue. The two
venomous lizards are the Gila monsters, Heloderma
Fig. 30.2 Hollow fangs in the upper jaw of Vipero berus.
suspectum and Heloderma borridum. Their venom
Fig. 30.3 Phelsumo modogoscoriensis with large adhesive lamellae under the toes.
290
Laws and regulations
glands are in the lower jaw and their fangs are not
hollow but grooved. The venom reaches the teeth via a
groove between the jaw and the lip and they must
Some lizards are oviparous ( Varanus spp, most of the
Iguanidae, geckos, some of the chameleons).
Native lizards. Both the small lizard
{Lacerta
vivipara) and the sand lizard (Lacerta agilis) are native
to northwestern Europe.
30.2 Laws and regulations
There is a multinational agreement concerning trade in
endangered flora and fauna in order to protect
endangered plants and animals throughout the world.
Fig. 30.4 Python regius with spurs on both sides of the cloaca.
This agreement was formed in 1973 and has been
enforced
since197sbythe(
CITES
brown in females, and male terrapins have long nails
regulations
(Convention  on  International  Trade in  Endangered
on the toes of their front feet.
Species of wild fauna and flora). CITES regulations
Snakes. There is also sexual dimorphism in some
 only apply to the international import and export of
snakes. Males of the family Boidae have more
listed species. Legally imported species can be traded
pronounced ‘spurs’ on the vestigial pelvis, on both
or transported within a country. Animals and plants
sides of the cloaca (Fig. 30.4). In some snake species
listed in CITES are divided into three categories.
the base of the tail in males is relatively wide and
Appendix I lists the most protected category (
of
straight, and thickened (hemipenal bulge) on the
endangered species for which trade will or may lead to
ventral side. Gender can be determined in snakes by
extinction. Trade in living or dead animals, parts, or
inserting a lubricated, blunt-tipped sexing probe into
products of these animals is strictly regulated. Animals
the cloaca and advancing it caudally. The probe will
m pahodxa io pauodwi aq keu Aadeo ul pan
  's u u idu a u dap s
special permits.
distance of 6-14 subcaudal scales (depending on the
Appendix Il lists species that are not currently
species), versus 2-6 scales in females (see the DVD).
threatened by extinction but may be threatened if trade
With some experience, probing can be performed
is not regulated.
safely. In neonatal colubrids it is possible to manually
Appendix II lists species protected in specific countries
evert ('pop out') the hemipenes.
that are party to the global CITES agreement. All other
countries are obliged to cooperate with them and to
Lizard. There is sexual dimorphism in some adult
regulate international trade in these species.
lizards, such as iguanas and most of the geckos. Males 
The CITES regulations are subject to change and
of the suborder Iguania have pronounced preanal or
the latest developments can be found at: ww w.cites.org.
femoral pores and a large tail base due to the
The European Union (EU) has set additional
hemipenes (Fig. 30.5). Spines, crests, dewlaps, and
restrictions in Regulation EC 338/97 and Regulation
horns may be present and more prominent in males
EC 865/2006. These regulations are automatically
than in females.
applicable and harmonized in all Member States:
http://eur-lex.europa.eu.
30.3.2 Age
30.3 Signalment
Age determination in reptiles is difficult because their
growth is strongly dependent upon diet and husbandry.
Determination tables can be used if the species is
Lifespan also varies according to the species,
unknown.
1-3
husbandry, and management. Some chelonians such as
terrapins live from 7 to 30 years and other species may
30.3.1 Gender
live for up to 60 years or more. Many snakes,
especially the large species, live 20 years or more.
Chelonians. There is sexual dimorphism in several
Lizards are also relatively long-lived: chameleons and
al uun arl si aay aun saads Au un 'saiads
anoles live 5-8 years, iguanas and skinks 10-20 years,
male. In chelonians the male has a longer tail and the
 More detailed information on longevity of reptiles
than in females. The plastron is concave in most males
can be found on the website Reptiles and Amphibians
but flat in females. The iris is red in male terrapins and
in Captivity: http://w w w.pondturtle.com/longev.html.
291
Chapter 30:
REPTILES
Fig. 30.5 Iguana with prominent preanal or femoral pores on the ventral aspect of the thigh. The pores are more pronounced in the male (left than
in the female (right).
30.4 History
30.4.4 Living conditions
The history comprises (1) the iatrotropic problem, (2)
Questions about living conditions are concerned with
general information about the functioning of the
the housing and feeding of the animal. How long has
animal, (3) past history, and (4) living conditions.
the animal been in the owner's possession? What was
its origin? Was it captured in the wild or bred in
captivity? Is it in contact with other animals? If so,
30.4.1 latrotropic problem
with what species, for how long, and are there newly-
introduced animals?
The history begins with the question: “What is the
problem? Questions are then asked about its duration
'ean ua su le au f uoissod pue
that seek company only during the breeding season.
Kw siuo inq sdnon un lam uouny saiads auos
do better if housed alone or in pairs. Reptiles housed
route of administration, duration of treatment, and
effect. Not uncommonly, it is found that the treatment
in small cages should be kept alone, but more than one
aue Aau1 j! aseo aauel e ul pasnoy aq Aew [ewu
was not prescribed by a veterinarian but obtained
 s a o      
closely watched. In general, reptiles from different
also useful to inquire whether preventive treatment
geographic regions should not be held together because
of the risk of transmitting diseases.
has been given (e.g., against parasites) and if so, what
adodu Aq pasney are sadau u swaqoud Aun
treatment, the route of administration, and the
frequency.
housing, husbandry, and diet. Extensive questioning on
these topics is very important.
30.4.2 Present functioning
Housing
Important here are questions about food intake, drinking,
Temperature. Reptiles are ectothermic: their body
vomiting, and behavior. How is the respiration? Is the
temperature depends on the environment. The preferred
animal dyspneic? Are there abnormal respiratory sounds
optimal body temperature range or POTR is the
or coughing? What is the appearance of urine and feces
temperature range in which the organ systems function
and have they changed? How is the locomotion? Are
most efficiently. On either side of the POTR is a narrow
there signs of neurological defects? Does the animal
range of tolerable temperatures but temperatures
fall off its perch? What is the reproductive history?
beyond these will lead to stress and disease. For most
Are there skin lesions? Are there changes in body
reptiles the POTR is known and can be found in
proportions or body parts, or other abnormal signs?
reference books.
In the wild, reptiles gravitate to an area having the
30.4.3 Past history
temperature they need. In captivity, a temperature
gradient must be provided to enable the animal to
Has the animal been ill before? If so, what was the
choose the temperature it prefers. It is therefore
diagnosis? If the animal was treated, what was the
important to inquire about the temperature and the
treatment, who administered it, what was the duration,
temperature gradient in the cage. It is also important to
and what was the effect?
ask how the cage is heated. Are there basking areas, hot
292
History
spots, hot rocks, heating pads, incandescent bulbs,
important is that it can be cleaned easily and is pleasant
ceramic heaters, or other heat sources?
for the reptile, does not cause ileus or obstipation
Heat sources should be placed out of the reach of the
if ingested, and does not cause skin irritation. Many
reptiles to avoid burning. The preferred temperature for
   l  s 
most diurnal reptiles is 27-35°C, with a basking area
 substrate in order to deposit their eggs. The absence of a
that is above 40°C. Nocturnal reptiles prefer a
 suitable place for their nest may lead to egg retention.
temperature of 21-27°C, and with a warmer area that
Hygiene. Reptiles have been shown to carry potential
is 32-35°C (Appendix 3). A good rule is to provide a
pathogens, such as Salmonella spp. Strict hygiene
is
hot spot with a temperature near the upper end of the
important. No eating, drinking, or smoking is allowed
POTR. Nighttime temperatures  should be  slightly
during handling of the animals. Hands should be
lower. Thermometers at various locations are used to
washed carefully with hot, soapy water after etery
monitor the temperature.
contact with a reptile or its immediate environment.
Temperate zone reptiles hibernate at temperatures of
Water and food dishes should be cleaned in a location
S-15°C. Reptiles in cold climates hibernate at the
far away from the kitchen sink or the bathroom, using
lower end of this range. Subtropical reptiles may also
separate cleaning materials.
hibernate but require some source of warmth, while
tropical reptiles do not hibernate. Some snakes in
Feeding
desert areas have a ‘summer rest' in order to escape the
The important questions for the history are: What and
hottest temperatures.
Mou pue ‘paay nok op mou ‘aay nok op ynu mou
Hibernating animals must be healthy and in a good
frequently? Do you give supplements, and if so, what 
condition. Those that are ill or weak are predisposed
are they, how much, and how often? (Appendix 2).
to
problems
after hibernation or（
death
during
hibernation. During hibernation there is a loss of
Chelonians. Food-related problems are seen frequently
approximately1
1%ofbody
weight
eachr
month.
in chelonians. Appropriate nutrition is essential for
Temperatures below 0°C can lead to irreversible retinal
their growth, shell composition, and reproduction.
degeneration and death.
Terrestrial
chelonians
may
bepredominantly
Photoperiod. An
appropriate
photoperiod
is
herbivorous or omnivorous. Herbivorous species can be
important and both natural and artificial light are used
fed high amounts of vegetable fiber such as dandelions,
to provide it, with the aid of timed switches. An
hand-picked weeds, grass, flowers, grass/hay pellets, and
 inappropriate photoperiod and temperature fluctuations
some vegetable greens. A vitamin-mineral supplement is 
may result in reproductive failure. There is continuing
given to insure adequate intake of calcium, iodine,
discussion of what is the correct light quality
and
vitamin D3, and vitamin A.
spectrum. Ultraviolet-B (UV-B) or lighti
in
the
Omnivorous chelonians can be fed both plant and
290-320 nm range promotes the synthesis of
the
animal products. The ratio differs per species. They
provitamin, D3, which is of great importance
for
can be fed vegetables, flowers, fruits, and small live
calcium metabolism, especially in herbivorous and
prey such as insects, snails, woodlice, and several
insectivorous reptiles. Incandescent and gas-discharge
worms such as tubifex and superworms (Zophobas
lamps do not emit UV-B but in the past decade more
mori). In addition, small amounts of meat, low-fat dog
and more lamps designed for reptiles have
been
food, or pelletized food can be given (Fig. 30.6). In lieu
marketed. More research is needed concerning the UV-B
requirement of various species.
Huridity. Most species do well at humidity levels of
50-70%, but desert species need lower humidity and
jungle species need higher. Inadequate humidity may
lead to skin problems and inadequate ecdysis.
Water. Turtles, snakes, and many lizards drink, sip, or
lap water from bowls or saucers. Other lizards can drink
dripping water or sprayed droplets. Many reptiles like to
soak or bathe. This enhances water intake and
stimulates excretion and shedding. Terrapins and
tortoises are able to take up water via the cloaca.
Large, shallow water bowls should be provided and
 should be cleaned regularly
Basic husbandry requirements. It is important to
provide enough shelter and climbing facilities. Many
Fig. 30.6 A good varied diet for a box turtle (Terropene corolino)
different types of substrate can be used. What is
includes greens. fruits. and a small amount of manufactured food.
293
Chapter 30:
REPTILES
of complete pellets or dog or cat food, a vitamin-mineral
aquatic carnivorous reptiles are susceptible to thiamine
supplement is employed, but with the disadvantage of
deficiency if fed thawed frozen fish, for the meat of
the risk of under- or overdosage.
several kinds of both saltwater fish and freshwater fish
contains thiaminase (lists of thiaminase-free fish can be
In terrapins calcium deficiency and hypovitaminosis
found on the internet). In frozen fish the amount of
A can lead to shell abnormalities and swollen eyelids
available thiamine is decreased and the activity of
(Fig. 30.7). Inappropriate diets for insectivores and
thiaminase is increased. To prevent thiamine deficiency,
herbivores can lead to calcium and vitamin D
fresh fish are used or thiaminase is denatured by
deficiency, resulting in shell deformities, soft shells,
heating fish to 80°C for 5 minutes before freezing.
poorly-calcified egg shells, and egg retention. Illness,
Symptoms of thiamine deficiency include tremors,
poor husbandry, and inadequate diets can lead to
ataxia, and opisthotonos.
anorexia and malnutrition. Pelletized food is available
for several species, although more studies are needed in
Lizards. Lizards can be omnivorous, herbivorous,
order to tailor composition to the species.
insectivorous, or carnivorous. Omnivorous lizards can
be essentially herbivorous. As they age, lizards may
Snakes. Snakes are preferably fed intact prey, which is
change their diet: species such as the bearded dragon
an adequate vitamin and mineral source. Snakes can
are carnivorous when young, then omnivorous, and
eat very large prey due to the absence of a sternum and
finally herbivorous in old age.
clavicle. Depending on the size of the snake, they can
Iguanas are omnivorous or herbivorous, depending
be fed rodents, rabbits, chickens, quail, or pigs. Injury
to the snake can be prevented by feeding dead prey.
on their age. They can be fed high-protein and high-
fiber greens and vegetables, other plants, and fruits,
If several snakes are housed together, they should
with small amounts of insects, small prey, and/or
be fed under supervision to avoid the risk that they
 pelletized food for iguanas.
  s s  ss    1
 Anoles, chameleons, geckos, water dragons, and
other snakes.
 Snakes such as Natrix sp. and Thamnophis spp,
skinks are insectivorous and feed on invertebrates.
Some species may also eat small amounts of greens,
are piscivorous. They feed on amphibians (frogs,
leaves, or fruit. Invertebrates contain little calcium,
salamanders), fish, worms, snails, etc. These and other
except for snails with their shells, and earthworms.
Diets low in calcium and/or vitamin D3 or high in
phosphorus, and/or the lack of UV-B may lead to
nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism (NSHP).
NSHP may develop in animals fed unsupplemented
diets of insects alone or in lizards fed all-meat diets or
neonatal prey. NSHP can also occur in herbivorous
lizards fed only unsupplemented greens and vegetables
or unsupplemented insects. Clinical signs of NSHP
include tremors, pathological fractures, egg retention,
and severe skeletal abnormalities (Fig. 30.8).
Most diets can be made complete by the addition of
small amounts of commercial food or vitamin-mineral
supplements. If insects are fed daily, they can be dusted
with a vitamin-mineral supplement once or twice a
Fig. 30.8 lguana with severe skeletal abnormalities. The severe
lordosis is due to dislocation of vertebrae. The thickening of the jaws
Fig. 30.7 Terrapins with hypovitaminosis A. The eyes are not visible
is due to fbrous osteodystrophy caused by nutritional secondary
because of the swollen eyelids.
hyperparathyroidism.
294
Handling and restraint
week, although this may lead to either over- or
underdosage. It is also possible to feed invertebrates a
high-calcium diet that results in a high content of
calcium in the gut (gut-loading).
It is challenging to devise a correct and complete diet
the diet depends on the climate, season, gender, age,
and species. At the same time, the animals should be
maintained in optimal environmental conditions.
30.5 Handling and restraint
Some of the handling procedures described here are
Fig. 30.9 Box turtles (Terrapene corolino): at the left with the shell
'uado mays aun yai nuhiu aun ie pue pa5ojo Aiaiaidwo
shown on the DVD. As a rule, any feces or urine that
is released during handling should be collected for
further examination.
forefinger. The firmer the grip, the stronger the snake's
Chelonians. When handled chelonians can scratch, bite,
resistance. Aggressive snakes are restrained by securely
urinate, and defecate. Terrapins can be restrained by
grasping the head with the full hand. It is important to
placing one hand between the hind limbs, with the
support the body of the snake so as to prevent
thumb on the carapace and the fingers on the plastron.
thrashing which may result in dislocation or fracture of
The animal's head should be directed away from the
the neck or vertebral column. When a snake is
handler and other persons.
presented in a bag, the head is identified and restrained
 Large terrestrial chelonians (>15 kg) can be placed
before the bag is opened and after the bag is opened
on an upturned bucket to prevent their limbs from
the head is restrained outside the bag with the other
reaching the floor. Protective clothing should be worn
hand. Small strangling snakes tend to coil around the
for handling the large species. When a chelonian is
handler's arm, which is allowed. The head is fixed as
turned over from side to side, there is a small risk of
described above. Snakes longer than 2.5 meters should
causing torsion of the intestines. To prevent this, the
be handled by two persons. A snake hook can also be
animal should be turned slowly and then returned to
used to lift or restrain a snake, but too much pressure
the upright position by reversing the direction of the
 on the neck may cause serious injuries to the head or
rotation. Placing a gravid female in dorsal recumbency
spine. The head can be gently pinned to the floor until
may cause displacement of the eggs into the bladder.
it is grasped by the handler. A snake loop can also be
Long-necked turtles such as Chelydra serpentina and
used to handle a snake. Finally, aggressive snakes can
Trioryx spp. are able to turn their neck caudally over
be sedated.
the carapace. To avoid being bitten, they are handled
Venomous snakes require special handling techniques
by grasping the caudal part of the carapace, with the
 and antivenin should be available before handling is
plastron turned toward the handler. Snapping turtles
begun. Information on poisonous snakes can be
"Xunlul snouas asneo ueo pue sy ool ot dn yaiam ueo
obtained from the snake center “Serpo” in Delft, NL
Tortoises can usually be handled easily with one hand
(tel. +31.15.213.0334). This reptile z00 also has a
on each side of the shell between the front and rear
      o on ,  
limbs.4 In some species, such as box turtles (Terrapene 
(www.serpo.nl).
spp-), the plastron is joined fexibly to the carapace by
connective tissue via which it can completely close the
Lizards. Lizards range from tiny to huge. They can bite,
carapace, making clinical examination difficult 
10
defecate, and cause serious injury with their strong tail
impossible (Fig. 30.9). To prevent this closure, an
and long, sharp claws. A lizard should not be caught
object or (in small animals) a finger can be inserted in
the inguinal fossa cranial to the knee. In larger and
Iguanidae, Geckonidae, and Anolis spp. have a
stronger animals, this technique is not recommended
preformed fracture line in the tail vertebrae which
and sedation may be necessary.
enables them to release the tail in order to escape from
a predator.? Termed autotomy, this does not occur in
Snakes. Snakes can bite, strangle, defecate, urinate, and
Agamidae, Varanidae, or chameleons. Some lizards
produce a foul-smelling secretion from their cloacal
have very fragile skin, which can tear easily. Tiny
scent glands. Do not approach a snake from the front.
aul suixy Ausa Aq Aenuew pauisau aq ueo spie
peay aut puuaq isn! 1i Suidseis Aq paipueu s! axeus V
head between the thumb and index finger, holding the
and fixing the head between your thumb and
rest of the body in the palm.
295
Chapter 30:
REPTILES
chelonians are able to lift the head and look around.
Their locomotion is symmetrical and some species are
able to lift the body off the ground when they move. In
observed when the animal is at rest.
Terrapins can be observed well in an aquarium (Fig.
30.11). The position of the animal in the water
(normally straight)  is  of i
importance. Floating
abnormally may suggest respiratory disease, intestinal
disease, or a coelomic disorder. Take care that the
Fig. 30.10 Chameleon resting on a branch.
animal does not drown.
Snake. Much information can be gained by observing
aui puuaq isn! suidseis Aq paxy aie spuez!l asie7
the position of the snake in the cage. Behavior differs 
head with one hand, the other hand drawing the hind
among the species and what is normal for one species
limbs caudally parallel to the tail. Certain species such
can be very abnormal for another (Fig. 30.12). For
as the green iguana have a very strong, whip-like tail,
example, the ball python Python regius tends to roll up
which should be secured at all times. It is sometimes
into a ball. A healthy snake will carry its head and
helpful to place a towel over the animal and then
ai aodxa ot yapio ui ino pu u anun sh 
 grasp the head. The animal can also be wrapped in a
surroundings (see the DVD).
towel or captured with gloves. Sometimes sedation is
A healthy snake placed in dorsal recumbency shows a
necessary.
 normal righting reflex by turning the head first. A healthy
If metabolic bone disease is suspected, careful
snake held by the middle of its body with its head
handling is indicated because of the risk of fractures.
hanging down should be able to raise its head up level.
Animals with active ovarian follicles should also be
handled with great care to prevent rupture of the
follicles.
Chameleons are very docile and can be handled with
little restraint. They appear to be more relaxed if they
can grasp something, such as a branch (Fig. 30.10).
30.6 Physical examination
Physical  examination  of  reptiles
paaooud pou saop
according to organ systems but topographically, from
cranial to caudal.
30.6.1 General impression
Fig. 30.11 A normally floating red-eared slider (Trochemys elegons).
The general impression is formed by looking at and
listening to the patient from a slight distance. Look for
 abnormalities that stand out.
Levet of consciousness, behavior, posture, and
locomotion
Reptiles may be presented for examination in small
cages, or snakes and lizards may be in a sack. If
observation is not possible, the animal can be placed in
 a temporary observation cage.
Chelonians. Some chelonians will not move, while
others run around or swim. Terrapins are normally
more active than terrestrial species. The box turtle is
able to close its carapace, which prevents formation of
the general impression (Fig. 30.9). Most healthy
posture.
296
Physical examination
Lizard. Behavior, posture, and locomotion vary from
Most lizards shed their skin in several pieces.
species to species. Small lizards tend to hide and are
normally very active. Others, such as the chameleon,
Legs. Inspection is from proximal to distal. The skin of
healthy animals is free of lesions, hemorrhages,
can remain immoveable for a long time (Fig. 30.10).
swellings, parasites, or other abnormalities. 
Most
Several species, such as among the Iguanidae and
Varanidae, use the tongue as an organ of both taste
chelonians and lizards are able to bear their weight on
their legs (Fig. 30.14). Pathological fractures and
and smell. Some species use the tongue to impress or to
threat.
arthritis occur frequently in iguanas, resulting in
abnormal positioning of the leg, inability to bear
weight, or swollen joints.
30.6.2 Inspection from a distance
Most chelonians have short nails on their claws but
Look systematically for signs of illness, from cranial to
male terrapins have long nails on their front claws.
caudal. Inspection of the head starts with the eyes,
Tail. The shape and position of the tail varies among
nasal openings {nares), beak, external ear (if present),
species. Some lizards are able to discard the tail
and skin. The eyes are normally open. In terrapins
{autotomy).
In most cases the tail
leventually
hypovitaminosis A may cause swollen eyelids. The
regenerates,
 often with a different appearance. If
nares should be open and clean. If there is a discharge
autotomy is incomplete, two new tails can appear.
from one or both nasal openings, take note of its
Abscesses, fractures, or necrosis may also occur.
appearance. The beak is normally closed. In snakes
observe the flicking tongue. Aggressive animals open
their beaks to threaten, giving the clinician a view of
30.6.3 Examination of the restrained
the mouth. In chelonians and lizards the tympanic
animal
membrane is covered with skin.
 Before handling the animal, the examiner should make a
In chelonians with otitis media the
tympanic
plan based on the findings obtained from the history,
membrane is swollen. Snakes have no tympanic
membrane or middle ear but they have a slit-shaped
 general impression, and inspection from a distance. All
inner ear which enables them to hear low-frequency
equipment needed for further examination is placed
 sounds.? During inspection of the skin of the head and
within easy reach. Physical examination should be
thorough and systematic, from cranial to caudal.
neck，look 
for lesions, swellings, hemorrhages,
General
examination
includes  inspection
and
 parasites, abnormal shedding, and other abnormalities.
 palpation. Excreta or other material produced during
In chelonians all parts of the shell are examined with
the examination should be collected for further
regard to shape, scute quality, seams between the scutes,
shedding, color, ulceration or other lesions, exudate, and
examination.
other abnormalities. The dome of the shell is the
Head. Inspection of the head is undertaken in the same
carapace and the ventral part is the plastron. They are
manner as inspection at a distance. It is necessary to
joined by the bridge.
restrain the head in order to palpate it and collect
In snakes and lizards the skin is examined for the
material for further examination. The head
of
presence
of lesions,
hemorrhages,
discolorations,
chelonians is restrained by grasping from above or
swellings, parasites, and other abnormalities. Snakes
below with the thumb and forefinger, just behind the
shed the skin frequently, depending on the species,
jaws (Fig. 30.15). The head can be brought forward by
age,nutritional
condition,
reproduction,
illness,
constant gentle traction.
environmental influences such as temperature and
 If the animal has retracted its head, pushing the hind
humidity, and many other factors.
legs inside the shell may cause the head to reappear.
During shedding of the skin, the cells of the germinal
aul sumoe Aq paioxa aq ueo peau aui sawawos
layer multiply to form a new epidermal layer. This takes
animal to bite an object. Forceps can be of help but
5-7 days and the color of the skin becomes dull blue.
can also cause injury. Blunt forceps can be placed
The eyelids of the snake are fused to form a protective
behind the beak and then gentle traction can be
spectacle (eye cap or brille) over the cornea. These
applied. If all of these attempts fail, the animal should
spectacles are also shed and during shedding the
be
allowed to rest and attempts resumed later.
epithelium of the spectacles becomes cloudy for 3-4
Eventually the animal can be sedated.
days. An enzyme-containing lymph fluid accumulates
The head of snakes and lizards is fixed with
between the old and new skin layers. Just before
the thumb and forefinger just behind the jaws (see
shedding occurs, the spectacles and the skin become
the DVD).
clear. Then shedding occurs within 3-4 days (Fig.
Eyes. Chelonians have well-developed eyes and usually
regularly. A healthy snake sheds the skin in one piece.
a third eyelid. As described above, the eyelids of snakes
297
Chapter 30:
REPTILES
Fig. 30.13 A shedding snake. The eyelids of a snake are fused to form transparent spectacles (eye cap or brille). The spectacles are also shed.
Before shedding. the skin has a dull blue appearance and the spectacles become cloudy. After several days the skin and spectacles clear up and
then shedding occurs.
('third eye” or extraocular photoreceptor) located on
the dorsal midline of the head, beneath the skin. It
consists of a degenerate eye containing a lens and a
retina, and it connects with the pineal gland. It is
thought to play a role in thermoregulation and in
reproduction.
Nose. The nasal openings (nares) should be clean and
herbivores, such as iguanas, have nasal salt glands
which excrete salt when plasma osmolality is elevated
(see § 28.3.4). The animals may sneeze, producing a
clear fluid which dries to a white powder of salt
Fig. 30.14 A healthy iguana. able to lift its body and the first part of its
crystals. This should not be mistaken for a respiratory
tail off the ground.
infection.
are fused to form spectacles. Most lizards have eyelids
      
andanictitating membrane, except forsome
Malformations, sotening, and compressibility of the
Geckonidae and skinks {Ablepharus sp.). In some of
lower jaw may indicate nutritional secondary
these species the eyelids are fused, as in snakes. Further
hyperparathyroidism (NSHP) due to dietary and/or
inspection of the eye is similar to that in the dog and
husbandry mismanagement. Affected lizards may be
cat. However, as in birds, the reptilian iris contains
unable to close the beak (Figs 30.8 and 30.16). There
striated muscles and therefore the pupillary light reflex
are also other causes of beak abnormalities. The beak
is under the influence of the voluntary nervous system
is palpated to detect possible flexibility and other
{see also § 28.6.3). Several species have a parietal eye
a bnorma lities.
298
Physical examination
Fig. 30.15 Fixing the head of a terrapin. Left: the head is fixed from above by the thumb and forefinger. just behind the jaws. Right: the head is
retracted by constant gentle traction.
Fig. 30.16 Left: Young iguana with nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism (NSHP). The enormous swelling of the lower jaw is the result of
fbrous osteodystrophy. Right: head of a healthy iguana.
Some snake species (some of the Boidae, Viperidae,
and Crotalidae) possess specialized receptors (pits)
which are very sensitive to heat and infrared radiation.
This organ enables the snake to sense warm-blooded
prey, even in the dark, and to navigate. They can
detect a temperature variation of as little as 0.003°C.
In boas and pythons these slit-like openings are
located on the upper and/or lower labial scales (labial
pits). In vipers the pits are located between the nostril
       
inflammation, and other abnormalities in and around
the pits (Fig. 30.17).12
Fig. 30.17 Some snake species possess specialized organs (pits)
Motth. Some reptiles open the mouth spontaneously to
sensitive to heat and infrared radiation. In this snake (Corollus
threaten and this may allow the mouth to be inspected.
coninus) the slitlike openings of labial pits are located on the upper and
If it is necessary to keep the mouth open, a mouth
lower labial scales (arrow 1). Arrow 2 indicates the presence of a snake
    a   o 
mite (Ophionyssus sp.)
Sometimes the beak can be held open by placing a
thumb and forefinger in the angle of the jaw (Fig.
have a short, fleshy, pinkish tongue. The narrow
   o u     
openings of the eustachian tubes may be visible inside
chelonians. In docile animals the mouth can be kept 
the pharynx just caudal to the jaw. The glottis is visible
open with an index finger or with the tip of a blunt
d a 1o uosu au a o  a 1e
mosquito forceps laid across the lower jaw. Chelonians
reveals the choanae.
299
Chapter 30:
REPTILES
Fig. 30.18 The beak is opened by pressing with the thumb and forefinger and then a mouth speculum or spatula is inserted.
The mouth is inspected for color, moistness of the
may be short and fleshy {iguanas), mobile {leopard
mucous membranes and tongue, and for hemorrhage,
gecko)，
forked (Varanidae),
orprojectable
ulceration, inflammation, caseous lesions, diptheroid
(chameleons). In the iguana the end of the tongue and
membranes, signs of gout, discharge in the glotis or 
the glottis are pigmented. The tongue is used for taste,
choanae, foreign bodies, food, or other abnormalities.
olfaction, and feeding. The glottis is located at the base
Gentle digital pressure on the choanae may expel
 Of the tongue. Inflammation of the mucous membranes
material present in the choanae and nasal cavity
can cause malformation of the jaw. Jacobson's organ is
through the nares.
located in the roof of the mouth. The mouth is
Snakes have no mandibular symphysis and thus the
inspected
for color, moistness of the mucous
jaw bones can move apart and forward or backward.
membranes, hemorrhage, ulceration, necrosis, caseous
This enables snakes to swallow large prey. The head of
lesions,
foreign
bodies,
discharge,
and
other
the snake is restrained between the thumb and index
abnormalities. Gentle digital pressure on the choanae
finger, or between the thumb and middle finger with
may expel material from the choanae and nasal cavity
the index finger on top of the head. The absence of a
via the nares.
Aq pauado aq ot eaq aui smoe sisaudus renqiueu 
placing a metal or plastic spatula in this fossa and then
Ear canal. The ear opening or tympanic scales should be
turning it 90° until it is positioned in the angle of the
inspected  closely
      
jaw.
abnormalities. They can be palpated if necessary. Most
The number of teth varies among species. Most
lizards have a transparent tympanic membrane
snakes have six rows of teeth: one row on each lower
(Fig. 30.19).
jaw and two rows on each maxillary and palatine or
pterygoid bone of the upper jaw. The slender, forked
Neck. The neck of chelonians and lizards is inspected
tongue lies in a sheath beneath the glottis and rostral
and palpated for lesions, hemorrhages, swellings,
trachea. It functions in olfaction, taste, and touch.
parasites, and other abnormalities. Some gecko species 
Sense particles are collected on the tongue from
(Phelsuma spp.) store calcium in the endolymphatic
the environment. The fork is then inserted into the
sacs, which may be visible as white swellings on either
vomeronasal pits or Jacobson's organ located in the
side of the neck.
rostral part of the roof of the mouth. This highly
sensitive and specialized organ is important in
Shell. All parts of the shell are closely inspected with
localizing prey,
mating,
and
aggression.
The
regard to shape, scute quality, seams between the
information is transported via olfactory nerves to
scutes, shedding, color, ulceration, exudate, trauma,
the brain. Loss of the tongue may lead to anorexia.
inflammation, and growth abnormalities. With the
The vomeronasal organ is well developed in snakes and
exception of soft-shelled turtles (Trioryx spp-), most
most lizards. It is modified in chelonians and absent in
species have a firm, noncompressible shell. Percussion
adult crocodiles. 13-15
may provide some information.
Lizards open the mouth spontaneously or it can be
opened by pinching and lifting the nose. It may also be
Integument, legs, tail. The skin of the entire body of
opened by pulling on the fold of skin beneath the chin
snakes and lizards and that of the head and legs of
(dewlap). If necessary, a speculum can be placed in the
chelonians is examined from cranial to caudal and
mouth to keep it open. Take care not to break any
from dorsalto ventralf
for lesions, hemorrhage,
teeth. Sedation may be needed. The tongue of a lizard
discolorations, swellings, parasites, shedding, and other
300
Fecal analysis
Fig. 30.19 Left: The opening of the ear canal of the iguana is covered by a thin. transparent membrane. Right: In some lizard species (Gecko ourotus)
the opening is uncovered and clearly visible.
abnormalities. Following inspection, the head and body
Coelomic body cavity. A healthy reptile usually has a
 are palpated from cranial to caudal.
supple abdomen. To palpate the abdomen 
of
In snakes the musculature of the back may reflect the
chelonians
Sthe index fingers are placed in the
nutritional condition. Some snake species (e.g., some of
prefemoral fossa of both sides. Eggs, cystic calculi, or
the Boidae) have retained pelvic vestiges, also called
other masses may be palpated by moving the animal
spurs, On either side of the cloaca (Fig. 30.4). The
from side to side. Snakes are palpated on the ventral
spurs are used during courtship and mating and are
side between the ribs from cranial to caudal, starting
more pronounced in male snakes than in females.
just behind the head. The coelomic body cavity of
Some species possess cloacal scent glands for anal
lizards can be palpated gently from  ventral  or  from
glands). These glands produce a foul-smelling material
lateral, depending on the size of the animal.
Aw i "sd jadau on u At au y o
 Masses that may be encountered during palpation
be released during handling and should not be
include food, fecal material, fat bodies, retained eggs,
confused with inflammatory exudate.
fecoliths, enlarged organs (e.g., kidneys), or large
Many lizards, such as Iguanidae and Agamidae,
ovarian follicles.
have femoral pores on the ventral aspect of the thigh
(Fig. 30.5). Several gecko species also have precloacal
30.7 Fecal analysis
pores which lie in a V-shaped row anterior to the
Reptilian feces are normally mixed with urates. The
 u d   s s s
than in females.
feces should be at body temperature for microscopic
examination. They are collected with a lubricated glass
The muscles of the legs of chelonians and lizards and
probe inserted gently into the cloaca (Fig. 30.20).
those of the tail of lizards also may reflect the animal's
Defecation is stimulated by gently turning the probe.
nutritional  condition.  Following inspection of the
n in 'pauio si aun no sn auo sao
stance of the legs of chelonians and lizards, the animal
is inspected and palpated from proximal to distal for
material should also be examined microscopically.
abnormalities of the skin, toes, and nails, and to detect
any soft tissue swellings, fractures, or swollen joints.
The tail is inspected and palpated to evaluate its
position, shape, and length, and to detect any skin
abnormalities, wounds, or fractures.
Cloaca. The cloaca is examined with regard to its shape
and content, and for possible swelling, prolapse, an
egg, or other abnormalities. Prolapse of the penis
(chelonians) or the hemipenes (snakes and lizards)
and part of the cloaca can be either physiological
or pathological. Prolapse of the shell gland, colon,
or
bladder (chelonians 
and
most lizards)
1S
pathological. After the cloaca is inspected it can be
Fig. 30.20 Feces are collected from a snake by inserting a lubricated
palpated and, if the animal is large enough, it can be
glass probe into the cloaca. Defecation is stimulated by gently turning
explored digitally.
the probe.
301
Chapter 30:
REPTILES
If no feces are obtained, cloacal washing can be used.
Lukewarm saline (10 ml/kg body weight) is introduced
into the cloaca and then retrieved with a syringe. Some
reptiles defecate when placed in a warm, shallow bath.
A direct smear of the feces is examined for flagellates
and parasite ova and then fecal flotation is performed
to detect other parasites.
 After physical examination, every patient should be 
weighed accurately and its length also measured.
Recording of all information is of great importance.
30.8 Further examination
Possible additional diagnostic procedures for reptiles
include bacteriology, mycology, cytology, histology,
hematology, biochemistry, serology, diagnostic imaging
(radiology, CT, MRI), endoscopy, ultrasound, and
ECG. Reference values are available for some species,
but they are lacking for many. Results of laboratory
examinations depend upon the species and are
influenced by the environment, season, age, nutrition,
and hibernation. More detailed information is available
in recent textbooks.6.7
Fig. 30.21 Collection of blood from the right jugular vein of a terrapin
The neck is fully extended and the needle is inserted into the vein from
Blood collection
cranial to caudal
Lithium heparin is used as the anticoagulant for reptile
blood because EDTA can cause hemolysis. At several
possible sites of blood collection there is a risk of
contamination with lymph. The skin of the site of blood
collection should always be disinfected (see also § 25.2.4).
Chelonians. Blood can be collected from the right
jugular vein. This vein is very superficial, lying on the
right side of the neck in a line between the tympanic
membrane to the base of the neck. The neck is fully
extended and the needle is inserted into the vein from
cranial to caudal (Fig. 30.21). Pressure should be
applied over the site after withdrawing the needle, to
 prevent a hematoma.
Blood can also be collected from the dorsal coccygeal
 Fig. 30.22 Collecting blood from the subcarapacial venous sinus
vein, which lies quite superficially in the midline of the
in a terrapin.
tail. The disadvantage of this site is the risk of
unpredictable dilution of the sample with lymph. The
needle may enter a lymphatic, which lies just cranial to
needle is inserted in the midline as far cranially as
the venous plexus.
possible, at an angle of 45°. It is then moved slightly
cranially and caudally until blood is obtained. If a
An alternative but less favorable site for collecting blood
is the cephalic vein (Fig. 30.23). When the front leg is
vertebra is encountered, the needle is withdrawn and
extended, a tendon can be palpated on the caudal
reinserted at a different angle and/or a different site.
aspect of the antebrachiohumeral joint. The cephalic
The subcarapacial (subvertebral) venous sinus is a good
vein is between the joint and the tendon. The needle is
site for venipuncture, with the neck extended or flexed.
inserted in the proximal direction, caudal or ventral to
The sinus is in the dorsum of the neck, just under the
this tendon.
carapace and caudal to the nuchal scute (Fig. 30.22).
Another less favorable site is the femoral vein. It is
The needle is bent slightly and then inserted at a slight
located on the medial side of the femur and may be
upward angle in the caudal direction, with gentle 
[sp ul pauosod si lewun aui puy on ino
negative pressure until the sinus is encountered. The
recumbency and the hind limb is extended and pulled
302
References
Fig. 30.24 For blood collection from the heart. the snake is positioned in
Fig. 30.23 Collecting blood from the cephalic vein. The front leg is
dorsal recumbency. The heart is immobilized between the thumb and
extended and the needle is inserted at the level of the elbow in the
forefinger and the needle is inserted into the heart at an angle of 45°.
proximal direction. The head of the terrapin is on the right in this picture.
backwards. The needle is inserted proximal to the knee
in the proximal direction.
Snake. Depending on the size of the snake, blood can be
collected from the heart, the ventral tail vein, and the
palate-pterygoid veins. Cardiocentesis is a relatively
simple procedure with little risk. The heart is located
at approximately one-third the distance from the snout
to the tail. The snake can be sedated if its condition
allows. With the snake in dorsal recumbency, its heart
is immobilized between the thumb and forefinger. The
skin is disinfected and the needle is inserted at an angle
Fig. 30.25 Collecting blood from the ventral tail vein of an iguana.
of 45° in the craniodorsal direction into the ventricle.
Digital pressure is applied over the site for 30-60
seconds (Fig. 30.24).
For collection of blood from the ventral tail vein, the snake
Lizards. The best site for collecting blood in lizards is
is positioned in dorsal recumbency. The vein is located in
the ventral caudal tail vein. Large lizards can be
the midline caudal to the cloaca, which is approximately
positioned in dorsal or ventral recumbency. If
in
halfway to the tip of the tail. The needle is inserted in the
ventral recumbency, the tail is turned upwards.
midline at an angle of 4s° in the craniodorsal direction.
The needle is inserted in the ventral midline at a
Be aware of the hemipenes {up to 14-16 subcaudals
point between 1/5 and 4/5 of the distance to the tip of
downwards). Lymphatic contamination is possible.
the tail. The needle is inserted at an angle of 45-909
 The palate-pterygoid veins can be seen in large snakes
in the craniodorsal direction, with slight negative
when the mouth is opened. They are in the roof of the
pressure until blood appears in the syringe (Fig. 30.25).
mouth on each side of the tongue. Sedation is usually
necessary.
autotomy.
References
1 Obst FJ. Richter K. Jacob U. The completely illustrated atlas of
 5 Funk RS. Snakes. In: Mader DR. ed. Reptile medicine and surgery.
reptiles and amphibians for the terrarium. Neptune (NJ): TFH
Philadelphia: Saunders: 1996.
Publications: 1988.
6 Mader DR. Reptile medicine and surgery. St. Louis: Saunders
 2 Pritchard P. Encyclopedia of turtles. Neptune INJ): TFH Publications:
Elsevier: 2006.
1979.
7 McArthur S. Wilkinson R. Meyer J. Medicine and surgery of tortoises
 3 Peterson Field Guides. Reptiles and amphibians. Eastern/central
and turtles. Oxford: Blackwell: 2004
 North America. 2nd edn. Boston: Houghton Mifflin: 1975.
8 Barten SL. Lizards. In: Mader DR, ed. Reptile medicine and surgery.
 4 Jacobson ER ed. Biology. husbandry and medicine of the green
Philadelphia: Saunders: 1996.
iguana. Malabar (FL): Krieger: 2003.
303
Chapter 30:
REPTILES
9 Wever EG. The reptile ear. Princeton (NJ): Princeton University
14 Parsons TS. The nose and Jacobson's organ. In: Gans C. Parsons
Press: 1978:61-65.
TC. eds. Biology of reptilia. vol Il. New York: Academic Press:
10 Rossi JV. Dermatology. In: Mader DR. ed. Reptile medicine and 
1970:99-191.
surgery. Philadelphia: Saunders: 1996:105-106.
15 Rehorek SJ. Firth BT. Hutchinson MN. The structure of the
 11 Lawton MPC. Ophthalmology. In: Beynon PH. Lawton MPC. Cooper
 nasal chemosensory system in squamate reptiles. J Biosci 2000:
JE. eds. Manual of reptiles. Shurdington: British Small Animal
25:181-190.
Veterinary Association: 1992:157-169.
16 Hernandez-Divers SM. Hernandez-Divers SJ. Wyneken J.
12 Marcus LC. Veterinary biology and medicine of captive amphibians 
 Angiographic. anatomic and clinical technique descriptions of a
 and reptiles. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger: 1981:47.
 subcarapacial venipuncture site for chelonians. J Herpetolog Med
 13 Marcus LC. Veterinary biology and medicine of captive amphibians
Surg 2002: 122:32-37.
and reptiles. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger: 1981:42-45.
708
Appendix 1
Guidelines for housing of rats, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs,
rabbits, and ferrets as experimental animals
Source: Preliminary recommendation of the European Council ETS
123: GT 123(2000) 57.
Table App 1A Rats
body weight (g)
minimum floor surface (cm2)
minimum cage
floor surface per
height (cm)
animal (cm)
 in stock and during
=200
008
18
002
pracedures*
 201-300
008
18
250
301-400
008
18
350
401-600
008
18
450
>600
1500
18
600
 during breeding
008
18
fernale with litter
for each additional adult add 400 cm²
stock with breeder cage
50
1500
18
100
size 1500 cm2
 51-100
1500
18
125
101-150
1500
18
150
151-200
1500
18
175
 stock with breeder cage
100
2500
18
100
size 2500 cnn2
101-150
2500
18
125
151-200
2500
18
150
*In lifetimne studies social housing is required. lt may be dificult to anticipate animal density at the end of a study and hence the guidelines mmay be exceeded
in somme circumstances. In such situations maintenance of a stable social structure should be given high priority.
Table App 1B Gerbils
body weight
minimum floor surface
minimum cage
floor surface
(g)
(cm²)
height (cm)
per animal (cm²)
 in stack and during 
40
002
18
150
procedures
>40
1200
18
250
during breeding 
1200
18
monogamous pair or trio with young
Table App 1C Hamsters
body weight
minimum floor surface
minimum cage height
floor surface per animal
(g)
(cm²)
(cm)
(cm)
in stock and
60
008
14
200
procedures
>100 
008
14
250
 buipaanq buunp
008
14
 monogarnous pair or female with
young
stock with breeder*
1500
14
100
 *Far a shart period after weaning hamsters may be kept in this high density. provided there is suficient room and the cage is adequately enriched. There 
may be no evid ence of harm to health and/ar welfare.
305
Appendix 1
Table App 1D Guinea pigs
body weight (g)
minimum floor surface (cm²)
minimum cage
floor surface per
height (cm)
animal (cm²)
 in stock and during
200
1800
23
200
procedures
 201-300
1800
23
350
 301-450
1800
23
500
451-700
2500
23
700
002<
2500
23
006
 buipaanq buunp 
2500
23
pair with young
for each breeding sow 1000 cmn? extra
 Table App 1E Rabbits
Older than 10 weeks
maximal body weight in cage
minimum floor surface for 1-2 socially
minimum cage height
(kg)
harmonious animals (cm2)
(cm)
<3
3500
45
3-5
4200
45
>5
5400
60
doe with young
doe weight (kg)
minimum floor surface (cm2)
extra for nest boxes (cm?)
minimum height (cm)
<3
3500
1000
45
3-5
4200
1200
45
>5
5400
1400
60
Less than 10 weeks
age
minimum floor
maximal number of animals on
per animal extra
minimum
surface (cm²)
minimum surface
(cm²)
height (cm)
weaning to 7
4000
800
40
weeks
8-1 we eks 
4000
1200
40
Table App 1F Rabbit
 Seats (planks) for rabbits
age (weeks)
body weight maximat (kg)
Surface (cm × cm)
height above cage floor (cm)
<10
55×25
>10
<3
55×25
25
3-5
55×30
25
>5
60×35
30
306
Appendix 1
Table App 1G Ferret
4500 cmm
1500 cm² per aninal
 housing in groups >600 g
 3000 cm? per animal
adult hob
6000 cm² per animal
 jill with pups
5400 cn²
307
Appendix 2
Classification of reptiles (ref: Animal Diversity Web)
Class : Reptilia
Infraorder: Platynota
 Family: Helodermatidae (Gila monsters or beaded lizards)
Order: Testudines (chelonians) approx. 254 species
 Family: Lanthanotidae (earless monitors)
Family: Chelidae (snake-neck turtles)
 Family: Varanidae (monitors)
Family: Chelonidae (sea turtles)
Infraorder: Scincomorpha
Fammily: Cheydridae (snapping turtle)
Family: Cordylidae (girdle-tailed lizards)
Family: Carettochelyidae (New Guinea soft-shelled turtles)
Family: Gerrhosauridae (plated lizards)
Family: Dermatemydidae (Central American river turtles)
Family: Gymnophthalmidae (spectacled tegus)
Family: Dermochelyidae (leatherback turtles)
Family: Lacertidae (green lizards)
Fammily: Emydidae (freshwater turtles and box turtles)
Family: Scincidae (skinks)
Family: Kinosternidae (mud turtles)
 Family: Pelomedusidae (helmeted side-necks)
 Family: Teidae (teius lizards)
Family: Xantusidae (night lizards)
Fammily: Testudinidae (tortoises)
 Family: Trionychidae (soft-shell turtles)
Suborder: Amphisbaenia approx. 140 species
 Family: Amphisbaenidae (amphisbaenia)
Order: Crocodilia (crocodiles, caimans, alligators) approx.
Family: Bipedidae (two-legged worm lizards)
27 species
Family: Rhineuridae (Florida worm lizards)
Family: Trogonophidae (snake lizards)
Family: Crocodylidae (crocodiles and family)
Subfamily: Alligatoridae (alligators and caimans)
Suborder: Serpentes (snakes) approx. 2400 species
Subfamily: Crocodylinae (crocodiles)
Infraorder: Henophidia
Subfamily: Gavialinae (gavialis)
 Family: Anilidae (pipe snakes)
Family: Anomochilidae (dwarf pipe snakes)
Order: Squamata (lizards and snakes)
Family: Boidae (giant snakes)
Family: Uropelidae (shield-tailed snakes)
Suborder: Sauria (lizards) approx. 3900 species
Family: Xenopeltidae (sunbeam snakes)
Infraorder: Diploglossa
Infraorder: Typhlopoidea (blind worm snakes)
Family: Anguidae (slow worms and alligator lizards)
Family: Leptotyphlopidae (slender blind snakes) 78 species
Family: Anniellidae (American legless lizards)
Fammily: Typhlopidae (common blind worm snakes)
Family: Xenosauridae (knob-scale lizards)
180 species
Infraorder: Gekkota (geckos)
 Fammily: Anomalepidae (American blind snakes) 20 species
Family: Dibamidae (dibamids)
Infraorder: Xenophidia
Family: Gekkonidae (geckos)
Family: Acrochordidae (file snakes)
Family: Pygopodidae (scaley-foot lizards)
Family: Atractaspididae (burrowing vipers. mole vipers)
Infraorder: Iguania
Family: Colubridae (colubrids or typical snakes)
Family: Agamidae (agamas)
Fammily: Elapidae (cobras)
Family: Chamaeleonidae (chameleons)
Family: Hydrophidae (sea snakes)
Family: Corytophanidae (helmeted iguanas or basiliscus)
Family: Viperidae (true vipers)
Family: Crotaphytidae (collared lizards)
Subfamily: Crotalidae (pit vipers)
Family: Hoplocercidae (prickle-tail iguanas)
Family: Iguanidae (iguanas)
 Family: Opluridae (Madagascan swifts)
Order: Rhynchocephalia (tuataras) 1 species
Family: Phrynosomatidae (horned lizards)
 Family: Polychrotidae (anolisamilie: Tropiduridae (lava
 Family: Sphenodontidae (tuataras)
lizards)
308
Appendix 2
Appendix 2.1 Some data on the most commonly kept tortoises
Testudo hermanni
Testudo graeca
Chelonoidis carbonaria
Geochelone pardalis
Taxananny
Testu dinidae
Testu dinidae
Testudinidae
Testu dinidae
(family)
southern Europe
southern Spain to northern
South America
central and southern Africa.
Africa. Balkans
southern Asia
Biotope
moderate climate
moderate clinmate
 tro pical forest
dry area
Nutrition
herbivare/ornnivare
herbivore/omnivore
 onnnivore
herbivore/omnivare
 Spe cial
nail on tip of tail carapax
spurs on thighs carapax up
Annerican giant tortaise has
carapax up to 70 cm
characteristics
up to 20 crm
to 20 cnm
 carapax up to 50 cn
Related
7. grceco
7. hen7onnr
C. cfentrcoloto
G. sutcoto
spe cies
T. murginate
7. morgrnoto
C. elephuntopus
G. elegons
7. horsfieldfr
pay5o4 1
T. kiernmonnr
7. klernmo7n
Appendix 2.2 Some data on the most commonly kept terrapins
Chrysemys scripta
Trionyx
Terrapene
Chelydra serpentina
elegans
carolina
Taxonanny
 ae pipAua
Trionychidae
aepipau
(farnily)
Origin
 Narth and South Arnerica
Narth Ammerica. Africa, Asia.
Narth America
 Canada to South America
Indonesia. Australia
Biatape
marsh. rivers
 marsh. rivers. ponds
open waods clase to
hides in soft graund. active in twilight
water
 and night
Nutritian
omnivore
carnivare
 carnivare/armnivare
 Carnivore (fe eds on invertebrates and
reptiles)
 Spe cial
red spot on cheek. likes 
proboscidal nose.
can close shield
 Smmall abdomminal shield. long neck.
characteristics
basking in sun
compressible shield
campletely
large head, strong mouth 
carapax 2040 cn 
carapax up to 90 cm
carapax up to 18 cn
 carapax up to 70 cn
 Related 
C. fecoroto
T. cortilogineus
7. ommoto
Mocrociemnys tennmncki
salpads
C. concinn
xoJay 1
7. cochurte
C. prcto picto
T. trungurs
T. netsonf
Appendix 2.3 Some data on the most commonly kept snakes
Boa constrictor
Python molurus
Elaphe guttata
Thamnophis sirtalis
sirtalis
Taxonanny
Baidae
Boidae
 Colubridae
 Colubrid ae
[farnily)
 southern Central 
Africa, southeast Asia.
 southeastern Central America
northern Central America
Anerica
Australia
Biatope
dry area, woods
waods. swamp
wet fields. wo ods 
all habitats
Re production
viviparous
oviparous
oviparaus
viviparous
Nutritian 
prey
 mammals. birds
 smmall mammals
fish
 Spe cial
constrictar. 2.54 m 
 constrictor. up to 8 m
 popular terrarium snake, constrictor.
 30-60 cmn
characteristics
 60 cmn to 2 m
Related species
Bou constnctor
P. regius
E. obsolete
7. srtotrs tetrotcenrc
occrcfentolis
P. retictorns
E. schrenkt
T. elegons elegons
T. sirtotis concinnus
606
Appendix 2
Appendix 2.4 Some data on snakes occurring in northwestern Europe
Natrix natrix
Coronella austriaca
Vipera berus
Taxanamy
 Colubridae
Calubridae 
Viperidae
(family)
Origin
 Europe. northwest Africa Asia
Europe. narthwest Africa.
Europe. western Asia
 western Asia
Biatope
moist, sunny spats close to water
heath. grassy plains
hedgeraws. undergrowth. heath
Reproductian
oviparous
viviparous
viviparaus
Nutritian
frogs. fish
lizards. smmall mammals. birds.
small mmammals
 Special
 Can appear to be dead, fair spot behind head
 grayish-red snake 70 cn
zigzag stripe on back. vertical pupil
 characteristics
80-150 cn
50-80 cnn
 Related species
N. notnx helvetico
C. girondfico (oviparous)
V. kaznakov
N. tesseloto
V. ursinl 
Appendix 2.5 Some data on the most commonly kept lizards
lguana iguana
Agama
Gekko gecko
Skink
Taxonamy
 aepuen6i 
aepiwe5
Gekkonidae
Scincidae
(family)
Origin
central Mexico. South America
Africa (Agumg. Uronnestyx).
southeast Asia.
southeast Asia.
southwest-central Asia 
Indonesia.
Australia. Africa
Australia. Karea.
Australia (Amphrboiorus. etc.)
Japan
Biatope
 rain forest. close to water
tro pical rain forest, mountains.
 in trees. tropical
 tropical areas. ground.
steppe, desert
rain forest to 
 somnetimnes digs
 savanna. steppe.
close ta water
 Reproduction
oviparous
oviparous
most oviparous.
ovaviviparous. some
but ovoviviparous
viviparous. some
 in New Zealand
 oviparous with very
 short incubation period
Nutritian
 onnnivorous/herbivorous
insects
insects, small
insects. samne eat plants
vertebrates. same
plants
Related
. dfelicotissin7G
Droco. Hydrosouru and
G. joponicus
Subfamily:
sapads
 sauo Kue
G. smrarogcfinus
G. monorchus
 Scincinae
G. vittuotus
Lygosonnina
 Special
long tail. good swirnmers. enjoy basking 
can change colors. fleshy
vertical-slit pupil.
cylindrical body. shart
dharacteristics
 in sun, femaral pores. spines. throat or
tongue. spines. throat or skin 
 setae on feet.
rudimentary feet. short 
 skin flaps and other decorations. up to 
flaps and other decorations.
 preanal pores.
neck 10-65 cm
2 meters
up to 40 cm
5-35 cnn
310
Appendix 3
Basic husbandry requirements for reptiles (l)
Terrarium
Lacation
Preferably a quiet place, nat by a sunny window.
Cage size
 Snakes: terrariun diagonal at least equal to the length of the snake and for each aditional snake increase
the diagonal by one-half the width.
Lizards: terrarium length 15-2x the length of the animal. width 1xthe length of the animal. and for each
additional aninmal increase the length and width by 30 %.
Tortoises: terrarium length and width 4x the length of the carapace. and for each additional aninnal increase
the length and width by 1× the length af the carapace.
 Terrapins: terrariunn length and width 6× the length of the carapace and for each additional aninnal increase
the length and width by 1.5x the length of the carapace.
Note: for aninnals that live in trees the height of the terrarium should be at least equal ta its length.
Heating
Heating lamnp or pads. basking area, with a temnperature gradient in the terrarium. and no possibility of contact
between the animal and the lamnp.
Hausing
 Simnple. with non-slip and easily cleaned floor. somme branches or stones. and at least one hiding place.
The terrariumn should be closed with an opening in the top for ventilation. For tortoises fron subtropical and
ternperate areas the top can be open.
 Far sorne species it is preferable to have one animal per terrarium, but tortaises can get alang well in graups.
Temperature of the terrarium
 Equ atorial
28-33C in daytime. 25-29C at night (A)
Tropical
24-30°C in daytinne. 20-25°C at night (B)
Subtropical
summner: 20-27°C in daytime. 15-21°C at night
winter: 10-16°C in daytime. 5-12C at night (C)
 Ternperate
summer: 16-23C in daytime. 10-16°C at night 
winter: 4-9C in daytime. 2-5C at night.
These animmals hibernate. (D)
Desert
30-40°C in daytime. 8-12°C at night (E)
Humidity
Dry
relative humnidity 20-40% (F)
Narmal
relative hurnidity 40-70% (G)
 PWnH
relative humidity 70-100% (H)
 Photoperiod
The narrnal variation of the photoperiod in northwestern Europe is nat a prablern far reptiles.
Nutrition
Nutrition differs according to species. age. and size of the animal (Appendix 4).
Key: mamnmals (I). birds (J). reptiles (K). annphibians (L). fish (M). crustaceans (N). insects (O), snails (P). spiders
(Q). fruits (R). vegetables (S). flowers (T). boiled eggs (U). dog food or pellets (V).
 Nate: to prevent nutritional deficiencies mmany herbivores and insectivores are fed smmall ammounts of
 comnmercial pellets or vitarnin/nnineral supplemments.
311
Appendix 4
Basic husbandry requirements for reptiles (ll)
temp.
humid.
food
Snakes
Boa
Bou constrctor sp.
A.B
F.G
Pythan
Python, Moretie Lusis spp.
A.B
F.G
Tree pythan
Chonfropython sp.
A
H
I,J
 Other boas
A.B
F.G
I,J
Rat snake
Etaphe sp.
C.D
G
IJ,U
Anaconda
Eunectes sp.
A.B
H
IJ,K
Cabra
Neyo. Cphrophagus spp.
B.C
G
IJ,K
Egg-eating snake
Dusypeltis scobru
B.C
G
1,U
Garter snake
Thumnophis sp.
D
G
1,K,L,M
Ring snake
Natrx, Nerodic spp.
D
G
L.M
King snake
Lompropeitis sp.
C.D
G
IJ,K
Japp
Vipero. Cerustes. Bothrops spp.
C.D
G
IJ,K
Lizards
Aguo sp.
A.B
G.H
1.0
Anale
Anotis sp.
B
G.H
。
Basilisk
Busrliscus sp.
B
H
1.0
 Chameleon 
Brooksic, Chamceleo spp.
A-C
G.H
0.1
Gecka
 several species 
A,B,C,D
G.H
1,0,KJ
Day gecko
Phelsume sp.
B
G.H
0.R
Iguana *
fguano guan0
B
G
IJ,O,P,R,S,T,V
Manitar*
Varanus sp.
A,B,C
G.H
IJ.K,L,M,N,O,P,Q,U,V
Scncus. Chotcrcfes spp.
B
G
IJ,0.P,Q,S,T,U,V
Tortoises
 European tortoise
Testudo hernmnannt. Testudo grceco
C.D
G
R.S,T.V
 Radiated tortoise
Asterochelys
B
G
R.S,T,V
American giant tortoise
Chetonorcfes corbonono
B
G.H
R,S,T,V
Bax turtle
Terrupene sp.
B.C
H
M,0.P,R.S,T.V
Terrapins
Painted turtle
Chrysemys scnpto elegons
A.B
H
L.M,N,O.P.U.V,S
Map turtle 
Gruptemys sp.
B.C
H
L.M,N,O.P.U.V,S
Crocodiles
Mississippi alig ator
Aligotor mrssisspprensis
B
ZJ.K.L.M.V
Caiman
Ccaiman sp.
A.B
H
Z,J.K.,L.M.V
Cracodile
Crocodylus sp.
A.B
H
Z,J.K.L.M.V
Gavial
Gavolis gungeticus
A.B
H
M.V.J.L
*The nutrition of iguanas and varanes varies considerably with age. In general. young animals at more insects than do adults
 Source: Chris van Kalken.
312
Index
1
Aggression (Continued)
against children. 215. 217
A priori probability. 13
dogs. 214-215
ABCDE protocol. 222. 223-226
fear-induced. 215
Abdomen
feeding bowl. 218
auscultation. 21-22. 97
killer type. 215. 218
enlargement, 94. 96. 97.109
against other cats. 219
inspection. 94. 105. 112
against other dogs. 215. 218
lymph nodes. 96
owner's role. 215. 218
palpation. 95-96. 105. 112
 pain-induced. 215
 percussion. 19-20. 96
against persons. 215. 219
 Abdominal examination 
territorial. 215. 216. 219
birds. 268
tests. 217-218
digestive tract. 94-97
Air sac system
endocrine disorders. 210-211
cervicocephalic. 252. 253
female reproductive tract. 11-112
pulmonary. 253. 254
kidneys/urinary tract. 104-106
Airways
reptiles. 301
obstruction. 223
 small mammals. 282. 286
primary survey. 223
Abdominal pain. 88
upper. 65-66
Abdominocentesis. 242
Alertness. 163
Abduction,137
Algorithms. 14. 15-16
Accessory sex glands. 120
All-meat syndrome. 249
Accuracy. 9
Allergic dermatitis. 125. 128
Acetonemia. 279. 283-284
Alone. problems being left. 216 
Achilles tendon. 143. 148
Alopecia. 126. 209. 210
Acoustic impedance. 21. 70
American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) risk categories. 244
Acoustic stimuli. sensitivity to/recovery from. 218
Anal glands. 97. 301
Acromegaly. 210. 211
Anal/perineal reflex. 172
Acromion. 140-141. 148
Anal sacs. 97. 98. 99. 281
Acute conditions. 221
 apocrine gland tumor. 210
see also Emergencies
Androgens. 124. 125
Adams-Stokes seizures. 76
Anemia. 101
Adduction. 137
 Anesthesia. 243
Adrenocortical disorders. 208-209
risk categories. 244
Advanced life support. 222
 small mammals. 281
Agoma spp. 310. 312
 see oiso Local anesthetic: Preanesthetic examination
Age estimation
Anestrus. 110. 111. 114
birds. 248. 262
Angle. anterior chamber. 191
cats and dogs. 91-93
Aniridia. 193
reptiles. 291
 Anisocoria. 167. 192
Aggression
Anorexia.88
cats. 219
 Anosmia. 169
313
INDEX
Anseriformes. 260. 268
Bacteriuria. 103
Antebrachiocarpal joint. 141. 145. 158
Bald breast. 264-265
Anterior chamber. 191
Barking. 48
 Anterior synechiae. 191 
Barlow sign. 152
Anticlinal vertebra. 154
Basic life support. 222
 Anuria. 101
Bayes theorem. 12
Anus. 97-99
Beak
Anxiety
birds. 258. 263
cats. 219
opening. 263-264. 300
dogs. 215-216
reptiles. 298-299
separation. 216
Beer's law. 21
testing. 217-218
Behavior. 213-220
Aortic stenosis. 82
birds. 252
Aortic valve. 83. 84
emergencies. 222-223
Apathy. 208
endocrine disorders. 208
Apex beat see lctus cordis
 estrus cycle. 110
Aphasia. scientific. 14
examination. 216-218
Apneic respiration. 226
 general impression, 44
Apocrine sweat glands. 124
in litter/early life. 216
Appearance. changed. endocrine disorders. 208
neurologic disorders. 162-163
Appetite. endocrine disorders. 208
reptiles. 296-297
Arrhythmias
visual impairment. 176-177
 auscultation of heart. 83
Behavioral problems. 213-220
pulse characteristics. 51. 52
cats. 218-220
respiratory (sinus). 52. 83
dogs. 214-218
Arterial blood pressure measurement. 25-26. 76-77
 vs abnormal behavior. 162
Arterial system. 76-77
Behavioral tests. 217-218
Arteries. palpation. 53
Bell ring. response to. 216
Arthrocentesis. 156-159
Biceps tendon. 147-148
Ascites. 79. 96
Biliverdin. 251
kidney/urinary tract disease. 102. 105
Biopsy
specimen collection. 242
fne-needle aspiration (FNAB). 240. 241
undulation test. 79. 80. 97
testicular. 121
Aspiration pneumonia. 86
Bird cage
Asteroid hyalosis. 197
examination. 249-251
Atactic respiration. 226
instructions for owner. 270-271
Ataxia. 162. 164
Birds. 247-271
 intention. 164
examination of restrained. 260-270
Atony. 166
gender determination. 248-249. 268
Atopic (allergic) dermatitis. 125. 128
handling. 257-260
Atoxoplasma. 268
history taking. 248-249
 Atropine. 179. 196
inspection from distance. 251-257
Attentiveness. 163
instructions for owner. 270-271
Auenbrugger. Leopold. 19
 symptoms in contact persons. 249
Auscultation. 17. 20-22
third eyelid. 185. 262
abdomen. 21-22. 97
Birth weight. 285
arterial blood pressure measurement. 25
Bites
instruments. 23-24
ferret. 277
small mammals. 280
injuries to birds. 250
thorax. 21-22. 69-71. 81-84
Bladder. 102-103
Autotomy. 295. 297
hemorrhage. 103-104
Aviary. examination. 249-251
neural control. 102-103
Aviary birds. handling. 259-260
palpation. 105. 282
 Axillary area. 148
Blepharospasm. 176. 179. 180. 183. 186
Axillary lymph nodes. 59. 60. 61. 133
Blindness. symptoms. 176-177
Blinking. frequent 176
B
Blood
samples. 235
e8
walls of bird cage. 251
 passive movements. 155-156. 166
Blood collection. 235-236
see aiso Vertebral column
equipment. 233-234
314
Index
Blood collection (Continued)
Cages (Continued)
reptiles. 302-303
bird see Bird cage
skin disinfection. 235
small mammals. 279. 305-307
 small mammals. 273. 274. 275. 276. 277
 see aiso Housing
Blood feathers. 257
Calcium deficiency. 249. 294
Blood pressure measurement. 25-26. 76-77
Calculus dentium. 92. 93
Blue filters. 178
Componulotes bidentotus compor. 267
Blue fur disease'. 281
Canaries
Blue muscle'. 268
gender determination. 268
Boas. 299. 309. 312
legs. 266
Body shape. 45
plumage. 257
Body weight
thoracoabdominal cavity. 268
loss. 208
tracheal mites. 254. 265
measurement. 45
'Canker'. 264
small mammals. 278
Cannibalism. 287
Bones. 140
Capillary refill time. 56. 57
Borborygmi. 71. 97
 Capillary system. 77
Botulism. 252
Cardiac insufficiency (heart failure)
 Brachycephalic dogs. 89
physical examination. 77. 78-79
nasal stridor. 64. 66
symptoms. 75-76
nose shape. 65
Cardiocentesis. 303
 ophthalmic examination. 178. 180. 186
Carotenoids. 257
restraint or sedation. 231
Carpal joints
Brachygnathia. 89
arthrocentesis. 157. 158
Bradycardia. 82
examination. 141. 145-146
 Bradypnea. 50
Carpometacarpal joints. 141. 146. 158
 Brain stem evoked response audiometry (BERA). 205
Carpus. 141. 145-146
Brain stem lesions. 224. 225-226
Cassowary. 258
Breath odor. 66. 91. 104
Castration. 211
 Breathing. primary survey. 223-224
Cataract. 195. 196. 209
Brille. 297. 298
Cats (specific mentions only). 4
 Bristles. avian. 255
abdominal examination. 95. 96
Bronchi. 69
behavior problems. 218-220
examination. 69-73
blindness. 177
narrowing. 71
 blood pressure measurement. 76-77
 respiratory sounds. 20-21. 70
blood sampling. 235. 236. 237
Brood patch. 267
body temperature. 54
Bruce effect. 287
ears. 204. 205
 Buccopharyngeal fluttering. 269
emergencies. 223
Budgerigars
endocrine disorders. 209. 211-212
dyspnea. 253
female reproductive tract. 109. 111. 112. 113
 gender determination. 248
foot pads. 123. 124. 125
handling. 259
 general examination, 48
head. 263
 general impression. 45
legs. 266
haircoat. 54. 55. 124-125
neck. 265
heart. 81. 82. 83-84
trunk. 267. 268
locomotor system. 138. 140
unilateral paresis/paralysis. 252
lymph nodes. 58. 60
Bulbocavernosus reflex. 99
 male reproductive tract. 118. 119. 120
 Bulbourethral glands. 120
mammary glands. 133. 134
Bulbus oculi see Globe
mouth.88.89.91.93
Bumblefoot. 250. 266
mucous membranes. 57. 58
Buphthalmos. 177. 187
needles. 233
nervous system. 162. 170. 171
C
nictitating membrane. 185
nose and frontal sinuses. 65. 66
Cachexia. 45
 ophthalmic examination. 178. 184. 191. 196. 198. 199
spu19 pabey
pleural fluid. 79
 examination of restrained. 261
positions. 227. 229
handling. 259-260
pulse. 52-53
Cages
 purring. 71. 84
315
INDEX
Cats (specific mentions only) (Continued)
Ciconiformes. 258
rectal examination. 99
Cingulum. 113
respiratory movements. 49. 50
Circulation
respiratory system. 64. 71. 73
primary survey. 224
restraint. 229. 230
 sounds generated. 20
Schirmer tear test. 181-182
Circulatory system. 75-85
skin. 55. 56. 126
Circumanal area. 97-98. 99
urinary catheters. 233. 234
CITES regulations. 291
urinary tract/kidneys. 103. 105. 106
Clasp-knife phenomenon. 166
urine collection. 238-239
Clavicula. 265
Caudal cruciate ligament. 148. 149. 150 
Claws
Causal approach. 13
birds. 258
Cavig porcellus see Guinea pig
 mammals see Nails
Cecotrophia. 283
Clients see Owners
Central venous pressure (CVP). 77
Clinimetrics. 9
measurement. 78
Clitoral fossa. 113
 signs of increased. 78-79
Cloaca. 268. 301
Cephalic vein. 235-236
scent glands. 301
reptiles. 302. 303
spurs. 291. 301
Cere. 263
temperature. 269
 Cerebral function. in emergencies. 224-225
Clonus. postreflex. 172
Cerebral reflexes. 168
Cloth band. restraint using. 91. 230-231
Certification. health. 245-246
Cnemidocoptes pilae. 262. 263
Cerumen. 203
Coat (haircoat). 54-55. 124-125
Cervical vertebrae. 154. 265
endocrine disorders. 209. 210
 Cernvicocephalic air sac system. 252. 253
 examination. 55. 126
Cervix. uterine.113-114
 general impression, 45
Chain of survival. 221-222
small mammals. 281
Chameleon. 290. 291. 296. 312
Coccygeal muscle. 97. 98. 99-100
Charriére (Ch) scale. 233
Coccygeal vertebrae. 154
Cheek pouches. 283
Cockato0s. 248. 258. 263
Chelonia. 289. 290. 308
Coelomic body cavity. 301
blood collection. 302-303
Collarettes. 128. 129
feeding. 293-294
Colobomas. 193
 general impression. 296
Colon. palpation. 96
handling and restraint. 295
Colonic lymph nodes. 96 
head examination. 297. 299-300
Columbicola columboe. 266
inspection. 297
Coma. 44. 163. 224
neck. 300
Comedones. 129. 130
shell. 297. 300
Complaints. 8
signalment. 291
Computerized medical records. 31. 32. 33
Chest see Thorax
Concepts. important. 8-13
Chewing. hair. 279
Confidence limits. 11
Chewing musculature. 88. 90. 167. 179
Confrontation tests. 218
Cheyletiellosis. 129
Congenital abnormalities. 245
 Cheyne-Stokes respiration. 226
Conjunctiva. 184-186
Chickens. 251. 257
ectopic cilia. 183. 185
head. 262
examination. 185
legs and feet. 267
palpebral. 184
thermoneutral zone. 270
scleral. 184. 186
Children. aggression towards. 215. 217
 Conjunctival mucosa. 56. 57
Chinchilla. 278
Consciousness. level of. 44. 163
digestive tract. 282. 283
birds. 252
 handling and techniques. 273. 275
emergencies. 222. 224-225
reproduction. 285. 286-287
reptiles. 296-297
urine. 284
Constipation.96. 99
Chlamydiosis. 249. 258
Consultations. approach to. 40-41
 Chlorination. drinking water. 279
 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
Choroid. 197-198
(CITES). 291
Chromodacryorrhea. 282. 288
Coordination. motor. 164
Chromosome analysis. birds. 248-249
Coprophagia. 283
316
Index
Copulation plug. 286. 287
Descemet's membrane. 188. 189. 190
Copulatory lock. 119
Detrusor. 102-103
Coracoid. 265
Detrusor incontinence. 104
Cornea. 188-191
Dewlap. 281
curvature (sphericality). 188
Diabetes mellitus. 209
defects. 190-191
 Diabetic neuropathy. 209
 diagnostic staining. 189-191
Diagnosis. medical records. 29. 35
edema.188. 189
Diagnostic materials. 22-26
reflectivity. 181. 188
Diagnostic plans. 35. 36
 scrapings. 190
 Diagnostic probability. 10. 11
sensitivity. 189
Diagnostic process. 13-16
transparency.189
 Diaphragmatic hernia. 73
Corneal reflex. 189
Diarrhea. 87. 99
Correction (postural) reactions. 169-171
Diascopy. 130
Corticosteroids. 126
Cortisol. 124. 125
birds. 249
Costs. medical record systems. 31-32
reptiles. 293-295. 311-312
Cotton swabs. 182
 Small mammals. 279
Cough. 64
 see oiso Feeding: Nutrition
 bronchial. 64
 Differential diagnosis. 36
circulatory disorders. 76
Digestive tract
laryngeal. 64
cats and dogs. 86-100
tracheal. 64
 small mammals. 282-283
Cough reflex. 168
 Dirofilariasis. 102
Cranial cruciate ligament. 148. 149-150
Disability. primary survey. 224-226
Cremor dentium. 92
Disinfection. skin. 235
Crepitation. 144
Distichiasis. 183
Crocodiles. 308. 312
Documentation see Medical records
Crocodylia. 289. 308
Dogs (specific mentions only). 4
Crop. 265
abdominal examination. 95. 96. 97
Crop milk. 265
aggression towards other. 215
Cross beak. 263
 anus/circumanal area. 97-99
Crossed extensor reflex. 172
anxiety towards other. 215-216
Cruciate ligaments. 148. 149-150
ascites. 79
Crusts. 129. 130
behavioral problems. 214-218
Cryptorchidism. 119. 211 
blindness. 177
Culture tubes. 178
 blood pressure measurement. 77
Curettes. 23. 130
blood sampling. 235. 236. 237
Cyanosis. 77
body temperature. 54
Cystocentesis. 239. 240. 274. 277
 central venous pressure. 78
Cytobrush. 23. 178
confrontation with other. 218
Cytology specimens. 240
ears. 203. 204
endocrine disorders. 208. 209
D
eye surroundings. 180
female reproductive tract. 109-114
 Darkness. examination in. 177. 258
foot pads. 123. 124. 125
Daylight length (photoperiod)
 general examination, 48
birds. 250
 general impression. 45-46
reptiles. 293. 311
haircoat. 54-55. 124-125
 small mammals. 280
heart. 81. 82. 83. 84
Deafness. 169. 202
larynx and trachea. 67
 Decerebrate hypertonia. 225-226
locomotor system. 137-156
Deductive reasoning. 1-2
lymph nodes. 58-62
 Defecation
male re productive tract. 117. 118. 119-120. 121
feces collection. 239
 mammary glands. 133.134
inappropriate. 219
mouth. 88. 89. 90. 91.93
Dehydration. 88
mucous membranes. 57. 58
Dental calculus. 92. 93
needles. 233
Dental formulae. 88. 282
neurological examination. 164. 166. 169-170. 171. 173
Dermanyssus gainoe. 250
 nictitating membrane. 185
Dermatitis. atopic (allergic). 125. 128
nose and frontal sinuses. 65. 66. 67. 68
Dermis. 55. 125
ophthalmic examination. 177-178. 187. 194. 198. 199
317
INDEX
Dogs (specific mentions only) (Continued)
Eating (Continued)
positioning. 227-229
 problems. 161
pulse. 52-53
Eccrine sweat glands. 124
respiratory system, 49. 50. 64
Ectoparasites. 266
restraint. 229. 230-231
Ectropion. 183. 184
Schirmer tear test. 181-182
Edema. 56
skin. 55. 56. 126
circulatory disease. 76. 78. 79
thorax. 68. 69. 70. 71. 73
kidney disease. 102
urinary catheters. 233
Egg laying. 268
 urinary tract/kidneys. 103. 104. 105. 106. 107
Egg tooth. 263
urine collection. 238-239. 240
 Ejaculation techniques. 121
Dolichocephalic dogs. 89
Elbow joint
 Doll test. 217
arthrocentesis. 157-158
 Dominance. 215
birds. 266
tests. 217
examination. 141. 146
 Door bell. response to. 216
Electrocardiography. 222
 Doppler effect. 25-26
Electroejaculation. 121
 Doppler system. blood pressure measurement 26. 76-77
Emergencies. 6. 221-226
Dorsal coccygeal vein. 302
 primary survey. 222-226
Down. 255
secondary survey. 226
bird cage floor. 251
Emphysema. subcutaneous. 223
molting. 256
Endangered species. trade in. 291
292 .P10.
Endocrine disorders. 208-209
 Drawer movement
Endocrine glands. 207-212
carpus. 146
Endometritis. 108
stifle. 149-150
Endorotation. 137
Ducks
Endotorsion. 137
 gender determination. 268
Endurance. reduced. 208
handing. 260
Enophthalmos. 177. 179. 186
neck paralysis. 252
Enteritis. 88
plumage. 255-256. 267
Entropion, 180. 183. 184
Dyscoria. 192
test. 183-184
 Dyskinesias. 165
Environment. primary survey. 226
 Dysmetria. 164
Epidermis. 123-124
Dysphagia. 86. 161
 adnexa. 124-125
Dysphonia. 161
Epididymis. 119
Dyspnea. 49. 64-65
Epigastrium. 94. 95
birds. 253
Epiphora. 176. 180
cardiac. 75-76
Erection. penile. 119-120
emergencies. 223
Errors. measurement. 9
of exertion. 49. 65. 75-76
Escape mechanism. 272-273
expiratory. 50
Esophagus. 94. 265. 283
 inspiratory. 50
Estradiol. plasma. 109. 114
 Dysuria. 102. 104. 105
Estrogens
birds. 257
E
cats and dogs. 110. 124. 125. 211
Estrus
Eagle. bald. 258
cats and dogs. 109. 110. 11.114
Ear(s). 202-206
small mammals. 285. 287
birds. 261
Estrus cycle. 109-110
examination. 203-205
mammary glands. 133
external. 203-205
small mammals. 284. 285. 287
flushing. 204
vaginal smears. 11 112
middle. 205
vaginoscopy. 114.115
movements. 203
EUROPETNET. 28
position. 166. 202
 Evidence-based medicine. 6-7. 16
problems. 202-203
Examination room. birds. 258
reptiles. 300
Examination table. 45. 229
small mammals. 281. 288
Excitement behavior. 216
Ear canal. 203-204
Exercise
Ear thermometer. 25
dyspnea during. 49. 65. 75-76
Eating. 88
 problem behaviour and. 216
318
Index
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. 88
Feathers (Continued)
Exophthalmos. 177. 179. 186
contour. 254-255
Exorotation.137
examination. 266. 267
Exotorsion. 137
hair-like (filoplumes). 255. 256
Expiration. 49. 50. 70
hormonal control. 257
Expired air. 66
molting. 255-257
Extensor carpi radialis muscle reflex. 171. 172
parasites. 266
Extremities see Limbs
waterproofing. 255
Eye(s). 167. 175-200
 see aiso Down: Plumage
birds. 261-262
 Fecal incontinence. 99
 examination see Ophthalmic examination
Feces
globe see Globe
bird cage/aviary. 249. 250-251
mobility. 167
birds. 251
parietal (third). 298
blood in. 87. 88. 99. 251
position. 167
palpation. 96. 99
problems. 176-177
reptiles. 301-302
reptiles. 297-298
sample collection. 239-240. 301-302
size and shape. 177
 small mammals. 282
small mammals. 288
Feeding
surroundings. 179-180
birds. 249
Eye cap. 297. 298
bowl aggression. 218
Eye contact. 41
reptiles. 293-295
Eye curette. 178
small mammals. 277. 278. 279
Eye spatula. 178
 see oiso Nutrition
 Eyelid reflex. 168
Feet
Eyelids. 167. 182-184
birds. 266-267
birds. 262
cats and dogs. 141. 142. 145. 148
ectropionization. 185
 Female genitalia. 110-111
edge. 183
endocrine disorders. 211
outer surface. 183
 see olso Vulva
position. 183. 184
 Female reproductive tract. 108-116
reptiles. 297-298
Femoral arteries. palpation. 53
third see Nictitating membrane 
Femoral pores. 292. 301
trichiasis. 180
Femoral vein. 302-303
wet. 180
Femur. 142. 151
abduction. 152. 153
F
adduction. 152. 153
Ferret. 276-277. 278
Fabellae. 148
coat. hair and nails. 281
 Facial muscles. 167
digestive tract. 283
Fainting. 76.162
 general examination. 281. 282
Falcons. 249. 250
 general impression. 280
handling. 258
housing. 279. 307
hunger traces. 256
reproduction. 284. 285. 287
Falculifer rostrotus. 266
urine. 284
Falling object (cotton) test. 169. 199
 Fertility. 117-118
Falling off test. 199
Fetus. palpation. 112. 114
 False negatives. 10. 11 
 Filing systems. record. 30-31
 False positives. 10. 11
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB). 240. 241
Family history. 43
Fixation forceps. Von Graefe. 22. 178. 185
 Fat liver disease. 268
 Flail chest. 50. 223
Fatigue. rapid. 75-76
Flamingos. 259
Fear. 215-216
Flashlight (penlight). 17. 22. 177. 178
tests. 217-218
Fleas. 55. 125
 see also Anxiety
Flexor reflex. 171-172
Feather cysts. 257
Flight feathers. 254
Feather powder. 255
abnormalities. 256-257
Feather sheaths. retained. 257
Flow
Feathers. 254-255
laminar. 20 
abnormalities. 256-257
rotational (vortical). 20
cage/aviary floor. 251
turbulent. 20
color. 257
Flow (progress) sheets. 29. 30
319
INDEX
Fluorescein staining. 23. 178. 189-191
Giemsa stain. 240
 Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). 121
Gila monsters. 290-291
Fontanel. 246
Gingiva. 92
Food. 43
Gizzard. 263. 268
 intolerance. 88
Glans penis.119. 120
residues. bird cage. 250
Glaucoma. 187. 188. 193. 196
see aiso Diet: Feeding
Globe. 186-187
Food allergy. 125. 128
position. 186
Foot see Feet
size. 186-187
Foot pads. 123. 124. 125. 130
Goiter. 253. 265
 Forceps. 22
Golden hour. 221
Foreign bodies. 88. 93. 94
Gonioscopy. 191
Form dot.268
Gout. 267
Forms. 29. 30
Grains. undigested. bird feces. 251
on the CD. 38-39
Graphs. 29
 general impression. 46
Grooming care. 216 
history. 38. 43
Growth. retardation. 76. 211
Fremitus. 81. 224
Growth hormone
Frenulum. 89. 93
deficiency. 209
Front limb. 140-141. 145-148
excess. 210. 211
Frontal sinus. 65. 66. 67
Guidelines. 6
Fundus examination. 197-198. 199-200
Guides. 6-7. 14. 15-16
Fur slip'. 273. 275
Guinea pig. 278
Furcula. 265
coat. hair and nails. 281
digestive tract. 282. 283
G
feeding. 279
handling and techniques. 274
Gait. 137-140
housing. 279. 306
abnormalities. 138-140
reproduction. 284. 285. 286
technique of evaluating. 138
urine. 284
 see aiso Locomotion
Gynecomastia. 211
Gallop. 138
Gallop rhythm. 82. 83
H
Gape worm. 264
Gastric tube insertion. rabbits. 273. 274
Habits. changed. 162-163
Gauge. catheter. 233
Hair. 54-55. 124-125
Geck0s. 290. 300. 301. 310. 312
dhewing. 279
Geese. 255-256. 267
clipping. 235
handling. 260. 261
ears. 202. 204
Gender determination
examination. 126
birds. 248-249. 268
growth cycle. 54. 281
reptiles. 291. 292
loss. 126
small mammals. 284-287
shedding. 54
General examination. 5. 6. 47-62
small mammals. 281
concept. 48-62
e0 0510 225
handling of patient. 48
Hairballs. 283
notation. 62
Hamster. golden. 275. 278
 General impression. 44-46
coat. hair and nails. 281
reptiles. 296-297
digestive tract. 283
small mammals. 280
general impression. 280
Genital mucosa
housing. 305
small mammals. 281-282
reproduction. 285. 287
 see a(so Vaginal mucosa
urine. 284
 Genital tract see Reproductive tract
Handing
Gerbil. 278
birds. 257-260
chromodacryorrhea. 288
cats and dogs. 48
coat. hair and nails. 281
reptiles. 295-296
digestive tract. 283
small mammals. 272-277
handling. 273. 276
Harder's gland. 262. 282. 288
housing. 305
Head 
reproduction. 285. 287
inspection. 166
urine. 284
palpation. 154.168
320
Index
Head (Continued)
History (Continued)
position. 165. 166. 179
notation. 43
shape. 166
program. 42-43
 Head examination
reasons for. 4-5
birds. 261-264
Hit-kick test. 217-218
digestive system. 88-94
Hock. 143-144
kidney/urinary tract disorders. 104
Homeostasis. maintenance of. 42
locomotor disorders. 154
 Hopping test. 170
neurologic disorders. 166-169
Horner's syndrome. 167
 ophthalmic disorders. 179
Housing 
reptiles. 297-300
birds. 249
 Head lamp. 177
reptiles. 292-293. 311
Head movements
small mammals. 277. 278. 279. 305-307
during locomotion. 138-139
Humerus. 141. 146. 265-266
passive. 155. 165-166
Humidity. relative. 278. 280. 293. 311-312
reduced. 166
Hummingbird. 269
rhythmic. in birds. 252
Hunger traces. 256
Health certification. 245-246
Hyaloid artery and remnants. 194. 195
Hearing
Hygiene
loss. 169. 202
bird cage/aviary. 250
testing. 169. 205
reptiles. 293
Heart, 80-84
 small mammal housing. 279
auscultation. 81-84. 280
Hyoid bones. 90. 94
inspection. 80
Hyperadrenocorticism. 208-209. 210
palpation. 80-81
 Hyperaldosteronism. 209
percussion. 84
Hyperestrogenism. 209. 211. 287
 primary survey. 224
Hyperextension. 137
Heart failure see Cardiac insufficiency
Hyperflexion. 137
Heart murmurs. 82. 83-84
Hypermetria. 164
Heart rate. 82
Hyperostotic changes. skull. 102. 104
Heart rhythm. 83
 Hyperparathyroidism. 212
Heart sounds. 70. 81-82
nutritional secondary (NSHP). 249. 294.
first. 81
298. 299
second. 81-82
 secondary. 102
third. 81. 82. 83
Hyperpigmentation. 126. 129. 130
fourth. 82. 83
Hypertension. 77
technique. 83-84
Hyperthermia. 226. 269. 279
Heart valves. 83-84
Hyperthyroidism. 208. 210
Heat. 109. 287
Hypertonia. 166
Hemarthrosis. 157
Hypertrichosis. 126
Hematochezia. 251
Hyperventilation. 50
Hematuria. 103-104
 neurogenic. 226
 Hemiparesis/paralysis. 164
Hyphema. 191
Hemoglobinuria. 251
Hypoadrenocorticism. 208. 209-210
Hemorrhage(s)
Hypogastrium. 94. 95
 mucous membranes. 56
Hypoglycemia. 209
 primary survey. 224
Hypogonadism. 121. 211
skin. 55
Hypopigmentation. 126
urinary tract, 103-104
Hypopion. 191
Heterochromia iridis. 192
Hypothermia. 226. 269
Hibernation. 280. 293
Hypothyroidism. 208-209. 210
Hip. floating. 151
Hypotonia. 166
Hip glands. 281
Hypotrichosis. 126
Hip joint
Hypovitaminosis A see Vitamin A deficiency 
arthrocentesis. 158
Hypoxia. 222
examination, 151-152. 153
Hip laxity test. 151-152
History. 40-43
 approach to client/patient. 40-41
latrotropic problem. 8. 34
forms. 38. 43
history. 40. 42. 43
the interview. 41-42
Icterus. 281
321
INDEX
Ictus cordis (apex beat). 80-81. 209-210
Joints (Continued)
 primary survey. 224
birds. 266. 267
rabbit. 280
 passive movements. 144-145. 154-156
Identifi cation
recumbent position. 145
birds. 260
 standing position. 140
patients. 28-29
Jugular vein. 78. 236. 237
specimens. 29. 232
reptiles. 302
Identification chips. implanted. 28. 29
lguanas. 290. 291. 310
K
blood collection. 303
examination. 298. 300. 301
Kea. 258
gender determination. 291. 292
Keratin. 123-124
handling. 296
Keratinocytes. 123-124
husbandry. 294. 312
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca. 181. 191
inspection. 297
Keratoconus. 188
lliopsoas muscle. 142
Keratoscope. 178.188
llumination. 17. 22. 177
Kidneys. 101-107
Incidence. 9
palpation. 105. 282
Incoordination see Ataxia
small mammals. 283-284
Ingluvies (crop). 265
 symptoms of disease. 101-102
Inguinal fossae. 281
Knuckling-over reflex. 169-170
Inguinal lymph node. superficial. 59-62. 133
Korotkoff sounds. 25
 Injections
 Kuhn's paradigm theory. 1
cats and dogs. 235
Kyphosis. 138. 153. 165
smmall mmammmmals. 273-274. 275-276. 277
Inspection. 17-18
aids. 22
Inspiration. 49-50
Laboratory examinations 
Instruments. 17. 22-26
 collection of material for. 232-242
 Intention ataxia. 164
preanesthetic. 244
Inter-observer variability. 9
 see a(so Specimen collection
Intercarpal joints. 141. 146. 158
Lacrimal apparatus. 190. 262
Internal iliac lymph nodes. 100
Lacrimal puncta. 184. 190. 262
Interruptions. 40-41. 42
Lacrimal sac. 184
Intertarsal joint. 266
Laennec. RTH. 21
Intertrigo. 180
Lagomorpha see Rabbits
Interval scales. 8
Lagophthalmos. 183
Interview. conducting the. 41-42
Lakatos. 1. 1-2
Intestinal tract. palpation. 96
Lameness. 136. 165
Intoxication (poisoning). 222. 249
examination in recumbency. 144 
 Intraocular pressure/tension. 187
 gait abnormalities. 138-140
Iridodonesis. 193. 196
history. 136
Iris. 191. 192-194
neurogenic/myogenic/orthopedic origins. 161-162
birds. 248. 261. 262
 observation of stance. 137
bombe. 193.196
types. 139
color. 192. 262
Laminar flow. 20
cysts. 191
Lankesterella. 268
defects. 193
Larynx. 67-68
embryonic rests. 193. 194
primary survey.223
resting position. 193. 196
Lateral collateral ligament. 148-149. 150-151
surface. 192-193
Lateral recumbency. 228-229
thickness. 193
fixation. 228-229
transillumination. 193-194
 see aiso Recumbent position
Iritis. 192
Laws. reptiles. 291
Lead poisoning. 249. 252
Lee-Boot effect. 287
Legs
Jacobson's organ. 300
birds. 266-267. 269
Jaws. 104. 167-168
mammals see Limbs
Joints
reptiles. 297. 300-301
 arthrocentesis. 156-159
Leishman. William Boog. 240
322
Index
Leishmaniasis. 102
Local anesthetic (Continued)
Lens. 194-196
urethral catheterization. 239. 274
 clarity. 196
Locomotion
location. 196
coordination. 164
luxation. 196. 197
endocrine disorders. 209
size and shape. 196
examination during. 136-140. 152-153
Lentidonesis. 196
 general impression. 44-45
Lethargy. 88. 208
 grading of disturbances. 139
Levator ani muscle. 97. 98. 99-100
neurological examination. 163-165
Libido. 117. 118
reptiles. 296-297
Lichenification. 129. 130
 small mammals. 280
Lidocaine. 179
see also Gait
 Life span
Locomotion disorders. 136. 164-165
reptiles. 291
ataxia. 164
small mammals. 278. 280
emergency cases. 225-226
Ligaments. 140
history. 136. 161-162
Light sources. 17. 22
 mechanical causes. 165
 ophthalmic examination. 177. 178
 see oiso Lameness
Lighting
Locomotor system. 135-159
birds. 250
abaxial part. 136
reptiles. 293
abnormalities. 136
 small mammals. 280
axial part. 136
Limber neck. 252
birds. 252
Limbs (extremities). 136
during motion. 137-140
examination. 140-152
recumbent position. 144-152
front. 140-141. 145-148
at rest. 137
inspection. 140
 standing position. 140-144
palpation. 140. 165
Lordosis. 153. 165
passive movements. 144-145
Louse
 positioning terminology. 137
long. 266
rear. 141-144. 148-152
tail. 267
recumbent position. 145-152
Lower jaw. 167-168
stance. 137
Lower leg
weight bearing.137
 front. 141. 146
see also Legs: Wings
rear. 143-144. 148
Lips. 88
Loxig curvirostra. 263
Liquothorax. 73
Luer lock. 233
Litter size. 285
Lumbar vertebrae. 154. 288
Littman phonendoscope. 22. 23. 24
Lummbosacral pressure test. 154. 155 
Liver
Lungs. 69
birds. 268
abnormalities. 73
enlargement. 78-79. 95-96
birds. 252-253
palpation. 95-96
examination. 69-73
size. 78-79
infiltrates. 70.73
Living conditions. 42-43
lobes. 69
Lizards (5auria). 289. 290-291. 310
Lupus erythematosus. 130
blood collection. 303
Luteinizing hormone (LH). 109. 120. 121
body and skin. 300-301
Lymph nodes. 57-62
dassification. 308
abdominal. 96
ear canal. 300. 301
adhesions. 60
feeding. 294-295
consistency. 60
 general impression. 297
draining mammary glands. 133
handling and restraint. 295-296
localization and drainage areas. 58-60
head examination. 298. 299. 300
painfulness. 60
husbandry. 311-312
palpation. 60-62
inspection. 297
rectal examination. 99-100
neck. 300
shape. 60
signalment. 291
size. 60
 Local anesthetic
 small mammals. 281
 ophthalmic examination. 179. 185
Lyssa, 90
323
INDEX
M
Metacarpus. 141
Metestrus. 109. 110. 111 
Macaws. 248. 258. 263
vaginal smears. 112
Macules. 127. 128
vaginoscopy. 114. 115
Male genitalia. 18-120
Microphthalmos. 177. 187
endocrine disorders. 211
Micturition. 103
Male reproducive tract. 117-121
Mink. 276-277. 278
 Malignancy. 88
digestive tract. 283
Mallards. 255-256
reproduction.284. 285. 287-288
Mammary glands. 132-134
urine. 284
lymphatic drainage.133
Miosis. 167. 191
secretions. 132. 134
Mites
small mammals. 281. 285
red. 250
Mandibular brachygnathia. 89
sarcoptic. 262. 263. 265. 266
Mandibular lymph nodes. 58-59. 60. 61. 179
shaft 266
 Mandibular salivary gland. 90
tracheal. 254. 265
Mass response. 172
Mitral valve. 83. 84
Masses
Moll. glands of. 180. 182
consistency. 9. 18
Molt. feathers. 255-257
fine-needle aspiration biopsy. 240. 241
 Monestrous animals. 109
palpation. 18
Monitors. 290. 312
size. 8. 18
 Monopare sis/paralysis. 164
Masseter muscle. 88
 Motion see Locomotion
Mastication. muscles of see Chewing musculature
 Motor activity
Mating
provoked. 161
dogs and cats. 117. 118
 spontaneous. 160-161
small mammals. 284. 287-288
 Motor system
Maxillary brachygnathia. 89
central (CMS). 164
May-Grinwald stain. 240
 peripheral (PMS). 164
Measurement
Mouse. 278
errors. 9
digestive tract. 283
scales. 8-9
 general examination. 281. 282
Measuring instruments. 22. 24-26
handling and techniques. 275-276
Medial collateral ligament. 149. 150-151
housing. 279
Medical records. 27-39
reproduction. 285. 287
accessibility. 30-31
urine. 284
clarity. 29-30
Mouth (oral cavity)
completeness. 30
birds. 263-264
computerized. 31. 32.33
cats and dogs. 88-90
content. 28-29
examination. 90-93. 179
effort and costs. 31-32
neurologic examination. 168
function. 27-28
opening. 90-91. 263-264. 300
 general impression. 45
 primary survey. 223
problem-oriented (POMR). 30. 33-38
reptiles. 299-300
supplements on CD. 38-39
small mammals. 282-283
 system setup. 29-32
Mouth spreader. 282
Medication history. 43
Movements
 Megacolon. 96
dhanged. 162-163
Meibomian gland. 180. 182. 183
compulsive. 162
Melanin. 126. 257
involuntary. 165
 Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (o-MSH). 126
 passive see Passive movements
 Melanocytes. 124
 purposeful/meaningful. 164
 Melanosomes. 126
Mucous membranes. 56-57
 Melena. 251
color. 56. 77
Menace reflex. 168
 primary survey.224
Menisci. 149. 151
small mammals. 281-282
 Menionus unguicufotus see Gerbil
Murmurs. 82. 83-84
Mesenteric lymph nodes. 96
 Mus muscuius see Mouse
 Mesocricetus ourotus see Hamster. golden
Muscle(s)
 Mesogastrium. 94. 95
atrophy. 211
 Metacarpal bones. 141. 145
inspection. 140
324
Index
Muscle(s) (Continued)
 Nosological method. 11-13
 palpation. 140
 Nosological probability. 10. 11
 percussion. 73
Nostrils (nares)
strength. 164. 208. 209
birds. 263
tension. auscultation and. 24. 71
mammals. 65. 66
tonus. 166
reptiles. 297. 298
weakness (paresis). 162. 164
 Nutrition 
Mustela putorius furo see Ferret
assessing condition. 45. 260-261
 Mustela vision see Mink
feather development and. 256-257
Muzzle
 see also Diet: Feeding
applying a. 222-223. 230-231
Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism (NSHP).249. 294. 298.299
grasping the. 217
Nystagmus. 167. 186
Mydriasis. 167. 192. 195-196
Mydriatics
0
birds. 261
mammals. 178-179. 196. 199
Obedience. 214
 Myoclonia. 165
tests. 217
training. 216
N
Obesity. 45
endocrine disorders. 208. 210-211
Nails. 124. 130
Observations
 dragging on floor. 162
 general see General impression
locomotor system examination. 140
recording. 35. 36-37
reptiles. 297
Obstacle test. 169. 198-199
 small mammals. 281
Occurrence. 9
Nares see Nostrils
Ocular discharge (exudate). 176. 182
 Nasal cavity. 179
Oculus dexter (0D). 176
Nasal discharge. 63. 66. 76. 282
Oculus sinister (0S). 176
Nasal openings see Nostrils
Odor. 17
Nasal plane. 66. 67. 130
breath (expired air). 66. 91. 104
Nasolacrimal duct. 180. 184. 190. 262
cerumen. 203
Nasopharynx. 67. 90. 282
 perception. 66
Neck. 94
 skin. 126
birds. 264-265
 small mammals. 281
 passive movements. 155. 165-166
urine. 103
reptiles. 300
vaginal discharge. 108. 111
Needles. 233. 234
Olfactory nerve (1). 169
Neophobia. 279
Oligouria. 101
Neoplasia. 88
Onychomadesis. 130
Nervous system. 160-173
Onychorrhesis. 130
birds. 252
Ophthalmic examination. 177-200 
endocrine disorders. 209
birds. 261-262
 small mammals. 288
instruments and aids. 17-18. 22. 23. 178-179
Neurologic examination. 140. 163-173
lighting. 177
emergencies. 224-226
 patient positioning. 177-178
 Neurologic symptoms. 161-163
Ophthalmoscope. 18. 22. 178
Nictitating membrane (third eyelid). 184-185
Ophthalmoscopy. 198. 199-200
birds. 185. 262
Opisthotonos. 225
examination. 185-186
Optic papilla (disc). 198. 199
protrusion.185. 186
Optical placing reaction. 170-171. 199
reptiles. 298
Oral administration of medicines. 274. 275
small mammals. 282
Oral cavity see Mouth
Nightjar. European. 269
 Oral mucosa. 88
Nikolsky's sign. 130
birds. 264
Nipples. 133
examination. 57. 58. 90. 91
 see aiso Mammary glands
lesions. 57
Nocturia. 102
Orbital puncture. small mammals. 275. 276 
Nodules/nodes. 127. 128
Orbits
 Nominal scales. 9
 bony parts. 179
 Nonverbal communication. 40
 muscles of floor. 179
Nose. 65-67. 179
soft parts. 179-180
reptiles. 298
Orchidometer. 22. 119
325
INDEX
Ordinal scales. 9
 Paraprostate cyst. 106
Oregon muscle disease. 265
 Parathyroid glands. 211-212
Oropharynx. 67. 68. 90. 94
Paresis. 162. 164
primary survey. 223
Parotid gland. 90
Orthopedic locomotion disorders. 161-162
Parotid lymph node. 59. 60
Ortolani test. 152. 153
Parrots
Onyctolagus cuniculus see Rabbits
 African gray. 248
Oscillometry. 25. 77
Amazon. 251
Osteodystrophy. renal. 102
cervicocephalic air sac system. 252. 253
Ostrich. 258. 265. 266. 269
examination of cage. 251
Othematoma. 202. 203
handling. 258. 259. 260
Otitis externa. 202. 205
head examination. 261. 263. 264
Otoscope. 17. 22. 204
history. 248. 249
Otoscopy. 204. 205
throat swab. 264
Ovaries. 112
 tracheal infection. 254
Overbite.89
trunk. 268
Overshot. 89
Parturition
Overweight. 45
abdominal palpation. 112
Ovulation. 110.115. 284
discharge after. 108-109
'Owl head', 252
history. 110
Cwls. 261
small mammals. 286
Owners
vaginoscopy. 114
approach to. 40-41
Passive movements. 144-145. 154-156
dog's aggressive behavior and. 215. 218
 neurologic examination. 165-166
handling birds. 259
wings. 266
 informing. 35
Past history. 43
 purchase of animals. 245
Posteurello muiticida. 250
records. 28
Patella. 143. 148. 149
restraint. 229
Patellar ligament relex. 171
 separation anxiety. 216
Patient record number. 29
Patients
P
approach to. 40-41
handling. 48
Pacing gait. 138. 139
identification. 28-29
 Packaging. laboratory specimens. 232-233
Pattern recognition. 2. 13
Pain
Peacocks. 252. 257
induced aggression. 215
Pecten. 262
 palpation of masses. 18
 Pectineus muscles. 152. 153
during passive movements. 145
Pekingese. 178. 231
perception. 172-173
Pelvic inlet. 114
Palate. 66-67. 68
Pelvis
hard. 89. 90. 93
birds. 266. 268
soft. 89. 90.93
rectal palpation. 100. 156
 Palate-pterygoid veins. 303
recumbent position. 152
 Palpation. 17. 18
small mammals. 286
instruments. 23
standing position. 141-142
 Palpebrae see Eyelids
Penguins. 258. 262. 265. 267
 Palpebral fissures. 167. 183
Penis
Pancreas. palpation. 96
cats and dogs. 106. 119-120
 Panniculitis. 129
small mammals. 286
 Panting (thermal polypnea). 48. 66
Penlight (flashlight). 17. 22. 177. 178
endocrine disorders. 208. 209
Perches. bird. 250
restrained animals. 231
Percussion. 17. 18-20
Paper-slide test. 170
abdomen. 19-20. 96
 Papules. 127. 128
acoustic. 18-19
Paradigm theory. Kuhn's. 1
finger-finger. 19
Parakeets. 250. 251. 262
instruments. 22. 23
 Paralysis. 164
small mammals. 282
Paranasal sinuses. 65. 66. 67. 179
thorax. 19-20. 72-73. 84. 224
 Paraparesis/paralysis. 164
vertebral column. 154
 Paraphimosis. 106
Percussion hammer. 19. 22. 23
326
Index
Pericardial effusion. 52
Popper's rational approach. 1. 2
 Perineal/anal reflex. 172
Porphyrins. 257. 284. 288
Perineal fistulas. 98. 99
 Position
Perineal hernia. 98. 99-100
052-672 eie io a6en puq
Periodontitis. 91. 93
cats and dogs. 227-229
 Perivulvar area. 110-111
 ophthalmic examination. 177-178
Petechiae. 55
 see aiso specific positions
 Petting. responses to. 218. 219
Posterior chamber. 194
 Phallus. birds. 268
 Posterior synechiae. 191
 Pharynx. 90. 94
 Postreflex clonus. 172
 Pheasants. handling. 260
Postural reactions. 169-171
Phonendoscope. 21-22. 23-24
Posture. 44. 165
 see oiso Auscultation
emergencies. 223
 Photoperiod see Daylight length 
reptiles. 296-297
Photophobia. 176. 186
 Preanesthetic examination. 6. 243-244
 Phthisis bulbi. 187
 Precision. 9
 Physical examination 
 Predictive value. 10-13
forms. 38-39
Pregnancy
 general see General examination 
 dogs and cats.112
methods and instruments. 17-26
small mammals. 284. 285. 286. 287
reasons for. 4-5
Prepuce. 106. 119
'routine'.5
 Prescapular lymph node. 59. 60. 61
setup. 5-6
 Prevalence. 9
specific (selective). 5. 6
 Previous medical history. 43
Pica. 88
 Primary survey. 222-226
 Piezoelectric effect. 26
 Probabilistic diagnosis. 13
 Pigeons. racing see Racing pigeons
 Probability
 Pinna. 202
a priori. 13
examination. 203
conditional. 10. 11
temperature. 203
diagnostic. 10. 11
thickening. 203
nosological. 10. 11
 Piorry. PA. 19
unconditional. 10. 11
Pits. 299
Problem lists. 29-30. 34-35. 37
 Pituitary tumors. 209
Problem-oriented medical records
 Placing reactions. 170-171. 199
(POMR). 30.33-38
Plans. in medical records. 35-36
 Problem-solving method. 1. 2. 14
 Plaque. dental. 92
 Problems. 6
 Plaques (cutaneous). 127. 128
 defining. 34
 Plasma. 235
iatrotropic see latrotropic problem
Plessimeter. 19. 22. 23
Proestrus. 109. 110. 111
 Pleura
 Progesterone. plasma. 109. 110. 115 
abnormalities. 73
Progestins. 133
examination. 69-73
 Prognathism. 89
rubbing. 69
Progress notes. 35-36
Pleural fluid (effusion). 76. 79
Progress (flow) sheets. 29. 30
 specimen collection. 241. 242
Prostate. 105-106. 120
 Plica semilunaris see Nictitating membrane
enlargement. 104. 105-106
Plumage. 254-257
rectal palpation. 100. 106. 120
breeding or nuptial. 255-256
Provocation tests. 217-218
eclipse. 256
 Pruritus. 125
head. 261
Pseudomonos ceruginoso. 281
neck. 264-265
Pseudopregnancy. 110. 287
nuffling up. 269
Psittaciformes. 258. 263
tail. 267
 see aiso Parrots
see also Feathers
Psittacosis (chlamydiosis). 249. 258
 Pneumonia. aspiration. 86
 Psychology. clinical analysis. 14-15
Pneumothorax. 73. 224
Ptosis. 183
Poisoning. 222. 249
 Pubic bones
 Pollakiuria. 104
birds. 266. 268
 Polydipsia. 102. 208
 small mammals. 286
Polyuria. 102. 208. 251
Pulmonary air sac system. 253. 254
Popliteal lymph node. 59. 60. 61. 62
 Pulmonic valve. 83. 84 
327
INDEX
Pulse. 50-53. 76
Rabbits (Continued)
alternating. 52
reproduction. 284-286
amplitude. 52
respiratory tract. 282
endocrine disorders. 209-210
Racing pigeons
 equal and unequal. 51
age estimation. 262
form. 52
 cage examination. 251
frequency. 52-53
handling. 258. 259
missing (deficit). 52. 83
head. 261. 262. 263-264
paradoxical. 51-52
legs and feet. 266
pressure. 51
neck. 264-265
 primary sunvey. 224
nervous system. 252
rhythm. 52
plumage. 254. 255. 256-257
small mammals. 278. 280
respiratory system. 253
symmetry. 53
tail feathers. 267
technique of assessing. 53
thermoneutral zone. 270
uniformity. 51-52
thermoregulation. 269
venous. 77-78
throat swab. 264
Pulsus celer. 52
trunk. 267-268. 268
Pulsus filiformus. 52
wings. 254. 266
 Pulsus frequens. 53
 Radiocarpal joint. 141. 158
 Pulsus magnus. 52
Radiography. eye and orbit. 200
 Pulsus parvus. 52
Radius. 141. 146
 Pulsus rarus. 53
Range of motion (ROM). 144
 Pulsus tardus. 52
Rat. 278
Pulviplumae. 255. 256
dhromodacryorrhea. 288
 Pupillary membrane. 193. 195
 coat. hair and nails. 281
persistent (PPM). 193. 194
digestive tract. 283
Pupillary reflexes. 168. 192
handling and techniques. 276
birds. 262
housing. 280. 305
consensual or indirect (CPR). 192
reproduction. 285. 287
direct (DPR). 192
urine. 284
emergencies. 225
Rational approach. Popper's. 1. 2
 Pupillary rigidity. 192
Rattus norvegicus see Rat
Pupils. 167. 191-192
Rear limb. 141-144. 148-152
birds. 261
 Records. medical see Medical records
 shape and position. 191-192
Rectal examination. 99-100
size. 225
female reproductive tract. 113. 114
 Purring. 71. 84
locomotor system. 156
Pustules. 127. 128
prostate. 100. 106. 120
 Pyelonephritis. 102
technique. 99
 Pyloric stenosis. 87
urethra. 106
Pyometra. 108. 112. 286
Rectum. 99-100
Pythons. 291. 296. 299. 309. 312
 fecal sampling. 240
rectal palpation. 99
0
Recumbent position. 227-229
emergencies. 223
Questions. asking. 41-42
locomotor system examination. 144-152
 Refined falsifiability. Lakatos'. 2
R
Reflex hammer. 22-23
Reflexes 
Rabbits. 278
cerebral. 168
digestive tract. 282-283
spinal. 171-172
ears. 288
Regulations. reptiles. 291
feeding. 279
Regurgitation. 87. 250
general examination. 280. 281-282
Renal failure. chronic. 102
 general impression. 280
 Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). 77
handling and techniques. 273-274
Reproductive function. endocrine disorders. 208-209
housing. 279. 306
Reproductive tract
kidneys/urinary tract. 283-284
female. 108-116
nervous system. 288
male. 117-121
ophthalmic examination. 181. 184. 185
 small mammals. 284-288
328
Index
Reptiles. 289-303. 308-312
Rhonchi (Continued)
 blood collection. 302-303
 musical. 70-71
 commonly kept species. 309-310
 nonmusical. 71
examination. 297-301
Ring tail. 280
fecal analysis. 301-302
Rings. bird feet. 266
feeding. 293-295
Riva-Rocci. 5cipione. 25
 general impression. 296-297
Romanovsky stain. 240
handling and restraint. 295-296
Rose bengal staining. 191
history. 292-295
 Rotation. limb. 137
housing. 292-293
Rubber jaw. 104
husbandry. 311-312
 Rufling up. birds. 269
 inspection. 297
signalment, 291
s
taxonomy. 289-291. 308
Respiration. 48
Sacrococcygeal muscle. 98
'abdominal'. 49
 Salivary glands. 90
abdominal type. 50 
duct openings. 89
abnormal. in emergencies. 226
Salt glands. 262. 298
costal. 49
 Samples see Specimens
 costoabdominal. 49
Saphenous vein. 79-80. 236. 237
labial. 50
Sauria see Lizards
pendulous. 49
Scabies. 125
periodic. 50
Scales
 small mammals. 278
 cutaneous (squamae). 128. 129
Respiratory movements. 48-50. 65
measurement. 8-9
birds. 254
Scapula. 140. 148. 265
depth. 49
 Schiff-Sherrington phenomenon. 166
endocrine disorders. 209
Schirmer tear test (STT). 23. 178. 181-182
frequency. 48. 50
Science. 1-2
paradoxical. 50. 223
Scissors. 22
 primary survey. 223
Sclera. 56. 57. 188
rhythm. 50
color. 188
small mammals. 280
thickening. 188
technique of observing. 50
vascular injection. 188
type. 49-50
Scoliosis. 153. 165
Respiratory muscles. auxiliary. 49
Scrotum. 118. 284
Respiratory sounds. 63-64. 65
Sea birds. 262
 auscultation. 69-71
Seasonal fluctuations
bronchial. 70
body temperature. 269
enhanced. 69
body weight. 280
 generation. 20-21
 Sebaceous glands. 124
normal. 69. 70
Seborrhea. 126
weak. 69
Sebum. 124. 281
 Respiratory system
 Secondary survey. 226
birds. 252-254
Sedation. 178. 231
cats and dogs. 63-74
Seizures. epileptic. 162. 276
small mammals. 282
Semen
Restraint. 48. 229-231
collection. 117. 121
birds. 259-260
examination. 121
manual. 229
Sensation testing. 172-173
muzzle or cloth band. 230-231
Sensitivity. 10-13
rabbits. 273
 Separation anxiety. 216
reptiles. 295-296
Serpentes see Snakes 
vs sedation. 231
Serum. 235
Rete mirabile. 269
Sesamoid bones. 145
Retina. 197-198. 199-200
Sex glands. accessory. 120
Retrobulbar pressure. 186.187
Sex hormones. 257
 Retropharyngeal lymph node. 59. 60. 61
 see aiso Androgens: Estrogens
 Reynolds formula. 20
Sexual dimorphism. 291
 Rhonchi. 70-71
Shell. chelonian. 297. 300
329
INDEX
 Shih Tzu. ophthalmic examination.178
Slowworms. 289
 Shipping. laboratory specimens. 232-233
Small intestine. palpation. 96
 Shoulder joint
 Small mammals. 272-288
arthrocentesis. 157
 general examination. 280-288
birds. 266
 general impression. 45. 280
examination. 140-141. 146-148
handling and techniques. 272-277
Siamese cat. 186. 192
history. 277-280
Signalment
housing. 277. 278. 279. 305-307
birds. 248
Smell. sense of. 169
medical records. 28
Snakes (Serpentes). 289. 290. 309-310
 preanesthetic examination. 244
 blood collection. 303
re ptiles. 291
body and skin. 300-301
role in diagnosis. 29
dassification. 308
Signs. 8
feeding. 294
Sinuses see Paranasal sinuses
 general impression. 296
Sinusitis. 252
handling and restraint. 295
 Siting position. 227
head examination. 298. 299. 300
venipuncture. 235. 236
housing. 293
Skeleton
husbandry. 311-312
birds. 265
inspection. 297
endocrine disorders. 211
signalment. 291
see aiso Locomotor system
venomous. 290. 295
Skin. 54. 123-130. 298
Sneezing. 64
adnexa. 124-125. 267-268
reverse. 64
birds. 266. 267-268
Sophisticated falsifiability. Lakatos'. 2
color. 55. 126. 281
5opor. 44. 163
disinfection. 235
Sounds 
ears. 203
abnormal. 45. 139
endocrine disorders. 209. 210
fear aroused by. 215
examination. 55-56. 126-130
 during passive joint movements. 144 
folds around eye. 180
sensitivity to/recovery from. 218
hemorrhages. 55
 see aiso Vocalization
odor. 126
Specificity. 10-13
reptiles. 297. 298. 300-301
Specimen collection. 232-242
 scraping.130
materials. 233-235
sensitivity testing. 173
preparation. 232-233
shedding. 297. 298
techniques. 235-242
small mammals. 281
Specimens (samples)
structure and function. 123-125
identification. 29. 232
temperature. 56
 packaging and shipping. 232-233
thickness. elasticity and turgor. 55-56
Spectacles. 297. 298
Skin lesions. 126-130
Speculum. vaginal. 113. 114
configuration. 130
Sphincter incontinence. urinary. 104
distribution. 130
 Sphinx position see Sternal recumbency
history. 125-126
Spinal reflexes. 171-172
primary. 127. 128
Spine see Vertebral column 
secondary. 127. 128-130
Splashing sounds. generation. 97
Skink, 310. 312
Spleen. palpation. 96
Skull. 152-156
Splenomegaly. 96
inspection. 153
Spraying. in house. 219
 ophthalmic examination. 179
Spreading reflex. 267
palpation. 154. 168
Spurs. cloacal. 291. 301
 passive movements. 154
Sputum. 64
Sleeping place. 216
Squamae. 128. 129
 Slit lamp. 17-18. 178 
Squamata. 289. 290.308
 Slit lamp examination
Squint (strabismus). 167. 186
 anterior chamber. 191
Stance. 136-137. 152-153
cornea. 189
Standing position. 227
iris. 193. 195
locomotor system examination. 140-144
lens. 195. 196. 197
observation of stance. 137
vitreous. 197
specimen collection. 241. 242
330
Index
 Standing reflex. 110 
Tapetum lucidum. 198. 199-200
 Sternal recumbency (sphinx position). 227. 228
Tapetum nigrum. 198. 200
 ophthalmic examination. 177. 178
Tapeworm proglottids. 98
venipuncture. 235. 236
Tarsocrural joint
see a(so Recumbent position
arthrocentesis. 158. 159
Sternostomo tracheocolum. 265
examination. 144.148
Stethoscope. 21-22
Tarsometatarsus. 266
 see a(so Auscultation: Phonendoscope
Tattoo numbers. 29
Stifle joint
Taylor reflex hammer. 22-23
arthrocentesis. 158-159
Tear drainage system. 189. 190
examination. 142-143. 148-151
Tear film. 180-182. 188
Stomach. 96. 283
Tear production. 180-182
Storage systems. record 30-31
excessive (epiphora). 176. 180
 Strabismus. 167. 186
small mammals. 288
 Stranguria. 104
Tear stripe. 180
 Strength. muscle. 164. 208. 209
Teeth. 89. 91-93
Stress
26'6 '68 'snonppap
 blood pressure effects. 77
fractures. 89. 92. 93
dogs left alone. 216
permanent. 91. 92
handling birds. 258-259
reptiles. 300
handling small mammals. 273
retained/persistent deciduous. 91. 92
 pulse rate effects. 53
 small mammals. 282-283
Stridor. 63-64. 223
Temperature
laryngeal. 64. 68
body. 25
nasal, 49. 64. 66
birds. 268-270
 pharyngeal. 64
cats and dogs. 53-54
tracheal. 68
endocrine disorders. 210
Stupor. 44. 163. 224
lethal. 269
 Subcarapacial venous sinus. 302
 preferred optimal (POTR). reptiles. 292
Subcutis. 55. 125
small mammals. 278
 Sublingual salivary gland. 90. 94 
cloacal. 269
 Superficial inguinal lymph node. 59-62. 133
ear. 25
 Suspended position. 229
environmental
Swabs
birds. 269. 270
eye. 182
reptiles. 292-293. 311-312
throat. birds. 264
small mammals. 278. 279
 Swallowing problems. 86. 161
measurement
Swallowing reflex. 168
birds. 270
Swans. 252. 258
cats and dogs. 24-25. 54
examination. 264
small mammals. 280-281
handling. 260
pinna. 203
 Sweat glands. 124
rectal. 24-25. 54
Symptoms. 8
respiratory movements and. 48
Synchysis scintillans. 197
skin. 56
Syngomus tracheatis. 264
Temporal muscle. 88
 Synovial fluid aspiration. 156-159
Temporomandibular joint. 154
Syringes. 233-234
Tendons. 140
Tenesmus (alvi). 99. 100. 103. 104
T
Terrapins. 290. 309
Table. examination. 45. 229
blood collection. 302
 general impression. 296
Tachycardia. 52-53. 82
Tachypnea. 50
handling and restraint. 295
Tactile placing reaction.170
husbandry. 294. 311-312
signalment. 291
carriage/posture. 153. 165
Terrarium. 311 
feathers. 267
Territorial marking. 219
intravenous injections. 275. 276. 277
Testes. 118-119
 biopsy. 121 
palpation. 154
reptiles. 295. 296. 297. 301
endocrine disorders. 211
small mammals. 273. 275. 276
 measurement. 22. 119
wagging.152
small mammals. 284. 286
Tail reflex. 110
 undescended. 119. 211
331
INDEX
Testicular tumors. 211
Trachea. 67-68. 223
Testosterone. 121
Transducers. 24. 25. 26
Testudines see Chelonia
Transponders. implanted. 28. 29
Tetanus. 167
Trauma. 221. 222. 223
Tetracaine. 179
Treatment plans. 35. 36
Tetraparesis/paralysis. 164
Tremor. 165
Thermal polypnea
Trichiasis. 180
birds. 253-254. 269
Trichobezoars. 283
cats and dogs see Panting
Tnichomonas gollinoe. 264. 265
Thermometers. 22. 24-25. 270
Trichorrhexis. 126
Thermoneutral zone. 270
Tricuspid valve. 83. 84
Thermoregulation. 53-54
Tropicamide. 178-179. 196
birds. 268-270
Trotting. 138. 139
respiratory movements and. 48
Trunk. birds. 267-268
testes. 118-119
Tubocurarine. 261
see aiso Temperature
Tumors see Masses
Thiamine. 294
Tunica vasculosa lentis. 194. 195
Thigh. 151
Turbulent flow. 20
Thoracic inlet. 94
Turtles. 290. 293-294
Thoracic vertebrae. 154
handling and restraint. 295
Thoracic wall. 69
 see oiso Chelonia
apex beat/ictus cordis. 80-81
Tympanic membrane. 204-205
primary survey. 223
Tyndall effect. 18
Thoracoabdominal cavity. birds. 268
Thoracocentesis. diagnostic. 241. 242
Thorax. 68-73
U
abnormalities. 73
auscultation, 21-22. 69-71. 81-84
Ulcers. 129. 130
inspection. 80
Ulna. 141. 146
palpation. 80-81
Ulnocarpal joint. 141. 158
percussion. 19-20. 72-73. 84. 224
Ultrasonography
small mammals. 282
globe and orbit. 200
trauma. 50. 223
 male reproductive tract. 121
Thrill. 53
Ultraviolet-B (UV-B). 293
Throat swab smears. birds. 264
Undershot. 89
Thyroid dysfunction. 208-209
Undulation test. 18. 79. 80. 97
Thyroid glands. 211-212
Upper leg
birds. 265
front. 141. 146
 enlargement in birds. 253. 265
rear. 142
Thyroid hormone. 257
 Uremic syndrome. 102
Tibia. 143. 148
Ureters. 105
Tibial compression test (TCT). 150
ectopic. 104
Tibiotarsus. 266
Urethra. 106. 107. 114
Tic. 165
Urethral catheterization. 238-239.
Tissue cells. specimen collection. 240. 241
274. 277
Toes
Urethral orifice. 107
birds. 266
Urinary catheters. 233
cats and dogs. 141. 142. 145
Urinary incontinence. 104. 107
Tongue. 89-90
Urinary tract. 101-107
examination. 57. 58. 91. 93-94
 examination. 105-107
neurologic examination. 168
history. 102-104
reptiles. 299. 300
infections. 102. 103
Tonsils. 90. 94
 small mammals. 283-284
Tonus. muscle. 166
Urination. inappropriate. 216. 219
Torsion. 137
Urine
Torticollis. 153. 252
birds. 250-251
Tortoises. 290. 309
blood in. 103-104
handling. 295
color. 103-104. 283-284
husbandry. 293-294. 311-312
odor. 103
see oiso Chelonia
residual. 103. 238
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). 130
retention.105
332
Index
Urine (Continued)
Vesicles. 127. 128
 small mammals. 283-284
Vestibulocochlear nerve (Vlll). 169
voided.238
Video recordings. 213-214. 216
Urine collection
Vipers. 290. 299. 310
cats and dogs. 237-239
Vision
small mammals. 274. 275. 276. 277
endocrine disorders. 209
Uropygial gland. 267
testing. 169.195. 198-199
Urticarial lesions (wheals). 127. 128
Visitors.response to. 216
Uterus
Visual disorders. 176-177
 abdominal examination. 111-112
Visual placing reaction. 169
inflammation. 108
Visual stimuli. sensitivity to/recovery from. 218
involution. 109
Vitamin A deficiency
 small mammals. 286
birds. 249. 261. 263
Uweitis. 191. 192. 193
reptiles. 294. 297
Vitamin C. 279
Vitamin D. 267. 293
Vitamin-mineral supplements. 294-295
Vaccination. 43
Vitreous. 191. 197
birds. 249. 256
Vocalization
nodule. 265
aggressive cats. 219
 small mammals. 280
altered. 161
Vagina. 107
 auscultation. 71
 artificial. 121
birds. 252
examination. 112-114
Vomeronasal pits. 300
lacerations. 114
Vomiting. 87. 283
palpation. 114
Von Graefe fixation forceps. 22. 178. 185
 small mammals. 286
Vultures. 258
Vaginal discharge
Vulva. 106-107. 110-111
examination. 111
discharge see Vaginal discharge
hamsters. 287
endocrine disorders. 211
 pathological. 108.111
ferret. 287
physiological. 108-109. 110
 swelling. 111
Vaginal mucosa
cats and dogs. 114. 115
rabbits. 284.286
W
Vaginal vestibulum. 110. 11. 113
Walking. 138. 139
cytology (smears) 111.112
Water
Vaginitis. 114
drinking. 279. 293
Vaginoscope. 17. 22
intake. 208. 278
Vaginoscopy. 113-114. 115
Water birds. 255. 258. 267
Valgus. 137
Weaning age/weight. 285
Valves. heart. 83-84
Weight. body see Body weight
Varus. 137
Weight bearing. limbs. 136
Vena cava. cranial. 277
Weight loss. 88
Venipuncture. 235-236
W/heals (urticarial lesions). 127. 128
reptiles. 302-303
Whitten effect. 287
small mammals. 273. 274. 275. 277
Wings
Venn diagram. 10
drooping. 252
Venous pressure waves. 77-78
examination. 254. 265-266
Venous system. 77-80
inspection. 252
Ventilation. 279
Work feathers. 256-257
Ventral tail vein. 303
Venturi effect. 20
Vertebral column. 136. 152-156
V
inspection. 153
observation. 136. 152-153
Young animals. health certification. 245
palpation. 154. 165
 passive movements. 154-156. 166
Z
percussion. 154
rectal palpation. 156
Zebra finch. 270
 small mammals. 288
Zeiss. glands of. 180. 182
333