Manualof
Diagnostic Cytology
of the Dog and Cat
Edited by JohnDunn
WILEYBlackwell
Manual of
Diagnostic Cytology
of the Dog and Cat
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Manual of
Diagnostic Cytology
of the Dog and Cat
Edited by
John Dunn
Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd
Newton Abbot
Devon
UK
WILEY Blackwell
This edition frst published 2014
@ 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Registered Offce
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 SSQ, UK
Editorial Offces
9600 Garsingron Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 SSQ UK
1606 Golden Aspen Drive, Suites 103 and 104, Ames, Iowa 50010, USA
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at ww w.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell
The right of the author to be identifed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the
UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted
by the UK Copyright, Designs and Parents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. Allbrand names
and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their
respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. It is sold on
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering profesional services. If professional advice or other
expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientifc research, understanding, and discussion only
sisoeeip poya yyads e uooid jo dupuauwoan se uodn paan aq iou pnous pue papuaiui sou ae pue
or treatment by health science practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or compleeness of the contents of this work and
purpose.In view of ongoing research, equipment modifcations, changes in governmental regulations, and the
for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and
precautions.Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate.The fact that an organization or Website
is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author
or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make.
Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared berween
when this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional
statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Datα
Manual of diagnostic cytology of the dog and cat / edited by John Dunn.
1 online resource.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-118-78310-8 (ePub) - ISBN 978-1-118-78311-5 (Adobe PDF) - ISBN 978-0-470-65870-3
4. Veterinary cytology. I. Dunn, John K., editor of compilation.
[DNLM: 1. Cytodiagnosis-veterinary. 2. Dog Disease-pathology. 3. Car Diseases-pathology.
4. Cytological Techniqurs-veterinary. SF 991]
SF991
636.089'607582-dc23
2013039433
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formars. Some content that appears in print may not be
available in electronic books.
Cover images: dog and cat - @ iStock.com/Websubstance; frst and fourth cytology images - @ BM] Publishing
Group Ltd; all other cytology images - courtesy of John Dunn
Cover design by Wiley
Set in 10/12pt Sabon by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
1 2014
Contents
Contributors
vii
Preface
xi
Editor's Note
xii
Cytological Collection Techniques and Sample Preparation
1
Natali Bauer
General Principles of Cytological Interpretation
17
Kathleen Tennant
Cytology of the Lymphoid Tissues
33
Erik Teske
Cytology of Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Lesions
57
John Dunn
Cytology of the Respiratory Tract
75
John Dunn
 Biochemical and Cytological Evaluation of Body Cavity Effusions
89
Niki Skeldon and Emma Dewhurst
Cytology of Synovial Fluid
111
Kate Sherry
8
 Biochemical and Cytological Examination of Cerebrospinal Fluid
127
Kate English and Holger Volk
Cytology of the Eye and Adnexal Structures
139
Roger Powell and David Gould
10
Cytology of the Urinary Tract
161
Joy Archer
11
Cytology of the Liver, Exocrine Pancreas and Gastrointestinal Tract
175
Marta Costa and Kostas Papasouliotis
12
Cytological Examination of the Endocrine Glands
195
Walter Bertazzolo
13
 Cytology of the Male and Female Genital Tracts
213
Gary C.W. England and Kristen R. Friedrichs
Contents
14
Cytology of Mammary Gland Lesions
231
Reinhard Mischke
15
Cytology of Selected Infectious Organisms
247
Harold Tvedten
FurtherReading
263
Index
267
Contributors
Joy Archer, VMD, MS, PhD, FRCPath, Dip1 ECVCP, HonFRCVS
Head of Veterinary Clinical Pathology
Department of Veterinary Medicine
Queen's Veterinary School
University of Cambridge
Cambridge
UK
Natali Bauer, PD (habil), Dr. Med. Vet, Dipl ECVCP
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Clinical Sciences
 Clinical Pathophysiology and Clinical Pathology
Justus-Liebig University Giessen
Giessen
Germany
Walter Bertazzolo, Med. Vet, Dipl ECVCP
Consultant Clinical Pathologist of the Ospedale Veterinario Citta di Pavia
Pavia
Italy
 Laboratorio La Vallonea
Alessano (Le)
Italy
Marta Costa, DVM, MSc, MRCVS
 School of Veterinary Science & Langford Veterinary Services (Diagnostic
Laboratories)
University of Bristol
Langford
Bristol
UK
Emma Dewhurst, MA, VetMB, FRCPath, Dipl ECVCP, MRCVS
Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd
Newton Abbot
Devon
UK
vili
Contributors
John Dunn, MA, MVetSci, BVM&S, Dipl ECVIM-CA, Dipl ECVCP,
FRCPath, MRCVS
Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd
Newton Abbot
Devon
UK
Gary C.W. England, BVetMed, PhD, DVetMed, DVR, DVRep, Dipl ECAR,
Dipl ACT, FHEA, FRCVS
 Dean of School
Professor of Comparative Veterinary Reproduction
School of Veterinary Medicine and Science
University of Nottingham
Sutton Bonington
Loughborough
UK
Kate English, BSc, BVetMed, PGCAP, FHEA, FRCPath, MRCVS
 Lecturer in Veterinary Clinical Pathology
 Department of Pathology and Pathogen Biology
The Royal Veterinary College
North Mymms
Hatfield
Herts
UK
Kristen R. Friedrichs, DVM, Dipl ACVP (Clin Pathol)
Clinical Associate Professor
Department of Pathobiological Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine
 University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI
USA
David Gould, BSc (Hons), BVM&S, PhD, DVOphthal, Dipl ECVO, MRCVS
RCVS and European Specialist in Veterinary Ophthalmology
Davies Veterinary Specialists
Hitchin
Herts
UK
Reinhard Mischke, Dr. Med. Vet, Dipl ECVIM-CA
Small Animal Clinic
 University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover
Hannover
Germany
Contributors
Kostas Papasouliotis, DVM, PhD, FRCPath, Dip1 ECVCP, MRCVS
European Veterinary Specialist in Clinical Pathology and Senior Lecturer
 in Veterinary Clinical Pathology
School of Veterinary Science & Langford Veterinary Services (Diagnostic
Laboratories)
University of Bristol
Langford
Bristol
UK
Roger Powell, MA VetMB, Dipl ACVP, FRCPath, MCRVS
PTDS Ltd
Hitchin
Herts
UK
Kate Sherry, BVetMed, Dipl ACVP, MRCVS
Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd
Newton Abbot
Devon
UK
Niki Skeldon, MA VetMB, FRCPath, Dipl ECVCP, MRCVS
Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd
Newton Abbot
Devon
UK
Kathleen Tennant, BVetMed, CertSAM, CertVC, FRCPath, MRCVS
Clinical Lead
Diagnostic Laboratories
Langford Veterinary Services
University of Bristol
Langford
Bristol
UK
Erik Teske, DVM, PhD, Dipl ECVIM-CA (Int Med) (Onc)
Honorary Member of ECVCP
Professor of Medical Oncology
Department of Clinical Science Companion Animals
Utrecht University
Utrecht
The Netherlands
Harold Tvedten, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVP, Dipl ECVCP
Professor of Clinical Chemistry
Department of Clinical Sciences
Contributors
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Uppsala
Sweden
Holger A. Volk, DVM, PhD, Dipl ECVN
 Clinical Director, Senior Lecturer in Veterinary Neurology and Neurosurgery
 Department of Clinical Science and Services
The Royal Veterinary College
North Mymms
Hatfield
Herts
UK
Preface
During the last decade, diagnostic cytology has become an increasingly important
and frequently used tool in the veterinary practitioner's diagnostic armamentarium
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat is aimed primarily at small
animal clinicians and undergraduate veterinary students who wish to enhance their
knowledge in this particular discipline, although clinical pathology residents should
also find this manual useful
The initial concept for this project evolved from the numerous requests received
 from veterinary clinicians in first opinion practice for a user-friendly and easily
accessible reference source. The intention, therefore, has not been to compete with
the numerous more comprehensive reference textbooks currently available on the
market.
To this end, this manual reviews the techniques for obtaining diagnostic speci-
mens and the general principles of cytological interpretation. It describes in a clear
 and concise manner the most common lesions and related disorders encountered in
colour images. A conscious attempt has been made to describe the lesions in the
 of facts. References are provided only where considered necessary. Readers are
instead directed to the list of reference textbooks and articles for more in-depth
information regarding each of the body systems.
Finally, I am indebted to the authors, all highly qualified experts in their field, for
their excellent contributions. Thanks are also due to Nick Morgan and the editorial
team at Wiley Blackwell, most notably Jessica Evans and Justinia Wood, for their
forbearance in seeing this project through to its conclusion.
John Dunn
Editor's Note
Because the final size of cells and other structures in digital photographs is variable
in many cases due to cropping and resizing of photos, the magnification factors in
the photographs throughout this manual are not given. The size of infectious agents
and other cells can be compared to that of adjacent erythrocytes and leukocytes
(see Figure 15.1).
The following stains have been used to stain the cytology specimens depicted in
the following chapters unless stated otherwise in the figure legend:
Chapterl: May-Grinwald-Giemsa stain
Chapter 2: Modified Wright's stain
Chapter 3: May-Grinwald-Giemsa stain
Chapter 4: Wright's-Giemsa stain
Chapter 5: Wright's-Giemsa stain
Chapter 6: Wright's-Giemsa stain
Chapter 7: Wright's-Giemsa stain
Chapter 8: Wright's-Giemsa stain
Chapter 9: Modified Wright's stain
Chapter 10: Wright's-Giemsa stain
Chapter 11: Modified Wright's stain
Chapter 12: May-Grinwald-Giemsa stain
Chapter 13: Wright's-Giemsa stain
Chapter 14: Pappenheim stain
Chapter 15: Wright's stain
1
Cytological Collection
Techniques and Sample
Preparation
Natali Bauer
Department of Clinical Sciences,Faculty ofVeterinary Medicine,Clinical
Pathopbysiology and Clinical Pathology, Justus-Liebig University
Giessen,Giessen,Germary
Acquisition of a fine-needle aspirate for cytological
examination is a fast and easy,
advantages are that generally no anaesthesia or sedation is required and the risk
of haemorrhage is minimal while the technique provides an excellent evaluation of
single cell morphology. In contrast to histology, however, it has to be kept in mind
that the tissue architecture is not preserved and cannot be evaluated. Histopathological
examination of biopsy specimens allows the assessment of growth patterns and the
margins of the lesion can be visualised if necessary, but surgical biopsy is associated
with a higher risk of haemorrhage and anaesthesia (local or general) is necessary.
Adequate techniques of sample preparation and staining are mandatory for
the optimal interpretation of cytological specimens. Moreover, correct interpreta-
tion of any cytological specimen requires correct microscopic examination and
recognition of common artefacts. This chapter describes the practical approach
to optimal sampling, routine staining techniques and the systematic microscopic
evaluation and detection of common artefacts.
Sampling techniques
Fine-needle aspiration
 Fine-needle aspiration cytology is a useful technique for the investigation of soft
tissue masses (cutaneous lesions, lymph nodes, intra-thoracic or intra-abdominal
masses) and effusions from body cavities. The technique can be easily performed
in a practice setting. The following basic equipment is required:
Glass slides with a frosted end which can be easily labelled.
 5 ml syringe (if required also a 2 ml or 10 ml syringe; a 10 ml syringe might be
advantageous for aspirating very firm masses),
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytotogy of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 1.1 Fine-needle aspiration using a needle and syringe.
20-22G needles.
A pencil for labelling the slides with the date and localisation of the lesion as
well as the patient's name. Note: Labels written with a ballpoint pen or marker
may be washed away with alcohol-based stains (e.g. Diff-Quik, Wright's, May--
Grinwald-Giemsa).
For organs such as the liver or spleen, longer needles are usually required espe-
cially in large dogs. Here, a spinal needle with a stylet is recommended to avoid
contamination by tissues adjacent to the mass or organ ( with softer tissues smaller
needles and syringes can be used).
, e r a s,  m  q  se aa-a
 aspiration technique'. The non-aspiration technique is preferred for sampling of all
masses or organs which are highly vascular (e.g. spleen, liver) in order to minimise
blood contamination. Overall, the sampling procedure should take no longer than
5-10s, and several smears should be prepared.
Aspiration technique:
D
 The mass or organ (e.g. a peripheral lymph node) is immobilised with
one hand and the needle is inserted with the other (Figure 1.1). Wherever
possible, fine-needle aspiration of abdominal organs or masses is best
performed under ultrasound guidance.
口
The skin is disinfected as for venipuncture.
0The needle with attached syringe is inserted into the lesion.
 The plunger is withdrawn, and while maintaining negative pressure, the
 needle can be redirected to aspirate different regions of the mass or organ.
 The needle with attached syringe is removed after releasing the plunger.
D
 The syringe is flled with approximately 3-5 ml air and reattached to the
needle to expel the aspirate gently on the glass slide.
Cytological Collection Techniques and Sample Preparation
Figure 1.2 Fine-needle aspiration using an aspiration gun, e.g. Zyto-Gun (Scil animal care
company GmbH, Viernheim, Germany).
Figure 1.3 The non-aspiration technique using a 'needle-alone technique' is useful for
obtaining samples from small lesions such as pustules or bullae.
D
Note: To facilitate pulling the plunger, commercial aspiration guns may
be useful when aspirating masses or organs which are difficult to immobilise
since the vacuum can be easily maintained with one hand (Figure 1.2).
Non-aspiration technique: Two methods of this technique can be used for
sampling.
*Needle-alone technique': The needle without the syringe attached is inserted
into the lesion after disinfection of the skin (Figure 1.3). The needle is then
rapidly moved back and forth in the tissue approximately ten times before
it is withdrawn. A syringe already filled with 3-5 ml air ensures a rapid
expulsion of the aspirated material onto the slide.
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
here to sample the spleen of a dog with ascites and icterus under ultrasonographic control.
Note the syringe is prefilled with air and is held between the thumb and forefinger.
 Alternatively, the needle is inserted with a syringe already filled with 2-3 ml
 of air attached (Figure 1.4). The needle and syringe are then rapidly moved
back and forth in the tissue before the needle with syringe attached is
removed. The aspirated material is then ejected onto the slide, and smears
are prepared immediately.
Cytological smears can be prepared using the blood smear (Figure 1.5) or squash
preparation technique (Figure 1.6).
Impression smears/imprints
Imprints can be made from wet surfaces (e.g. biopsies, ulcerated or exudative skin
lesions) as well as from dry skin lesions using Sellotape (Figure 1.7 and Figure 1.8). It
may be necessary to blot away excessive blood or tissue fluids from the surface of a
biopsy specimen with a clean, dry swab or paper towel before making the imprint onto
a clean glass slide. The disadvantages of impression smears are that they only collect
cells from the surface of the lesion and therefore may not be representative of underly-
ing pathology, fewer cells are collected and bacterial contamination is more likely.
Scrapings
Scrapings may be useful for sampling extremely firm lesions which are less likely
to exfoliate cells with the aspiration technique. After the lesion is cleaned and dried, a
large scalpel blade (held at a 90° angle) is moved several times over the surface of the
(A)
(B)
8.06
.201
Maxs
(C)
(D)
0
2
Figure 1.5 Preparation of the smear using a blood smear technigque. (A) The aspirated
needle. (B) A second slide held at a 45° angle (for highly viscous fluids such as joint fluid,
smaller angles of approximately 25" are recommended) is brought towards until it makes
contact with the aspirated material. (C/D) The material is distributed along the width of the
spreader slide which is then pushed forwards smoothly and rapidly.
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 1.6 The squash preparation technique. (A) The fine-needle aspirate is placed on
the glass slide by ejecting 3-5ml air through the syringe and needle. (B) A second slide is
gently placed on top of the first one. Capillary forces result in the slides adhering to each
other. (C) The top slide is gently drawn over the bottom slide on which the aspirate has been
deposited. (D) The top (spreader) slide is removed once it reaches the end of the bottom
slide which can then be submitted for cytological examination.
+
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(A)
(B)
(C)
Rak3
Pler
Figure 1.7  Impression smear of a liver biopsy. (A) Prior to preparing the impression
smear, blood contamination is minimised by pressing the biopsy gently on a filter paper.
(B and C) The imprint smear is prepared by touching the slide with the surface of the
biopsy in several areas.
(A)
(B)
Figure 1.8 Sellotape imprint. (A) A strip of Sellotape is pressed several times onto the skin
lesion. This technique is ideal to show micro-organisms (bacteria, yeasts) on the skin surface.
For assessment of cells, however, other techniques such as evaluation of Romanowsky-
stained skin scrapings are preferred. Parasites such as lice or Cheyletiella mites can also be
detected with an unstained Sellotape preparation. (B) For preparation of a Romanowsky-
stained Sellotape imprint, the piece of Sellotape is firstly put on the slide like an upturned ‘u'
(sticky side down), and the imprint can then be stained without fixation. After staining (and
also for preparation of an unstained Sellotape imprint), the strip of Sellotape is put flat on the
slide and can be then evaluated microscopically.
lesion in the direction of the person taking the sample. The scraped material is then
transferred to a slide and is distributed evenly with the scalpel blade, or a second slide
may be used to prepare a squash preparation using the technique described previously.
Swabsmears
 sn s  ss hnd n asn asa are sies qss
vagina or the ear canal (Figure 1.9). They are less useful for tumour diagnosis (the
disadvantages are similar to those described for impression smears).
Cytological Collection Techniques and Sample Preparation
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 1.9
Collection of an ear swab for cytological investigation. (A) The cerumen or
discharge is collected with a cotton bud. (B) The material is then rolled out onto a slide.
(C) Note the meandrical movement of the cotton bud.
Brushings
Brushings are taken with a cytobrush (Figure 1.10) and have the advantage that they
are more representative of the deeper layers of the lesion than lavage fluids, imprints
or swabs. They are commonly taken from the conjunctiva, respiratory tract or vagina.
Collection and handling of fluid samples
for cytological examination
The hair at the site of fine-needle aspiration is clipped and the skin is disinfected.
 If abdominocentesis is performed without ultrasonography, samples are taken on the
linea alba 2cm behind the umbilicus. Thoracocentesis without ultrasonographic
 guidance is performed at the ventral thoracic wall between the sixth and eighth
ribs. The needle is inserted cranial to the rib to avoid injury to nerves or blood vessels.
 If larger amounts of fluid are aspirated, a three-way stopcock should be attached to
the hub of the syringe to avoid creating a pneumothorax. Fluid specimens should be
routinely collected into EDTA (or a plain tube if bacteriology is required). Smears
should be prepared within 30min of sampling to avoid artefacts due to sample aging.
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 1.10 Acquisition of a conjunctival cytobrush preparation. The material collected with
the cytobrush is rolled out on a slide. Note: The dog is pretreated with anaesthetic eye drops
prior to sampling.
(A)
(B)
(C)
Dob6y
Figure 1.11 (A) This photograph demonstrates the side holder apparatus, a glass slide, the
sample chamber and fiter cards for preparation of a cytospin preparation using a cytocentrifuge.
removed and the smear is dry-centrifuged at 90g for 1 min. (C) A stained cytospin preparation.
fluid), a cytospin preparation is preferred (Figure 1.11). For body cavity fluids
(abdominal and thoracic effusions, synovial fluid), the cellularity can be estimated
from a direct smear. If the cell count is low (i.e. < 10.0 × 10/L), a cytospin preparation
is recommended in addition to the direct smear to facilitate detection of cell
 populations present in low numbers. When, as will often be the case in a practice
setting, a cytospin centrifuge is not available, a sample chamber for preparing an
"in-house? sediment smear can be prepared (Figure 1.12).
Although the results tend to be of lower quality than the in-house sedimentation
or cytospin techniques, a sediment smear can also be prepared by centrifuging
Cytological Collection Techniques and Sample Preparation
(A)
(B)
Figure 1.12 (A) If a cytocentrifuge is not available, an in-house sample chamber for
preparing a sediment smear can be fabricated using the cut-off barrel of a syringe (a 10 ml
or 1 ml depending on the volume of fluid obtained), ECG clamps and filter paper (if not
available, you can use three layers of coffee filter paper in which an appropriate round hole
is cut which is slightly larger than the inner diameter of the syringe). (B) The cut-off syringe
barrel is attached to the slide and filter paper with the ECG clamps and is then filled with
the fluid (50-200μl). The cells are allowed to sediment for 1 h. The supernatant is then
removed.
the specimen for 5 min at 1000 g. After centrifugation, the supernatant is removed
(decanted into the sink or aspirated with a pipette) so that a small amount (one to
two drops) is left in the tube. The sediment is then resuspended in the residual
supernatant, and smears are prepared using a blood smear or line concentration
technique.
Staining techniques
Several stains are available which can be used alone or in combination. Prior to
 staining, the smears are air-dried; further fixation is generally not necessary.
Routinely used alcohol-based Romanowsky stains (Figure 1.13) include:
May-Grinwald-Giemsa stain
Wright'sstain
Diff-Quik stain (Siemens Diagnostics Healthcare GmbH)
New methylene blue (NMB) stain (e.g. Accustain Reticulocyte Stain, Sigma
Diagnostics, St. Louis) can be used to show up the nuclear and nucleolar structure
(e.g. the nuclear chromatin) in greater detail. Typical staining characteristics of Diff-
Quik stain, May-Grinwald-Giemsa stain and NMB stain are shown in Figure 1.14.
10
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 1.13 Examples of staining devices and stains. (A) Large round glass vessels used for
staining in laboratories/practices with a high caseload. (May-Grunwald-Giemsa stain shown
here). (B) Cuvettes with Diff-Quik staining solutions. (C) 'Cuvettes' for Diff-Quik stain. These
'cuvettes' are slide holders filled with the staining solutions. These can be used in veterinary
staining solutions. The slide is dipped in every vial five times over a period of 5s, and then it 
is flushed with pure distilled water to remove excess stain. Note that fluids with a higher
cellularity and protein concentration require a longer time to stain properly.
A simple staining technique using stains other than Diff-Quik (e.g. NMB stain)
is as follows:
The slide is placed on a tissue paper. The staining solution is added to the smear,
e.g. with a micro-capillary.
A cover slip is placed on top of the droplets of staining solution.
Gentle pressure is applied to the cover slip, and the tissue paper is folded to
absorb excess staining solution.
The stained smear can be now evaluated under the microscope with a cover slip lens.
Microscopic examination of cytological specimens
 Microscopic evaluation of the smears should always be performed in the same
sequence:
After a macroscopic ('eyeball') evaluation of the smear to detect potential areas
of interest (Figure 1.15A), the smear is scrutinised at low magnification with a
Oytological Collection Techniques and Sample Preparation
11
(A1)
(A2)
(A3)
(B1)
(B2)
(B3)
Figure 1.14 Staining characteristics of neutrophils (A) and hepatocytes (B) with Diff-Quik
stain (1), May-Grunwald-Giemsa stain (2) and NMB stain (3). Diff-Quik and May-Grunwald-
Giemsa stains show fairly similar results; however, chromatin structure of the nuclei and
nucleoli can be seen in greater detail with the May-Grunwald-Giemsa stain. Moreover, mast
cell granules do not always stain with Diff-Quik stain so that they may be misclassified as
macrophages. Note that erythrocytes are clear in the NMB stain.
(A)
(B)
Figure 1.15
5Microscopic examination of a smear (example is a splenic aspirate from a dog):
(A) Step 1: Screen the smear macroscopically to detect areas with the most cellular material
(circled). (B) Step 2: Screen the smear under low magnification using a 10x or 20x objective
lens. In order to locate an area where cells are set in a monolayer and detect focal lesions
(clusters of tumour cells, parasites such as microfilaria) Note: Large cellular populations tend
to be found at the margins and at the feathered edge of the smear.
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(A)
(B)
Figure 1.16 Microscopic examination of a smear (example is a splenic aspirate from a dog):
(A) Step 3: When a suitable area is identified, cellular morphology is assessed under
1000x magnification (using a 100x oil immersion objective lens). Here, medium-sized
macro-nucleolated lymphoid cells predominate consistent with a diagnosis of marginal
zone lymphoma. (B) The same smear in an area where cells are not set in a monolayer.
 Single cell morphology cannot be assessed and cells are incompletely stained.
Figure 1.17  Crushing artefact (ymph node aspirate dog). Note the streaks of nuclear
10x or 20x objective lens to detect areas in which cells are arranged in a monolayer
and also areas which are hypercellular or have different staining characteristics
(Figure 1.15B). These areas are then examined under higher magnification (with a
100x oil objective lens; Figure 1.16).
Recognition of artefacts
The recognition of artefacts is essential for correct interpretation of cytological
findings. Artefacts may occur due to suboptimal sample preparation (e.g. crushing
artefact results in smudged cells, bare' nuclei or cytoplasmic strands; Figure 1.17),
Oytological Collection Techniques and Sample Preparation
13
sample aging or contaminants such as stain precipitate (Figure 1.18), ultrasound
gel (Figure 1.19), starch powder from surgical gloves (Figure 1.20), tissue paper or 
plant fibres (Figure 1.21) or pollen grains (Figure 1.22). Focusing and unfocusing
will help to differentiate between contaminants and intracellular structures.
Figure 1.18 Precipitated staining solution (blood smear dog). Note the finely stippled
azurophilic material on top and between the cells. Precipitated staining solution may be
confused with Haemopiasma spp.; however, it can also be seen between the erythrocytes,
and focusing up and down will confirm that the same material is on top of the erythrocytes.
Figure 1.19 Contamination of the smear with ultrasound gel (renal carcinoma, dog). Note
the irregular lilac granular material in the centre of the photograph.
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 1.20 A starch powder grain (arrow) from surgical gloves is a contaminant in this
fine-needle aspirate of a mass on the head of a grey parrot. Focusing and unfocusing reveals
starch powder grain is in focus, while the erythrocytes in the background are out of focus,
indicating the contaminant is lying on top of the smear.
Figure 1.21  A plant fibre can be seen in this fine-needle aspirate of a renal carcinoma
is missing, and focusing and unfocusing reveals that the material is placed on top of
thecells.
Oytological Collection Techniques and Sample Preparation
15
Figure 1.22 Pollen grains (centre of the figure) are present in this skin scraping from a dog.
(A)
(B)
Figure1.23
3Drying artefacts on a blood smear of a cat. (A) Bluish rod-like structures which
could be mistaken for Haermoplasma sp. can be seen at the margin of the erythrocytes (red
arrows). Erythrocytes with 'punched-out holes' (torocytes, black arrows) resemble
hypochromic erythrocytes; however, true hypochromasia is characterised by a gradual
change of colour rather than this punched-out appearance. (B) Focusing up and down
reveals that the bluish structures seen in (A) appear as refractile dots, hence confirming that
this is a drying artefact.
 The same applies for recognition of drying artefacts affecting erythrocytes which
 may appear as bluish intracytoplasmic structures resembling Haemoplasma organ-
isms (Figure 1.23A); however, after unfocusing, they appear as refractile dots
(Figure 1.23B).
2
General Principles of
Cytological Interpretation
Kathleen Tennant
Diagnostic Laboratories, Langford Veterinary Services,
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
Initial assessment of the sample: Is the preparation
of diagnostic quality?
The sample should be examined under low power (10x) to assess cellularity and
the sample background and to identify areas of particular interest. At this stage
some samples will be recognised as compromised or inadequate for a definitive
diagnosis. Some of the more common problems include:
1. Complete absence of cells. In the complete absence of nucleated cells, a
definitive diagnosis generally cannot be made.
2.
 Cell rupture/distortion. Cells stripped of cytoplasm may appear abnormal
and should not be assessed.
3.1
Poor staining.
4.
Contamination of the sample with exogenous substances such as lubricant
or ultrasound gel.
5.
 Exposure of cytology to formalin fumes alters staining characteristics and
  ss a o e osq  m, e s
Romanowsky-type stains.
6. Occasionally the tissue aspirated is not the expected type, e.g. a presumed
submandibular lymph node aspirate which yields normal salivary epithelial
cells.
7. Sample too thick for assessment of individual cells (Figure 2.1).
Inflammation
Samples which contain only inflammatory cells are the easiest to interpret when
screening cytology samples in-house'.
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
18
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 2.1Avoid areas of the smears where the cellularity or the background is too thick
to assess. Cells condense and the internal detail becomes impossible to assess.
The general approach to inflammation is to (i) identify the predominant cell
(ii) identify any morphological abnormalities and (ii) attempt to establish any
obvious cause for the inflammatory response.
Neutrophilic inflammation
A neutrophilic inflammatory response is one where 70% or more of the nucleated
cells are neutrophils (the term suppurative is sometimes used when the number
of neutrophils exceeds 8.5 %).
Neutrophils may be further described as non-degenerate (Figure 2.2) or
degenerate (Figure 2.3) based on morphology. Non-degenerate neutrophils are
is not directly damaging to them. These are seen most commonly in sterile
Karyolysis is characterised by
velling of the cell and nucleus in response to
a damaging or toxic insult to the neutrc
rophil. Causes include exposure to bacte-
rial toxins or irritant material, e.g. f
 free urine, bile or pancreatic enzymes. As the
nucleus swells, it becomes more rarefied, stains less intensely and appears more
ragged and open. When karyolytic neutrophils are identified, it is important
to actively search for causative c
organisms or substances. Septic neutrophilic
inflammation is diagnosed by 
 demonstrating organisms (most  frequently
bacteria) inside a neutrophil's cytoplasmic vacuoles. In contrast, karyorrhexis
nants of nuclear material within the cell (Figure 2.4). This type of degenerative
change is more often associated with the age-related death of non-degenerate
neutrophils.
Figure 2.2 Non-degenerate neutrophils in synovial fluid from a dog with immune-mediated
polyarthritis. The nuclear chromatin is condensed and the nuclei have smooth well-defined
margins. Some are hypersegmented.
the nuclei are swollen and ragged. Intracellular bacterial rods are present (arrowed).
Figure 2.4 Pyknosis and karyorrhexis in neutrophils. Source: Dunn and Villiers (1998a).
Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
20
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 2.5 Macrophage-rich inflammation. In this case, the cytoplasm is packed with clear
nonstaining rods (Mycobacteria spp.).
Macrophage-rich or granulomatous inflammation
A predominance of macrophages suggests a more insidious or chronic inflam-
matory process. Certain organisms are also associated with macrophage-rich
inflammation (e.g. Mycobacteria spp.) and in some cases can be seen within
phagocytic macrophages (Figure 2.5). Multinucleated macrophages or giant cells
can also be noted, especially when the inflammation is ongoing or foreign bod-
ies are present. A mixture of macrophages and neutrophils is referred to as
'pyogranulomatous' inflammation and has similar causes.
Eosinophilic inflammation
This is often associated with hypersensitivity or parasitic reactions, although
eosinophil numbers may also increase as a paraneoplastic response to certain
tumour types (mast cell tumours, lymphoma). An increased number of eosinophils
can also be aspirated from eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions and from
 a as oa   s a s
Lymphocytic/plasmacytic inflammation
This type of inflammatory response may be associated with immune stimulation,
e.g. at vaccine site reactions. It may also be identified in some other inflammatory
conditions such as rhinitis and lymphocytic-plasmacytic inflammatory bowel dis-
ease. The lymphoid cell population may be relatively mixed, but a predominance of
small lymphocytes may help to distinguish the lesion from lymphoma.
General Principles of Cytological Interpretation
21
Figure 2.6 Mixed eosinophilic (one eosinophil is arrowed) and neutrophilic inflammation in a
tracheal wash from a dog with eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy.
Mixed inflammation
When no single inflammatory cell type is predominant, the percentages of different
cell types should be noted and, if possible, an underlying cause identified. In
addition to the cell types described previously, mast cells may be noted in samples
from some inflammatory lesions.
Aspiration of normal or hyperplastic tissue
In general, cells from normal tissues are very similar or indistinguishable from
hyperplastic areas. Cells of a similar cell type and their nuclei should show
minimal variation in size and shape (Figure 2.7). Most tissues have a cell turnover
low enough such that morphological changes associated with proliferation are
not common. Subtle variation in nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, depth of cytoplas-
mic basophilia and signs of increased turnover such as the presence of nucleoli
may occasionally be perceived in actively hyperplastic tissues, but generally the
 diagnosis is achieved by demonstrating cytologically normal cells from a mass or
enlarged organ.
Neoplasia
In many cases, the aspiration of tissue cells without inflammation from an
abnormal area is due to the presence of a neoplasm. Neoplastic populations may be
benign (Figure 2.7) or malignant. With benign tumours the cytomorphologic
features are more likely to be regular (in many cases, the changes are similar to the
relatively mild ones described earlier for hyperplastic tissue).
22
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 2.7 Benign prostatic hyperplasia. The cells and their nuclei are of relatively uniform
size in this aspirate. Nuclear chromatin appears stippled. Tiny rounded nucleoli are present
Publishing Group Ltd.
Criteria for malignancy
Neoplastic transformation of cells often results in loss of growth inhibition and
failure of internal quality control mechanisms. This may allow not only unfettered
and uncontrolled growth in the transformed population but also the introduction
 and persistence of alterations in cell morphology.
The presence of any of following morphological characteristics, particu-
larly the nuclear features, increases the index of suspicion that the cells are
malignant:
The presence of a population of cells in an abnormal location, e.g. anal sac
epithelial cells in a sublumbar lymph node aspirate.
Anisocytosis ( variation in cell size).
Anisokaryosis (variation in nuclear size)
Variation in nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio (Figure 2.8). This is often increased
(more nucleus to cytoplasm) in populations of neoplastic cells.
The presence of one or more prominent nucleoli in many nuclei (Figure 2.9).
Note that the presence of one or two small nucleoli is acceptable in cells from
tissues with a high turnover (e.g. intestinal epithelial cells, hepatocytes).
The presence of multinucleated cells especially if the nuclei vary in size within
the same cell (Figure 2.10).
Nucleolar abnormalities most notably the presence of macronucleoli (those
larger than red cell size) and/or multiple nucleoli which vary in size and shape
(Figure 2.9).
 Coarse or reticulated nuclear chromatin; cells which spend more time in the
active proliferation phases tend to have coarser nuclear chromatin which may
form strands (Figure 2.10).
Nuclear moulding. In normal populations of cells, growth inhibition pre vents
the nuclei within the same cell or in adjacent cells from influencing the shape of
each other (Figure 2.11).
Figure 2.8  Anisocytosis (variation in cell size) and anisokaryosis (variation in nuclear size) in
a malignant histiocytic tumour. A few neutrophils are also present.
Figure 2.9 Multiple, large and variably sized nucleoli in a mesenchymal tumour. The lower
cell in contains variably sized angular nucleoli.
Figure2.10
 An example of abnormal multinucleation. The arrowed cell contains multiple
nuclei which vary in size. In addition, the nuclei contain prominent nucleoli and coarse
nuclear chromatin.
24
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 2.11Nuclear moulding (arrowed).
Figure 2.12 Increased numbers of mitotic figures. Three mitotic figures (arrowed) can be
 ln l jo  e  s a  s i 
o aasd a r sar o jo raqu au u asnau aoalqns 
 abnormal mitotic figures in which there is obvious chromosomal asymmetry
or lag (Figure 2.12). Note: Mitotic figures can also be seen in hyperplastic tissue.
 Cytoplasmic basophilia. The increased content of mRNA in very active cells
results in a darker, bluer staining cytoplasm with Romanowsky-type stains
(Figure 2.13).
 Abnormal cytoplasmic vacuolation or cytoplasmic vacuolation in cells which
are not normally vacuolated. Perinuclear vacuolation is of particular concern
(Figure 2.13). Single large vacuoles which push the nucleus peripherally impart
a 'signet ring' morphology to the cell. The presence of 'signet ring’ cells is highly
suggestive of carcinoma (Figure 2.14).
General Principles of Cytological Interpretation
25
Figure 2.13  Cytoplasmic basophilia and perinuclear vacuolation in mesothelial cells which
are either very reactive or possibly neoplastic.
Figure 2.14 Carcinoma. Note the 'signet ring' morphology of the malignant epithelial cell.
Various combinations of the features described earlier can be identified in
different neoplasms, and it should be noted that some malignant tumour types
display very few of these changes (e.g. thyroid and anal sac carcinomas).
Dysplasia
When tissue is exposed to repeated or prolonged inflammation, infection or
injury, dysplasia may occur, resulting in reversible morphological abnormalities
which may mimic many of the criteria for malignancy listed previously (anisocytosis,
anisokaryosis, variable nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, multinucleation, presence
26
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 2.15 Dysplasia in a population of hepatocytes. There is evidence of anisocytosis
and increased binucleation. Other nuclear features remain unremarkable.
of nucleoli and increased cytoplasmic basophilia; Figure 2.15). Although these
morphological changes are often not as marked as those in a truly malignant
 process, there is a broad area of overlap.
The misdiagnosis of markedly dysplastic cell populations as malignant
           s
underlying inflammatory or infectious process or other injurious cause before
re-sampling the lesion.
Characteristics of cell populations: Epithelial, mesenchymal
or discrete round cell?
 In some cases, tissue cells are so poorly differentiated that determining the tissue
 of origin is impossible based on morphology alone, but in most tumour aspirates
the tissue can be subdivided into one of the following categories.
Epithelial
Cells of epithelial origin have often maintained their cell-cell bonds (desmosomes
and hemidesmosomes) which results in aspiration of sheets or balls of adhered cells
(Figure 2.16). The bonds themselves may appear as thin non-staining areas between
cells. Cytoplasmic borders are well defined in individual cells, and cytoplasm is
generally abundant, resulting in a relatively low nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio.
Nuclei are frequently round. Epithelial cells of glandular origin may be arranged in
a rosette (acinus) which may contain secretory product (Figure 2.17)
General Principles of Cytological Interpretation
27
Figure 2.16  A cell-to-cell bond (arrowed) in a population of epithelial cells.
Figure 2.17  A rosetted (acinar) structure in glandular epithelium.
28
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Mesenchymal
This category encompasses cells of connective tissue origin. Most have an oval to
elongated nucleus and (with the exception of adipocytes) cytoplasmic margins
which are poorly defined (Figure 2.18). Some cells may have the classic 'spindle
shape, but others may appear rounder and plumper. If the tissue type is productive,
e.g. collagen from fibroblasts, chondroid from chondrocytes or osteoid from osteo-
blasts, the product may appear as an eosinophilic material associated with the cells,
especially in more hypercellular areas (Figure 2.19). The presence of product, e.g.
collagen, may anchor the cells in place and result in relatively low cell yields.
Figure 2.18 Mesenchymal cells with elongated to oval nuclei and wispy, indistinct
cytoplasmic margins.
(A)
Figure 2.19  (A) Mesenchymal cells. Note the intracellular and extracellular eosinophilic stromal
material which in this case is probably chondroid.
General Principles of Cytological Interpretation
29
(B)
Figure 2.19 (Continued)
(B) Osteosarcoma (dog). These osteoblasts are showing a marked degree of anisocytosis,
anisokaryosis and variation in nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. The cells are surrounded by
eosinophilic matrix material, probably osteoid. One large binucleated cell is present. The nuclei
contain large prominent nucleoli which vary in size. Note also the cytoplasmic granules which
may be responsible for producing the osteoid matrix.
Figure 2.20Large cellymphoma. Note the individual cells with a high nuclear to
cytoplasmic ratio. Two mitotic figures are also present.
Discrete round cells
There are relatively few cell types in this category. Round cell tumours tend to yield
large numbers of individual cells which are not associated with a stromal product.
Lymphoid tumours (Figure 2.20), plasma cell tumours (Figure 2.21), histiocytic
30
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
tumours (Figure 2.22) and mast cell tumours (Figure 2.23) are included in this
category. Melanomas yield cells with round cell characteristics but they are usually
included in the mesenchymal category (Figure 2.24).
Figure 2.21
Plasma cells in bone marrow from a case of multiple myeloma. These are
discrete cells with dark basophilic cytoplasm and a perinuclear clear zone (*halo').
Figure 2.22 Histiocytoma. These discrete round cells have a moderate amount of
basophilic cytoplasm, and a mild degree of anisocytosis and anisokaryosis is evident.
Note also the indistinct nucleoli.
General Principles of Cytological Interpretation
31
Figure 2.23 Mast celltumour. These cells are packed with azurophilic cytoplasmic granules
which obscure nuclear detail. Note also the cytoplasmic granules in the background from
rupturedmastcells.
Figure 2.24 Melanoma. The cells contain black melanin granules which are obscuring all
internal cellular detail. Free melanin pigment granules are also present in the background.
32
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Cystic structures
High numbers of anucleated keratinised squamous epithelial cells may be found in
a variety of cutaneous lesions (epidermal inclusion cyst, sebaceous cyst) as well as
in some benign adnexal neoplasms (Figure 2.25). Aspirates from truly cystic struc-
tures within other organs (e.g. cysts in the kidneys of cats with polycystic disease)
may yield only a proteinaceous fluid and very few or no cells. A definitive diagno-
sis may require histopathological examination of the cyst capsule in these cases.
Figure 2.25  The presence of an abundance of anucleated keratinised squames and debris
is consistent with an epidermal or a follicular inclusion cyst. Sebaceous cysts and some
3
Cytology of the Lymphoid
Tissues
Erik Teske
Department of Clinical Science Companion Animals,Utrecht University,
Utrecht, The Netherlands
The lymph node
Canine and feline lymph nodes are very similar in function and morphology to that
of man and most domestic animals. The lymph node possesses a well-defined capsule
containing elastic and smooth muscle fibres which continue in the node as a
framework of septa and trabeculae. Most primary and secondary nodules are situ-
ated in the cortex, where they are surrounded by the paracortical regions and at
least in part by the lymph sinus. Practically all paracortical lymphocytes are of
 T-cell origin, while those in the follicles are of B-cell origin intermixed with some
T-lymphocytes. In the medulla, the lymphoid tissue consists of anastomosing cords
of lymphocytes. Antigen-stimulated cells including plasma cells accumulate here.
Histiocytic cells, including antigen-prese nting cells, can be found in allcompartments.
Normal cytological appearance and benign changes
Although normal lymph nodes are seldom aspirated, familiarity with the normal
cytological appearance is necessary in order to recognise abnormalities. Mild
antigenic stimulation takes place in the normal lymph node, and in principle all
stages of B- and T-lymphocyte maturation can be identified. However, the major-
ity (85-95%) of the cells are small B- and T-lymphocytes. These cells are charac-
terised by little cytoplasm, round nuclei without nucleoli and often slightly rough
chromatin structure (Figure 3.1). The size of these cells (about 10 μm in diameter)
lies between that of erythrocytes and neutrophils.
Lymphoglandular bodies are cytoplasmic fragments which stain light blue
with May-Grinwald-Giemsa (Figure 3.1). They are characteristic for lymphoid
tissue, and their presence can be useful in differentiating lymphoid cells from those
 of an undifferentiated small cell carcinoma. Although not a sign of malignancy,
their numbers are higher in high-grade malignant lymphomas.
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytotogy of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
34
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.1 FNAB of a normal lymph node of a dog consisting of a monomorphic population
of small lymphocytes, which are only little larger than surrounding erythrocytes. The pink
material between cells is nuclear material from damaged cells. The small blue structures are
ymphoglandular bodies (arrows).
A normal lymph node also contains other developing stages of the lymphoid
series, e.g. medium-sized lymphocytes, immature blasts and plasma cells, but never
more than 5-10% of the total number of lymphoid cells. Other non-lymphoid
cells which are present sporadically in a normal lymph node include neutrophilic
and eosinophilic granulocytes, macrophages/histiocytes, mast cells, erythrocytes
and monocytes.
Non-lymphoid tissue
Normal or enlarged submandibular salivary glands are often mistaken for
enlarged submandibular lymph nodes. Salivary gland cells are much larger than
lymphoid cells, contain more cytoplasm and form acinar (gland-shaped) struc-
tures. Lymphocytes and lymphoglandular bodies are absent.
In obese animals, it is possible to have the wrong impression that the lymph
node is enlarged because it is surrounded by a thick layer of fat. Fine-needle
aspiration of these enlarged 'nodes' may yield only fat.
Reactive hyperplasia
 si od p e p s  s a po a
hyperplasia, resulting from antigenic stimulation of the lymph nodes. Reactive
hyperplasia is characterised cytologically by an increase in the number of medium-
sized lymphocytes and large immature lymphoid cells, such as immunoblasts
and centroblasts, in relation to the number of small, normal lymphocytes. There are
also increased numbers of mitoses, lymphoplasmacytoid cells (cells which are inter-
mediate between an immunoblast and plasma cell) and plasma cells (Figure 3.2).
Cytology of the Lymphoid Tissues
35
Figure 3.2 Aspirate of a hyperplastic lymph node. Several mature lymphocytes, an
immunoblast (arrow), two neutrophils and several dark-blue plasma cells (arrowheads) are
present. Inset: A Mott cell, i.e. a plasma cell with so-called Russell bodies in the cytoplasm.
Sometimes so-called Russell bodies are seen in the cytoplasm of plasma cells
(Mott cells). These are vacuoles filled with immunoglobulins (Figure 3.2).
 Depending on the underlying cause, there may also be increased numbers of
other cell types, such as histiocytes (macrophages, dendritic cells, interdigitating
cells), polymorphonuclear granulocytes and, especially in skin disorders, eosinophils
and mast cells.
Lymphadenitis
The presence of many inflammatory cells in the lymph node is referred to as
lymphadenitis. Differentiation into purulent and granulomatous lymphadenitis
is made according to the predominant inflammatory cell type present.
Purulent lymphadenitis is characterised by an increased number of neutrophils.
usually combined with a reactive lymphoid cell population and a few macrophages
(Figure 3.3). Differentiation from reactive lymphoid hyperplasia may be difficult,
but can also be quite clear, as in bacterial lymphadenitis which is characterised by
an abundance of neutrophils and very few or a complete absence of lymphoid cells
There may be evidence of necrosis, and bacteria may be present. An increase in
eosinophils is seen mainly in allergic dermatitis, some parasitic infections, but also
in abdominal lymph nodes in cats with the hypereosinophilic syndrome.
Granulomatous lymphadenitis is also usually characterised by a slightly reactive
lymphoid picture and increased numbers of macrophages, epithelioid antigen-
with an elongated oval nucleus, which is often indented and has a finely granular
chromatin pattern. Epithelioid cells possess a variable (often minimal) amount of
cytoplasm. These cells may be arranged in clusters which can resemble carcinoma
36
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.3  Purulent lymphadenitis. Mixture of small lymphocytes and many neutrophils.
In the background are some 'threads' of degenerate nuclear material.
Figure 3.4 Pyogranulomatous lymphadenitis in a dog. Multinucleated giant cells,
quadrant, fungal hyphae can be seen.
metastases. Granulomatous lymphadenitis is seen in fungal and yeast infections
(Figure 3.4 and Figure 3.5); protozoal infections, e.g. toxoplasmosis and leish-
maniasis (Figure 3.6); and certain bacterial infections (e.g. infections with
Mycobacterium spp.) (Figure 3.7).
A dermatopathic lympbadenopathy is a granulomatous lymphadenitis which
 Occurs with skin disorders in which pruritus, scaling of skin and skin damage
are prominent. The cellular picture is characterised by the presence of many
brown-black melanin granules and a few eosinophils. Interdigitating cells are also
encountered. These are elongated histiocytes with a characteristic indentation
of the nucleus with a reticulated chromatin pattern (Figure 3.8). They can often
only be identified as naked nuclei
Figure 3.5 Lymph node aspirate from a cat with cryptococcosis. Among the lymphocytes,
plasma cells and the occasional eosinophil two Cryptococcus neoformans yeasts are visible
(arrows). Note the non-staining thick capsule and the thin double cell wall.
Figure 3.6 Dog with leishmaniasis. The amastigotes are present in the cytoplasm of the
macrophages but can also be seen individually in the background of the smear. A few
lymphocytes and plasma cells are present.
Figure 3.7  Granulomatous lymphadenitis due to mycobacterial infection in a cat. Several
same organisms stain acid-fast after restaining of slide with Ziehl-Neelsen.
38
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.8 Dermatopathic lymphadenopathy in a dog. There are many brown-black melanin
 granules in the background, several mature lymphocytes and a large bare' nucleus of an
interdigitating cell (arrow).
Neoplasia
Metastatic malignancies
In principle, all malignant tumours can metastasise via the lymphatic system.
Some types of tumour metastasise earlier than others to the regional lymph node
 Sarcomas generally spread by the haematogenous rather than by the lymphogenous
route. Carcinomas (Figure 3.9), melanomas (Figure 3.10) and mast cells tumours
(Figure 3.11) often metastasise to the lymph node, although this also depends upon
the histological sub-type.
A cytological preparation from a lymph node which contains cells that are
 n   n  n  d  s
important to note, however, that a lymph node aspirate may occasionally
harvest cells from adjacent tissue. Hence it is necessary to first evaluate the
foreign' cells for malignant characteristics before a diagnosis of tumour metas-
tasis is made. It is also possible that a single aspirate may occasionally contain cells
from both the primary tumour and the adjacent lymph node, e.g. if a normal or
reactive supramammary lymph node and a caudal neoplastic mammary gland
are aspirated simultaneously, an erroneous diagnosis of tumour metastasis
may result.
In addition to the presence of metastatic cells, lymph node cytology also
n o ai oi asuodsa au a jo sa e se sao uaq saoun
The number of macrophages, plasma cells and younger larger lymphoid cells is
 often increased. A few mast cells are always identified in a normal or hyperplastic
lymph node. According to the literature, however, the number should not exceed
3%. An increased number of mast cells is suggestive of mast cell tumour metastasis
 or even mast cell leukaemia.
Figure 3.9 Adenocarcinoma metastases of a mammary gland tumour in a prescapular
Figure 3.10 Melanoma metastasis in a canine lymph node. The majority of cells are
tumour cells, although only a few contain intracytoplasmic fine black melanin granules.
Figure 3.11  A lymph node with mast cell tumour metastases. The mast cells vary in size
and have prominent nucleoli. A binucleated cell can also be seen.
40
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Lymphoid malignancies
The cytological appearance of malignant lymphoma varies. A lymphoid cell can
become malignant during each stage of its development, either by an arrest in further
differentiation or by autonomous proliferation of a particular cell type (Figure 3.12).
The cell types which are encountered in malignant lymphoma thus do not differ in
appearance from normal
Iymphoid cells.
. The cytological differentiation rests on the
population;
;: while in a non-lymphomatous lymph
node, all different maturation stages of the
lymphoid series are visible
Various classification schemes have been developed for non-Hodgkin's lympho-
mas in man. The Kiel classification system is based entirely on the transformation
scheme for normal lymphocytes
s and is very suitable for cytological
 purposes
(Table 3.1 and Figure
3.12).In the literature,
 this Kiel classification has been
applied successfully to malignant lymphomas of dogs. There is as yet no informa-
tion about the applicability of this classification for malignant lymphomas of cats.
From a practical viewpoint, the diagnosis of malignant lymphoma and its sub-
classification into low- or high-grade lymphoma is usually sufficient and has prog-
nostic clinical significance. The classification into low- and high-grade lymphoma
has a fair to good inter-observer agreement, but further sub-classification into the
various sub-types has a much lower inter-observer agreement. It should also be
emphasised that the classification into the Kiel classification sub-groups is based on
cytomorphology and that a reliable prediction of immunophenotype is not possible
on cytology alone. Additional immunophenotyping into B- or T-cell lymphomas
 can be performed on unstained direct smears or cytospin preparations (Figure 3.13).
Precursor
Timmunoblast
cell
T1-ly
T2-ly
（
Lymphoplasma-
cytoid cell
B-immunoblast
Stem cell
Plasmacell
B1-ly
Centrocyte
B2-y
Centroblast
Figure 3.121
Transformation scheme of normal lymphocytes. Source: after Lennert, K and
Feller,A.C.(1990) DieKiel-Klassifikation.In Histopathologie der Non-Hodgkin-Lymphome
@ Springer Science+Business Media; adapted from: van Heerde, P (1984).
Cytology of the Lymphoid Tissues
41
Table 3.1Simplified classification of malignant
lymphomas by celltype,based onthe Kiel
classification
 Low-grade malignant lymphoma
Lymphocytic
Immunocytic
 Plasmacytic
Centrocytic
Centroblastic/centrocytic
High-grade malignant lymphoma
Centroblastic
Pure centroblastic
Anaplastic centrocytic
Polymorphic centroblastic
Lymphoblastic
Immunoblastic
Other
Histiocytic
'Multilobated’ cell
Source: Data from Lennert and Mohri (1978).
Figure 3.13  Immunostaining with CD79a antibody of a cytospin preparation from an
aspirate of a canine malignant lymphoma, demonstrating the B-cell origin of the tumour.
A diagnosis of lymphoma is relatively straightforward if the aspirated cell
 population consists mainly of blasts. However, there are also forms of lymphoma,
for example, lymphocytic and centrocytic lymphomas, in which the tumour cells
more closely resemble mature lymphocytes. Also the diagnosis may be more
42
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
difficult when the lymphoma contains more than one cell type, as in the immuno-
cytic or centroblastic/centrocytic sub-types. In many cases, the presence of enlarged
lymph nodes and the non-reactive appearance of the lymphoid cell population
may be decisive, especially if the cell population is monomorphic. When plasma
cells or other inflammatory cells are present, the diagnosis may be in doubt, and
histopathological examination of a surgical biopsy may be required for a definitive
diagnosis.
Morphology of canine lymphomas classified
by the Kiel classification
Lymphocyticlymphoma
This type of lymphoma consists of a monomorphic population of small, mature
lymphocytes. In the new Revised European American Lymphoma/World Health
       ss  
group as chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. The cytological appearance is often
difficult to differentiate from a normal non-reactive lymph node. If the lympho-
cytic lymphoma consists of B-lymphocytes, which can only be confirmed with
certainty by immunophenotyping, the cells have a narrow rim of cytoplasm
and the nuclei tend to be round with coarsely clumped chromatin pattern. This
is in contrast to the T-lymphocytic lymphoma, in which the nucleus is slightly
indented and has a dense chromatin pattern. Both types of lymphoma exhibit
little cell multiplication. Lymphocytic lymphoma occurs infrequently in dogs
(Figure 3.14).
Lympboplasmacytoid/immunocytic lympboma
more cytoplasm than the cells of a lymphocytic lymphoma. The round nucleus
may be ecentrically located, and an inconspicuous nucleolus may be present.
This cell type has developed a little further in the direction of the plasma cell.
This lymphoma sub-type is classified as a lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma
(Figure 3.15). The term immunocytic lymphoma is used when the majority of the
cells are small lymphocytes but centrocytes, immunoblasts and plasma cells are
also present (Figure 3.16).
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma consists of a mixed population of medium-sized and
large cells. This type of lymphoma is difficult to differentiate from other lymphoma
sub-types because reactive plasma cells may be intermixed between the tumour
cells. The finding of the so-called *hand-mirror’ forms is suggestive for T-cell
lymphoma (Figure 3.17).
Plasmacytic lympboma
Plasmacytic lymphoma is extremely rare (Figure 3.18). This type of lymphoma
is characterised by the presence of atypical plasma cells in varying stages of
development.
Figure 3.14 A monomorphic population of small, mature lymphocytes in a dog with
lymphocytic lymphoma.
Figure 3.15 Lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma in a dog. Note the monomorphic population
small- to medium-sized lymphoid cells with abundant cytoplasm. The nucleus is sometimes
eccentricallyplaced.
Figure 3.16 In this immunocytic canine lymphoma, a mixture of lymphoplasmacytoid cells
(green arrow), centrocytes (yellow arrows) and immunoblasts (black arrows) can be seen next
tosomesmallymphocytes(red arrows).
44
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.17 Small cell lymphoma in a dog demonstrating so-called hand-mirror' forms.
 The cytoplasmic protrusions are called uropods and are suggestive of T-cell origin.
Centrocytic lympboma
This lymphoma consists primarily of centrocytes. Centrocytes are small cells with an
irregular, sometimes indented nucleus (Figure 3.19). The cytoplasm is often absent
 or is very pale. The chromatin pattern is fine and there are usually no visible nucleoli.
Centroblastic/centrocyticlympboma
troblasts (Figure 3.19). Centroblasts have a rim of dark basophilic cytoplasm and
 a large, round nucleus with multiple nucleoli that often lie adjacent to the nuclear
Cytology of the Lymphoid Tissues
45
Figure 3.19 Centroblastic/centrocytic lymphoma. A mixed population of large centroblasts
(black arrows) and smaller centrocytes (cleaved cells; red arrows) is present.
Figure 3.20  Aspirate of a centroblastic canine lymphoma. Large cells with dark-blue
cytoplasm and large nuclei containing multiple small nucleoli are present.
membrane. Many mitoses are present. If the percentage of centroblasts is higher
than 30-50%, the lymphoma is classified as centroblastic (Figure 3.20).
Centroblastic lymphoma
The primary cell type is the centroblast, but a few centrocytes will often be present.
There are two forms of this sub-type. If immunoblasts are present in addition to
centroblasts, the tumour is called a ‘polymorphic centroblastic' lymphoma
(Figure 3.21). If there are more than 50% immunoblasts, the tumour is referred
to as an immunoblastic lymphoma (see following text). The other form is the
'anaplastic centrocytic (centrocytoid) lymphoma (Figure 3.22). Anaplastic centro-
cytes are cells which morphologically resemble centrocytes, but they have a larger
and irregularly shaped nucleus with a coarser chromatin pattern and, in contrast to
4G
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.21 Polymorphic centroblastic malignant lymphoma. A monomorphic population of
round centroblasts (with multiple small nucleoli). In addition, a few immunoblasts with a
(tingiblebodies')is alsovisible.
Figure 3.22Anaplastic centrocytic or centrocytoid canine lymphoma characterised by large
cells with irregularly shaped nuclei, no visible nucleoli and a small amount of pale cytoplasm.
centrocytes, a minimal amount of pale cytoplasm. In the dog, the centroblastic,
polymorphic centroblastic and anaplastic centrocytic sub-types are the most
frequently occurring types of lymphoma.
Lymphoblasticlympboma
Lymphoblastic lymphoma occurs infrequently in the dog. The lymphoblast is
a medium-sized, round to oval cell with a thin rim of light to moderately basophilic
cytoplasm that is sometimes vacuolated. The nucleus has a fine chromatin pattern
Cytology of the Lymphoid Tissues
47
Figure 3.23 Immunoblastic lymphoma (dog). Apart from some naked nuclei in the
background, a monomorphous population of immunoblasts characterised by a large centrally
located nucleolus is present.
with a few small nucleoli. Many mitotic figures can be present. In humans this type
of lymphoma sometimes contains 'starry sky’ macrophages (Figure 3.21), which
are thought to be characteristic of a certain sub-type, the so-called Burkitt's
lymphoma. In the dog, however, this type of large, vacuolated macrophage that has
 phagocytised cellular debris can be identified in various types of lymphoma.
Immunoblastic lympboma
If at least 50% of the cells in a preparation are immunoblasts, a diagnosis of
immunoblastic lymphoma is made (Figure 3.23). Immunoblasts are large cells with
moderate amount of basophilic cytoplasm and a large, round often eccentrically
placed nucleus containing a single large, centrally located nucleolus. In the dog, in
addition to these large immunoblasts, there is also a smaller type of immunoblast
with a smaller centrally placed nucleus. In common with the larger immunoblasts,
these cells have a large centrally located nucleolus.
Multilobated lympbomas
This sub-type is characterised by the presence of a large number of blasts with
multilobulated nuclei (Figure 3.24).
Feline malignant lympboma
 In principle, the same sub-types of lymphoma can also be seen in the cat; however,
the majority of feline lymphomas are more pleomorphic, making a diagnosis more
( a -q o  sd a a si ou rd go 
48
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.24 Multilobated lymphoma (dog). A population of large cells with irregular,
sometimes multilobulated nuclei can be seen. in the background, several smallymphocytes
are present.
Figure 3.25 Large cell lymphoma in a cat. The nuclei are large and sometimes irregularly
shaped and have a very prominent centrally located nucleolus, suggesting immunoblastic
origin.
and the large granular lymphocyte (LGL) lymphoma (Figure 3.26). The latter is
thought to be of T-cell (natural killer cell) origin.
Histiocyticsarcoma
The tumour cells are large cells with abundant, sometimes vacuolated cytoplasm.
The nuclei are large and extremely pleomorphic (kidney-shaped, ring-shaped or
an aq re shan aos pue uas aq e s pade-np,
Figure 3.27). The nucleoli may be extremely large and prominent. Some tumour
cells may show evidence of phagocytosis; however, this is not a pathognomonic
feature.
Cytology of the Lymphoid Tissues
49
Figure 3.26 Aspirate of an abdominal lymph node in a cat with a LGL lymphoma. Note the
large azurophilic cytoplasmic granules which can also be seen free in the background.
(A)
Figure 3.27 Histiocytic sarcoma in a canine lymph node. The tumour consists of
large cells, with irregular, sometimes kidney-shaped, nuclei and abundant grey-blue
cytoplasm with a few small vacuoles. Inset: (A) A ring-shaped or 'donut' cell.
(B) A multinucleated cell.
Thespleen
Splenomegaly and localised abnormalities identified by radiography or ultra-
sound are indications for fine-needle aspiration. The spleen is the largest lymphoid
organ. It has no afferent lymphatic vessels, and its sinuses are filled with blood
instead of lymph. The spleen is surrounded by a capsule from which many
50
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
trabeculae infiltrate the organ. The parenchyma is divided into white pulp and
red pulp. The white pulp is lymphatic tissue which forms nodules, and the red
pulp consists of erythrocytes. The spleen plays an important role in both the
immune system and haematopoiesis, and the cytological content is therefore
influenced by both systems.
Fine-needle aspiration is best performed under ultrasound guidance.
 Both the aspiration and non-aspiration techniques have been advocated (see
Chapter 1). The latter technique is preferred in order to minimise blood
contamination.
Benign changes
The reactive patterns are similar to those that occur in lymph nodes. A reactive or
byperplastic spleen (Figure 3.28) is therefore characterised by increased numbers
of plasma cells and immature medium-sized or large lymphocytes. In addition,
there may also be increased numbers of neutrophils, eosinophils, mast cells and
macrophages. Erythrophagocytosis, with or without haemosiderosis, can be seen
in immune-mediated or neoplastic disease (Figure 3.29). Extramedullary erythro-
poiesis or haematopoiesis is the most commonly encountered splenic abnormality
and is characterised by the presence of red and white cell precursors and large
megakaryocytes (Figure 3.30). Stromal components, e.g. connective tissue and
capillaries, may also sometimes be aspirated (Figure 3.31)
Splenitis can be infectious and non-infectious in origin. It is characterised
by increased numbers of neutrophils and/or eosinophils. As in the lymph node,
histiocytic inflammation or hyperplasia can be caused by protozoal infec-
tions, e.g. leishmaniasis or fungal i
infections such as cytauxzoonosis and
cryptococcosis.
Figure 3.28 Splenic hyperplasia (dog). A mixed population of small- and medium-sized
ymphocytes and some plasma cells are present. Note the streaks of pink nuclear material
from damaged cells. Inset: High power magnification of the same aspirate.
Figure 3.29 Aspirate of enlarged spleen in a dog with immune-mediated haemolytic
anaemia. Several macrophages demonstrate erythrophagocytosis.
erythroblasts and normoblasts, are present indicating extramedullary haematopoiesis. Inset: A
large megakaryocyte and erythroid precursors are present in this splenic aspirate.
Figure 3.31  Splenic aspirate (dog). Connective tissue containing capillaries, lymphocytes
and plasma cells can be seen.
52
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.32 Splenic aspirate of a dog with the haemophagocytic syndrome. Several
macrophages which have phagocytosed red cells and neutrophils are present.
Haemophagocytic syndrome refers to a non-neoplastic polyclonal proliferation
of activated histiocytes in different organs, e.g. bone marrow and spleen. It can be
associated with immune-mediated, infectious and neoplastic or myelodysplastic
conditions. It also occurs as an idiopathic condition. It is characterised by the
 presence of bicytopenia or pancytopenia in the blood and many haemophagocytic
macrophages in the bone marrow or spleen (Figure 3.32).
Neoplasia
The same haematopoietic tumours that can involve lymph nodes may affect
the spleen, i.e. malignant lymphoma and histiocytic sarcoma (see the section
on lymph nodes for detailed descriptions of these tumours). In addition to
lymphoma, the spleen may be secondarily involved in animals with leukaemias
(Figure 3.33). Differentiation of lymphoid leukaemias from primary lymphoma
is often difficult.
Other
haematopoietic
tumours
which
can involve the spleen include
plasma cell tumours (extramedullary myelomas or plasmacytomas) (Figure 3.34)
and mastocytosis (Figure 3.35); the latter is more often seen in cats. Extramedullary
myelomas and mastocytosis usually result in diffuse enlargement of the spleen and
total replacement of the normal lymphoid cell population by neoplastic plasma
cells and mast cells, respectively
Mesenchymal tumours form by far the largest proportion of non-haematopoietic
tumours (Figure 3.36). More than 90% of these are malignant and haemangiosar-
comas are the most common. A definitive cytological diagnosis is difficult as is
often the case with mesenchymal tumours.
s. In addition, cell yield is often poor,
and interpretation is hampered by severe blood contamination. Other cytological
abnormalities
such
1 as reactive
lymphoid hyperplasia, é
erythrophagocytosis
and extramedullary haematopoiesis can occur concurrently. Metastatic tumours
Figure 3.33
Monomorphous population of blast cells in the spleen of a dog with acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia.
Figure 3.34 Splenic aspirate of a dog with an extramedullary multiple myeloma. Many
plasma cells have the unique cytomorphologic appearance of so-called flame cells with
basophilic cytoplasm bordered by a magenta rim.
Figure 3.35 Mastocytosis of the spleen in a cat. A monomorphic population of mast cells
with very fine purple cytoplasmic granules, characteristic for cats, is present.
54
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.36 Splenic fibrosarcoma. The fibroblasts are located in a pink amorphous
extracellular material.
involving the spleen are rare (metastases of carcinomas or melanomas are
occasionally found in the spleen).
Thymus
The thymus varies in size and development with the age of the animal. The
thymus consists of two lobes united by connective tissue. Each lobe is composed
of numerous lobules, each containing cortical and medullary components. The
cortex contains densely packed small lymphocytes within a network of epithelial
reticular cells. In the medulla, the lymphocytes are less numerous and the reticu-
lum is more prominent. The lymphocytes have more variation in nuclear size and
cytoplasmic volume. Other cell types, e.g. mast cells, eosinophils and Langerhans
 u se ood n as a ad  sdo  sd ose e s
lymph node can be found in the thymus.
Pathology of the thymus is usually tumour related, although rare cases of
 aaq a sis  s on e o a  ia
  s     do d o s o
lymphoma and thymoma. The malignant lymphomas are similar to those
described already earlier in this chapter. Thymomas are rare tumours which
originate from the epithelial cells within the thymus. Although benign and
malignant thymomas have been described, the term malignant refers more to
the clinical behaviour of the tumour rather than its cytological or histological
appearance. Three different sub-types of thymoma can be recognised. In the
epithelial thymoma, the reticular epithelial cells predominate, and only a few
small lymphocytes may be present. The epithelial cells have large open vesicular
nuclei. The cytoplasm is often absent or poorly defined. In predominantly
Cytology of the Lymphoid Tissues
55
Figure 3.37 Lymphocytic thymoma (dog). A population of predominantly small lymphocytes
is present. Two mast cells can also be seen.
Figure 3.38
Mixed epithelial-lymphocytic thymoma in a dog. Small lymphocytes
predominate, but epithelial cells with large vesicular nuclei are also present (arrows). The
Cytoplasmic margins of these cells are poorly defined.
lymphocytic thymomas (Figure 3.37), there are very few recognisable epithelial
cells present. In mixed epithelial-lymphocytic thymomas (Figure 3.38), both cell
types are present although the lymphocytic component is more prominent. Mast
cells may also be present in some of these thymomas.
Acknowledgement
This chapter is based on: Teske, E. (2009) Clinical cytology of companion animals:
Part 3. Cytology of the lymph node. European Journal of Companion Animal
Practice 19(2), 117-124. Reproduced with permission of FECAVA.
4
Cytology of Cutaneous and
Subcutaneous Lesions
John Dunn
Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd, Newton Abbot, Devon,UK
Introduction
Most cutaneous and subcutaneous lesions can be classified sufficiently on a
cytological basis to provide meaningful clinical guidance. Specimens for cytological
examination are usually obtained by fine-needle aspiration or, if the lesion is
ulcerated, by making impression smears (imprints).
type of lesion under investigation. Most mast cell tumours and histiocytomas
can be diagnosed definitively on the basis of cytological examination alone
(although histology is usually required to grade mast cell tumours (MCT)). In
contrast, I
most mesenchymal t
tumours  require histological  confirmation  to
precisely define tissue type.
Normal cell types
Normal skin is composed of several layers of squamous epithelial cells. Basal
epithelial cells are round, are deeply basophilic and have a high nuclear to cyto-
plasmic ratio. The cells in the most superficial layer become cornified (keratinised),
and their nuclei become pyknotic or disappear completely.
Aspirates from cutaneous or subcutaneous lesions may contain variable
numbers of cornified squamous epithelial cells or anucleated keratinised squames
(also referred to as keratin scrolls or bars; Figure 4.1). Sebaceous epithelial cells
and adipocytes may also be aspirated from perilesional sebaceous glands and
adipose tissue. Impression smears or scrapings of ulcerated lesions may contain
only superficial cells, and secondary inflammation and/or infection may result in
dysplastic changes which can mimic those associated with neoplasia (some impres-
sion smears may therefore not be truly representative of underlying pathology).
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
58
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.1 Anucleated keratinised squames (keratin scrolls).
Non-neoplastic lesions
Haematomas are large blood-filled masses usually resulting from trauma. An
aspirate from a recently formed haematoma has the appearance of blood except
that platelets are usually absent. As healing progresses, fibrocytes or fibroblasts
and reactive macrophages may be seen (Figure 4.2).
Sialocoeles often form in the submandibular region or under the tongue. They
contain clear or blood-tinged fluid which appears viscous (Figure 4.3).
Cutaneous abscesses are common in cats and are often the result of a bite wound
Anal sac abscesses commonly occur in the dog. Cytological examination reveals a
large number of extremely degenerate neutrophils, many of which may contain
s aq  oe s i yo sr  so  asa ssss
within the cytoplasm of macrophages on a Romanowsky-stained smear (these
        d  
and Figure 15.2E)).
 A pyogranulomatous response, characterised by a mixed population of non-
 degenerate neutrophils and macrophages, can be seen in aspirates from injection
site reactions or lick granulomas (Figure 4.5). Variable numbers of small
lymphocytes, plasma cells and mesenchymal-type cells may also be seen.
Eosinophilic plaques, granulomas or ulcers (eosinophilic granuloma complex)
are especially common in cats but may also occur in dogs. These ulcerated lesions
can occur on the face, trunk and thighs and occasionally in the oral cavity. When
located on the upper lip, the lesions are often called 'rodent ulcers' (Figure 4.6).
     o     s
They are usually round and well circumscribed and are often located on the dorsum
or tail head (Figure 4.7; see also Figure 2.25). Rupture of the cyst can induce a
secondary localised pyogranulomatous response.
Cytology of Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Lesions
59
Figure 4.2 Haematoma. The reactive macrophages in this aspirate from an older lesion
contain phagocytosed red cells. Source: Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd.
(A)
(B)
Figure 4.3 Sialocoele. (A) This aspirate contains a few red cells and large finely vacuolated
mononuclear cells (these may be salivary epithelial cells or macrophages). (B) This aspirate
also contains eosinophilic material which is probably saliva. Inset: Some cells contain
rhombotic haematoidin crystals which represent haemoglobin breakdown product.
Figure 4.4 Anal sac abscess. Note the large number of degenerate neutrophils containing
intracellularbacteria.
Figure 4.5 Lick granuloma. Note the mixed population of reactive macrophages and
Figure4.6
An impression smear of an eosinophilic granuloma (rodent ulcer') on the upper
lip of a cat. Eosinophils and neutrophils predominate and there is evidence of secondary
bacterial infection. Although not present here, mast cells may also be seen.
Cytology of Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Lesions
61
Figure 4.7 Epithelial inclusion or follicular cyst. This aspirate consists of keratin scrolls,
anucleated keratinised squames and amorphous cellular debris. The large negatively stained
structures are cholosterol cyrstals (these form from the degradation of cells within the cyst).
Inset: Cholesterol crystals and amorphous keratinised debris. Source: Axiom Veterinary
LaboratoriesLtd.
Figure 4.8 Hygroma. Red cells and two reactive macrophages containing phagocytosed
red cells can be seen. Reactive fibrocytes may also be present.
Hygromas (Figure 4.8) are fluid-filled soft tissue swellings most often located
 on the elbows of large breed dogs. They result from repeated trauma or pressure.
 Aspirates from seromas appear similar but are usually less cellular.
Foreign body reactions (Figure 4.9) result from penetration of the skin by
plant or some other inert material. The lesions are often fistulous and drain
blood-tinged, sometimes purulent fluid. Cytological examination of swab smears 
may be useful.
62
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.9 Foreign body reactions are characterised by a mixed inflammatory response
consisting primarily of macrophages and lymphocytes with a variable number of neutrophils.
A large multinucleated giant cell (arrow) and numerous neutrophils can be seen here. There 
may be evidence of a fibroblastic response and secondary infection is common.
Source: Dunn and Villiers (1998a). Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
Acantholytic keratinocytes
Figure 4.10  Pemphigus foliaceus. Aspirate from an intact pustule consisting of neutrophils
Pemphigus foliaceus (Figure 4.10) is an immune-mediated skin disease charac-
terised by the formation of pustules particularly on the head (nose and pinnae)
and pads which subsequently rupture and form crusts.
Neoplastic lesions
Epithelialtumours
Basal cell tumours (trichoblastomas) are typically single well-circumscribed intra-
dermal lesions which are usually benign. They are most frequently located on the
head, neck and limbs. Basal epithelial cells usually predominate but there may also
Cytology of Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Lesions
63
(A)
(B)
Keratohyaline
granules
Sebaceous
epithelial cells
Figure 4.11  Basal celltumour. (A) Shows a compact cluster of small basal epithelial
cells. These cells are of uniform size and shape and have a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio.
(B) Shows these cells when viewed side-on (green arrowhead). Note the keratohyaline
granules (short arrows) and small cluster of sebaceous epithelial cells (long arrow).
Source: Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd.
be scattered sebaceous epithelial cells and keratinocytes, suggesting a degree of
sebaceous or follicular differentiation (Figure 4.11). Basal cell tumours may there-
fore be difficult to differentiate from other adnexal tumours, and histopathology
may be required. Some tumours appear pigmented if the cells contain melanin
pigment gra nules.
Sebaceous adenomas (Figure 4.12) are often mistakenly referred to as ^warts'.
They are small, usually multilobulated lesions which tend to occur most frequently
on the head, neck and trunk of older dogs. Sebaceous adenocarcinomas are
relatively rare. They may be ulcerated and poorly circumscribed and the sebaceous
epithelial cells show obvious criteria of malignancy.
Squamous cell carcinomas (Figure 4.13) most frequently occur on the tips of
the pinnae or nose of cats and the limbs, especially the digits, nail beds and pads,
of dogs. These tumours tend to ulcerate, are locally invasive and may metastasise
to the regional lymph node.
Figure 4.12 Sebaceous adenoma. These sebaceous epithelial cells contain a moderate
amount of pale vacuolated cytoplasm and a poorly defined centrally located nucleus.
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 4.13 Squamous cell carcinoma. (A) This aspirate from a well-differentiated tumour
margins. There is evidence of nuclear atypia (coarse nuclear chromatin and visible nucleoli.
Inset: Some epithelial cells may contain other cell types, e.g. neutrophils (this is termed
emperipolesis). (B) Less well-differentiated tumours show a more marked degree of 
anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, and the cells have a higher nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and
the nuclei contain visible nucleoli. Note the perinuclear vacuolation and neutrophils
(squamous cell tumours often elicit an intense inflammatory response and, since the lesions 
are frequently ulcerated, secondary infection is common). Source: Villiers and Blackwood
(2005). Reproduced with permission of BSAVA. (C) The cells may be concentrically arranged
to form the keratin pearls seen on histology sections.
Cytology of Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Lesions
65
Figure 4.14
Perianal adenoma. The hepatoid cells have abundant granular pinkish/blue
cytoplasm and a round nucleus containing one or more prominent nucleoli. Inset: Smaller
basophilic reserve cells with a flattened nucleus (arrow) are present between the hepatoid cells.
Figure 4.15 Apocrine gland carcinoma of the anal sac. Cells from these tumours usually
exfoliate in large sheets or clusters, have a moderate amount of pale basophilic cytoplasm,
a round or oval-shaped nucleus and a variable nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. Cytoplasmic
margins are poorly defined. Malignant characteristics are usually present but may not be as
pronounced as with carcinomas involving other tissues. Source: Axiom Veterinary
Laboratories Ltd.
Perianal adenomas (Figure 4.14) are usually seen in intact male dogs (occasionally
in females), and most are located adjacent to the anus (occasionally on the tail, pre-
 puce and perineum). The cells exfoliate in clusters and are hepatoid in appearance (i.e.
they resemble hepatocytes). Perianal adenocarcinomas are rarely encountered. They
tend to show more obvious criteria of malignancy, but some may appear well differ-
entiated and cannot reliably be differentiated from adenomas on a cytological basis.
Apocrine gland adenocarcinomas of the anal sac (Figure 4.15) arise from the
 glands in the walls of the anal sacs. They have a greater tendency to occur in older
female dogs. Adenocarcinomas of the anal sac are malignant and have often
66
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.16 Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma of the external ear canal. The neoplastic
cells contain globules of black secretory material which obscure morphological detail.
Neutrophils are also present.
 rh 'so ae a a a aq sou qd rqns a on ears
reason it is important they are differentiated from perianal adenomas. More than
 50% of cases have a paraneoplastic hypercalcaemia.
Ceruminous gland carcinomas (Figure 4.16) arise from the sweat glands in the
external ear canal. They more commonly occur in cats. They are locally invasive
and may metastasise to the regional lymph nodes.
Mesenchymal tumours
Lipomas (Figure 4.17). Aspirates from lipomas have a greasy appearance and
consist of numerous fat droplets which can be stained with Sudan red (these fat
droplets disappear if alcohol fixative is used). Liposarcomas are rare tumours.
They have been reported most frequently on the ventral abdomen. They are firm
and poorly demarcated and adhere to underlying tissue. Some may ulcerate. The
cells show obvious malignant features.
Haemangiopericytoma is an example of a perivascular wall tumour that arises
 ae  so  o  t't i ss oo   so 
frequently located on the limbs. They are locally invasive and rarely metastasise
but recurrence is common.
Cutaneous haemangiomas are benign tumours arising from vascular endo-
a a ns s  so n   a  n p
lial cells are often present in very low numbers and may be difficult to identify
because of blood contamination. Cutaneous haemangiosarcomas (Figure 4.19)
are rare tumours of older dogs and cats. Some appear well differentiated and
cannot be reliably differentiated from haemangiomas. In contrast, the cells
aspirated from anaplastic haemangiosarcomas show obvious malignant features.
(A)
(B)
Figure 4.17
Lipoma. (A) Intact adipocytes may be aspirated either singly or in large clusters.
Adipocytes have abundant clear cytoplasm and a small dark nucleus which is compressed
on the periphery of the cell. Inset: Small blood vessels may also be seen (arrow). (B)
Liposarcoma. Note the plump spindle-shaped mesenchymal cells with numerous variably
sized cytoplasmic lipid vacuoles, a vesicular nucleus and multiple nucleoli. Source: Axiom
Veterinary Laboratories Ltd.
Figure 4.18 Haemangiopericytoma (perivascular wall tumour). These plump spindle cells
have an oval-shaped nucleus and basophilic cytoplasm which may be vacuolated. Cytoplasmic
margins are poorly defined and nuclear chromatin has a coarse stippled appearance.
Source: Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd.
68
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.19 Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma. Note the spindle-shaped cells and eosinophilic
matrixmaterial.A moderate degree of anisocytosis and anisokaryosis isevident.
Source: Emma Dewhurst/Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 4.20 Fibrosarcoma. Cells from less well-differentiated fibrosarcomas are plumper and
have a higher nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. The nuclei possess multiple nucleoli and the cells
are associated with eosinophilic collagenous material. Inset: Vaccine-induced fibrosarcoma in a
cat. Source: Dunn and Villiers (1998a). Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
There may be evidence of erythrophagocytosis and/or chronic haemorrhage (e.g.
haemosiderin-laden macrophages may be present).
Fibromas are relatively rare tumours and are composed of well-differentiated
spindle cells with an oval-shaped nucleus and elongated cytoplasmic tails.
 Fibrosarcomas (Figure 4.20) are more common in the cat and have a predilection 
for the oral cavity, head and limbs. These tumours are poorly circumscribed and
may ulcerate. Aspirates taken from reactive granulation tissue, fibromas and well-
differentiated fibrosarcomas may appear remarkably similar, making cytological
differentiation difficult. Feline sarcoma virus causes multiple fibrosarcomas in young
cats. Vaccine-induced fibrosarcomas are locally invasive and slow to metastasise.
Melanoma (Figure 4.21). Benign and malignant melanomas occur more
(uq ae op a u sou iso) so uu sop u unba
Cytology of Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Lesions
69
Figure 4.21 Malignant melanoma. Cells from poorly differentiated melanomas may contain
relatively scant melanin pigment granules, and the cells usually have large nuclei containing
several large irregular nucleoli. A moderate degree of anisocytosis and anisokaryosis is
evident. Inset: These cells from a benign melanoma are of uniform size and shape. Note the
abundant free melanin pigment granules in the background. Source: inset - Dilini
Thilakaratne, James Cook University, Australia. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 4.22  Anaplastic giant cell (sof tissue) sarcoma. Plump mesenchymal cells and large
showing multiple criteria for malignancy.
They appear as raised dark brown/black well-circumscribed masses. The cyto-
 logical appearance of cells in aspirates from melanomas is variable (some may
resemble those seen in discrete round cell tumours). Melanin pigment granules
q  a a s  s a  s a a 
with careful examination melanin granules can usually be seen in a few cells.
Anaplastic giant cell (soft tissue) sarcomas occur most frequently on the limbs of
older dogs and cats and involve subcutaneous tissue or skeletal muscle (Figure 4.22).
They are firm, poorly circumscribed and attached to underlying structures.
70
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
ymphocytes
Figure 4.23 Canine histiocytoma. These cells have a moderate amount of pale basophilic
cytoplasm. The nuclei are round, oval or indented and some nuclei contain one or more
poorly defined nucleoli. Despite the fact that these tumours are benign, a mild to moderate
degree of anisocytosis and anisokaryosis is evident. An increased number of lymphocytes
(arrows) can be seen as these lesions start to regress.
Round cell tumours
Canine histiocytoma (Figure 4.23). Most histiocytomas occur in young dogs less
than 5 years of age. They are small raised, well-circumscribed hairless tumours
which can occur on the head (especially the pinnae), paws, limbs and trunk. Some
may ulcerate and most regress spontaneously.
Other histiocytic neoplasms which can involve the skin include cutaneous
histiocytosis, systemic histiocytosis and malignant histiocytosis ( or histiocytic sarcoma).
Canine cutaneous histiocytosis is characterised by the development of multifocal lesions
similar to those described for cutaneous histiocytoma. Systemic histiocytosis occurs in
young adult male Bernese mountain dogs but has also been reported in other breeds.
The skin is consistently
junctiva, may also be involved. The histiocytes in systemic histiocytosis do not show the
 ate numbers of lymphocytes and neutrophils. Malignant histiocytosis is a rapidly pro-
 gressive disease that occurs in older Bernese mountain dogs and less frequently in other
breeds. It has also been reported in cats.
. Malignant histiocytes may infiltrate the spleen,
lymph nodes, lung and bone marrow; the skin is only occasionally involved.
Canine Mast cell tumour (MCT) (Figure 4.24) occur most frequently on the
trunk and limbs. Tumours located on the perineum, prepuce or digits tend to be
 more aggressive. MCT in cats tend to occur on the head, neck and limbs, and most
solitary lesions are benign. Multiple histiocytic-type’ MCT which may regress
Cytology of Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Lesions
71
(A)
（B）
sinophil.
Mesenchymal
cell
Figure 4.24 Mast celltumour (MCT). (A) Mast cells contain azurophilic cytoplasmic granules
which may obscure nuclear detail. The degree of cytoplasmic granularity is quite variable.
Some rapid water-soluble Romanowsky stains may not stain mast cell granules. Inset:
Occasionally, the mast cell granules are concentrated at one pole of the cell. (B) Mast cells
from less well-differentiated MCT tend to contain fewer granules, and the cells demonstrate
more obvious blastic features (note the prominent nucleoli and increased number of
eosinophils). Toluidine blue can be used to stain the granules in these poorly differentiated
cells. Inset: Aspirates from canine MCT often contain eosinophils and mesenchymal
cells (arrowed). Source: Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd.
be obtained by cell proliferation analysis (such a panel is performed by the
 Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health at Michigan State University;
http://www.animalhealth.msu.edu). This panel evaluates three markers (Ki67
protein, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and argyrophilic nucleolar
72
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.25 Plasmacytoma. The cells have a variable amount of dark basophilic cytoplasm
and a round eccentrically placed nucleus with a coarse chromatin pattern. A moderate
degree of anisocytosis, anisokaryosis and variation in nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio is evident.
Binucleated and multinucleated cells are present. Pink amorphous material (amyloid) may be
intimately associated with the plasmacytoid cells.
 organiser regions (AgNORs). It also includes a PCR test to check for the c-kit
 mutation in highly aggressive MCT which may respond to tyrosine kinase inhibi-
tors, and KIT expression in the neoplastic mast cells is assessed by immunohisto-
chemistry labelling.
Plasmacytomas have been reported on the skin (especially the digits and ears),
oral cavity, gingiva and tongue of older dogs (these tumours are rare in cats).
Although the cells can appear extremely pleomorphic, most plasmacytomas are
benign (Figure 4.25).
Cutaneous lymphoma may arise primarily in the skin or occasionally as a mani-
festation of generalised lymphoma. Cutaneous lymphoma may present as solitary
or multiple nodules or plaques or as a generalised pruritic exfoliative dermatitis. It
can be classified as epitheliotrophic (also known as mycosis fungoides) or non-
epitheliotrophic (differentiation  requires immunocytochemistry; Figure  4.26).
Epitheliotrophic lymphoma is the more common form and is usually of T-cell ori-
 gin. The neoplastic cells infiltrate the epidermis and adnexa.
Transmissible venereal tumours (TVT) are most frequently seen in young roam-
ing, sexually active dogs (Figure 4.27). In the United Kingdom they are usually only
seen in dogs imported from temperate climates. The lesions are usually located on
 the external genitalia or oronasal area and are poorly circumscribed, ulcerated and
  s i   s  
may spontaneously regress.
Cytology of Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Lesions
73
Figure 4.26 Cutaneous lymphoma (epitheliotrophic lymphoma). The neoplastic lymphoid
cells vary in size from small to large with round, indented or convoluted nuclei which may
contain visible nucleoli. The cells possess a variable amount of pale basophilic cytoplasm.
Note the mitotic figure (arrow). Occasionally, in addition to generalised skin involvement, the
animal may also be leukaemic with circulating T-cells in the blood (this is known as Sezary
syndrome).Inset:Thenon-epitheliotrophicform is characterised byinfiltration of the subcutis
Laboratories Ltd.
Figure 4.27  Transmissible venereal tumour. The cells from TvT have a moderate amount of
pale basophilic cytoplasm. Note the small discrete cytoplasmic vacuoles. The nuclei are
round with coarse nuclear chromatin and poorly defined nucleoli. Mitotic figures and a mixed
 inflammatory cell population may be present. Source: Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd.
5
Cytology of the Respiratory
Tract
John Dunn
Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd, Newton Abbot, Devon,UK
Introduction
Cytological interpretation of samples retrieved from the respiratory tract should
take into account the history, clinical findings and any radiographic abnormalities.
 Failure to recognise a non-representative specimen, for example, one that is con-
taminated by oropharyngeal material during collection, may result in misleading
cytological interpretation and provide meaningless culture results.
Collection techniques
Nasal flush
A nasal flush is performed under general anaesthesia. A soft rubber catheter is passed
in a caudal direction through the external nares. Ten millilitres of sterile normal sa line
tive pressure. At the same time the catheter is moved backwards and forwards to ensure
maximum retrieval of tissue and cells. The aspirated fluid is transferred to an EDTA
tube to preserve cell morphology. After centrifu
fugation smears of the sediment are pre-
pared for cytological examination (samples for bacteriology should be transferred to a
the soft palate into the nasopharynx has also been described (readers are referred to
standard cytology texts for a fuller description of this technique).
Aspiration of suspected intranasal masses can be performed using a 6-10Fr
 polypropylene urinary catheter with the end cut at a 45° angle to provide a cutting
edge, or alternatively a 20-22G needle or Tru-Cut biopsy needle can be used if the
mass can be visualised endoscopically. Care must be taken not to penetrate the cribri-
form plate (the correct catheter length can be gauged by measuring the distance from
the external nares to the medial canthus of the eye). Once the catheter meets resist-
ance, it is introduced into the mass, and negative pressure is maintained with the
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytotogy of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
76
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
syringe in order to collect solid tissue fragments from which imprints or squash prepa-
rations are made (or tissue fragments can be submitted for histological examination).
 In the author's opinion, cytological examination of nasal discharge is rarely
helpful unless an obvious causative agent, e.g. Aspergillus sp. or Cryptococcus neo-
formans, is identified.
Transtracheal wash and bronchoalveolar lavage
Cytological examination of the trachea, bronchi and alveoli can be achieved by a
tracheal wash (TW) and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Interstitial lesions may not
be diagnosed using these techniques. Transthoracic fine-needle aspiration may be
by radiography or ultrasonography.
TW or BAL is indicated when there is radiographic evidence of tracheobronchial
or pulmonary disease resulting in a chronic cough or respiratory distress. It may
be necessary to perform a full cardiological investigation beforehand to exclude
cardiogenic causes for the respiratory signs or radiographic lesions observed. TW
and BAL are useful techniques for diagnosing hypersensitivity reactions, inflamma-
tion/infection (bacteria, fungi, parasitic larvae and protozoa) and neoplasia.
 Both these diagnostic techniques induce a neutrophilic inflammatory response
which peaks around 24h after the procedure is completed. If the procedure has
to be repeated, this should be done after 48 h has lapsed since any wash-induced
inflammatory changes may complicate cytological interpretation.
Rare complications arising from these procedures include subcutaneous emphy-
sema, pneumomediastinum, haemorrhage, hypoxia and needle tract infection.
Transtracheal wash
-asae aan nu sap ans pue siop ar u ad oi raa si anan s
sia (light sedation may be necessary in small dogs and cats). The cough reflex remains
intact and the sample is less likely to be contaminated by oropharyngeal material.
The skin is clipped and aseptically prepared. The subcutaneous tissue is then
infiltrated with local anaesthetic. An 18 G jugular catheter or 14G needle with
3.5Fr urinary catheter is inserted through the cricothyroid ligament, and 1-2 ml of
normal saline/5kg BW is expelled from the attached syringe and aspirated immedi-
sampling. The aspirated fluid should be collected into EDTA (cytology) and sterile
plain tubes (bacteriology). A gauze wrap applied over the puncture site may help to
 prevent the formation of subcutaneous emphysema.
Bronchoalveolar lavage
This is the preferred technique for collecting a representative sample from the
lower airways for cytological examination from small dogs and cats. The draw-
backs are that general anaesthesia is required and there is a greater risk of oro-
Oytology of the Respiratory Tract
77
pharyngeal contamination of the sample unless the endotracheal tube is passed
directly into the trachea, avoiding contact with the oropharynx and arytenoid
cartilages. If possible, the depth of anaesthesia should be such that it does not
inhibit the cough reflex.
A long 14G urinary catheter is passed down the endotracheal tube (the catheter
must be longer that the endotracheal tube by at least 5-7.5 cm). One to two millilitres
of normal saline/5kg BW is flushed through the catheter and aspirated immediately.
A larger volume of saline, e.g. 1-3 ml/kg BW, may help to negate the catheter dead
space which may be a significant factor particularly in small animals.
Similar samples can also be collected through a rigid or fiberoptic bronchoscope.
This allows for visualisation of the bronchi and different collection sites, and
biopsies can be collected if necessary.
Transthoracic fine-needle aspiration
discrete and, to a lesser extent, diffuse interstitial lesions particularly if a mass is
located adjacent to the thoracic wall although it may potentially give rise to
more complications, particularly pulmonary laceration, haemorrhage and pneumo-
 n  s    d     
recumbency preferably under ultrasound guidance. Sedation may be required if the
animal is struggling or showing signs of severe respiratory distress.
Local anaesthetic is injected into the anterior edge of the intercostal space
immediately caudal to the rib. With diffuse interstitial lesions the right dia-
phragmatic lung lobe is generally aspirated between the seventh and ninth ribs
one-third of the distance down from the vertebral bodies to the costochondral
junction.
Lesions close to the thoracic wall may be aspirated using a 22-25 G x 5cm
needle attached to a 5ml or 10ml syringe; deeper lesions may require a longer
22 G spinal needle to reach the site. The needle is inserted through the costochon-
dral space at a 90? angle to the thoracic wall. Once the thoracic cavity has been
entered, negative pressure is applied to the syringe and the needle is advanced into
the lesion. The chances of obtaining an adequate sample are maximised if the nee-
dle is withdrawn and advanced two or three times in a slightly different direction
maintaining negative pressure at all times. The needle is then withdrawn and the
 negative pressure is released just before the needle exits the thoracic cavity. Only a
small amount of material may be present in the needle or the hub of the syringe,
 and this is expelled onto a glass slide. A smear is prepared in the usual way.
Cytological evaluation
In the author's experience, total and differential cell counts are of minimal diagnostic
value. The cells are concentrated by centrifugation (5 min at 1000-1500 rpm).
The sediment is re-suspended in a drop of supernatant and a smear prepared
using the line concentration or blood film technique. A squash preparation may
be helpful if the wash contains flocculent tissue flecks.
78
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Nasal cytology
Normal cell types
 Ciliated columnar epithelial cells predominate with smaller numbers of squamous
epithelial cells (Figure 5.1). Clusters of mature lymphocytes originating from nasal
associated lymphoid tissue may also be seen. Large numbers of bacterial organisms
(cocci and rods) are usually present and constitute the normal microflora of
the nasal cavity.
Inflammation/infection
Allergic rhinitis and lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis are allergic conditions character-
ised by increased numbers of eosinophils and lymphocytes and plasma cells,
respectively. Primary bacterial rhinitis rarely occurs and more often is secondary to
some other underlying pathological process, e.g. neoplasia, foreign bodies such as
grass awns, dental disease and viral or fungal infection. In response to an intense
inflammatory response, normal epithelial cells may show dysplastic changes which,
if pronounced, can mimic those associated with neoplasia (Figure 5.2). Bacterial
rhinitis, either primary or secondary, is characterised by large numbers of degener-
ate neutrophils, many of which contain ingested bacterial organisms. Fungal
rhinitis can be either a primary or a secondary opportunist infection. The most
common pathogens in the dogs are Aspergillus spp. (see Figure 15.3l) and
Penicillium spp.; cryptococcosis is more common in cats (see Figure 15.3 F). Fungal
infections can elicit a granulomatous or pyogranulomatous inflammatory response,
but there is often evidence of a concurrent purulent or suppurative inflammatory
component associated with secondary bacterial infection.
Figure 5.1Numerous ciliated columnar epithelial cells. A goblet cell (arrow) and a single
keratinised squamous epithelial cell covered in bacteria are also present. Inset: BAL (cat).
Ciliated columnar epithelial cells. Source: Dunn (2010). Reproduced with permission of BMJ
 Publishing Group Ltd
Oytology of the Respiratory Tract
79
Figure 5.2 Nasal flush (canine). These dysplastic epithelial cells are of uniform size and
or more nucleoli. Two binucleated cells are also present.
Figure 5.3 Nasal adenocarcinoma. The epithelial cells have dark basophilic cytoplasm.
A moderate degree of anisocytosis, anisokaryosis and variation in nuclear to cytoplasmic
Neoplasia
Adenocarcinomas are relatively common in dogs and cats (Figure 5.3). Squamous cell
carcinomas involving the nasal cavity are more common in cats. The cytological
appearance of these tumours is similar to adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carci-
nomas located at other sites. Tumours of mesenchymal origin of the nasal cavity are
rare (fibrosarcomas, osteosarcomas and chondrosarcomas occur occasionally). As
80
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
with most mesenchymal tumours, histological examination of a biopsy specimen is
usually required to precisely define tissue type. The radiographic appearance and loca-
tion of the lesion may also provide a few pointers. Lymphoma is the most common
round cell tumour to involve the nasal cavity in dogs and cats. Again, the cytologi-
cal appearance of nasal lymphoma resembles that seen at other sites. Anaplastic nasal
carcinomas also have a round cell appearance, but the cells tend to be much larger.
Cytology of the trachea and bronchial tree
Normal cell types
 Ciliated columnar epithelial cells line the trachea and bronchi (Figure 5.1). These
often appear poorly preserved. Ciliated and non-ciliated cuboidal epithelial cells
line the bronchioles. These may be present as single cells or in clusters. If visualised
end-on the ciliated and columnar/cuboidal features of these cells may be difficult
to appreciate (Figure 5.4).
Goblet cells are mucus-producing bronchial cells (Figure 5.5). Increased numbers
can be seen with conditions resulting in chronic airway irritation and overproduc-
tion of mucus, e.g. chronic bronchitis and feline bronchial asthma.
Alveolar macrophages (Figure 5.6) may be the predominant cell type in BAL
from clinically normal animals. The cytoplasm becomes vacuolated and may
contain phagocytosed debris when these cells become activated.
Neutrophils normally constitute less than 5% of the total nucleated cell population.
Increased numbers are seen with inflammation, infection or tissue necrosis. Eosinophils
and lymphocytes are normally present in low numbers in dogs (<5% and 5-14% of the
total nucleated cell population, respectively). In some healthy cats, the number of eosin-
ophils may be as high as 20%. An increased number of eosinophils with variable
numbers of other inflammatory cells may be seen with hypersensitivity reactions or
Figure 5.4  Ciliated or cuboidal epithelial cells viewed longitudinally. Source: Dunn (2010).
Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
Oytology of the Respiratory Tract
81
Goblet
cells
Figure 5.5 Goblet cells (arrows) contain large deeply basophilic mucin granules.
Source: Dunn (2010). Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
Figure 5.6 BAL (canine). Reactive alveolar macrophages with abundant basophilic
vacuolated cytoplasm. Source: Dunn (2010). Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing 
Group Ltd.
 and in response to antigenic stimulation, e.g. viral diseases and chronic infections.
Some lymphocytes may transform into plasma cells. Mast cells are rarely seen in TW/
BAL samples from healthy dogs and cats (<2% of the total nucleated cell population).
Mucus
Most washes/flushes, whether the sample is from the nasal cavity or lower
respiratory tract, contain a small amount of mucus which stains as an eosinophilic
background deposit. Increased amounts of mucus may be expected with inflammation
82
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(2010). Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
Figure 5.8 BAL (feline). Curschmann's spirals are frequently seen in conditions resulting
in excessive production of mucus.
or infection (Figure 5.7). Curschmann's spirais are casts of inspissated mucus
from the small bronchioles (Figure 5.8).
Oropharyngeal contamination
The presence of superficial squamous epithelial cells in a TW or BAL indicates
oropharyngeal contamination. Bacteria (e.g. Simonsiella spp.) often adhere to
the surface of these cells (Figure 5.9). A variable number of neutrophils may also
be present.
Oytology of the Respiratory Tract
83
Simonsiella spp.
Figure 5.9  Oropharyngeal contamination. The keratinised squamous epithelial cells are
Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
Inflammation
Possible causes of a neutrophilic (purulent) inflammatory response (Figure 5.10)
include tracheobronchitis (e.g. kennel cough), bronchopneumonia, inhaled bron-
chial/pulmonary foreign body, aspiration pneumonia, pulmonary abscess or a
large necrotic tumour (e.g. primary lung tumours involving a single lung lobe).
When the inflammatory response is associated with bacterial infection, the
neutrophils appear degenerate and contain ingested organisms.
Mycobacterial infections, especially in cats (Figure 5.11), and mycotic or
protozoal infections most frequently elicit either a granulomatous or pyo-
of reactive epithelioid macrophages and a variable number of neutrophils.
Large multinucleated giant cells, lymphocytes, plasma cells and eosinophils
may also be present in low numbers.
BAL cytology from dogs and cats with chronic bronchitis tends to be less
specific. The inflammatory response may be relatively mild, and there may be
evidence of increased mucus production. A mixed inflammatory response may
be evident although in many cases macrophages may predominate.
Eosinophilic inflammation
As a general guideline, an inflammatory response is considered to have a
significant eosinophilic component if the number of eosinophils is greater than
10% of the total nucleated cell population. In some cases, the number of mast
cells may also be slightly increased (Figure 5.12 and Figure 5.13). Differential
84
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.10  Bronchopneumonia. This hypercellular BAL consists of large numbers of
degenerate neutrophils. Many contain intracellular bacterial organisms (inset). Source: Dunn
(2010). Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
Figure 5.11  A cluster of macrophages containing phagocytosed negatively staining
mycobacterial organisms. Inset: Same case. The mycobacterial organism stain acid-fast
positive with Ziehl-Neelsen stain. Source: Dunn (2010). Reproduced with permission of BMJ
Publishing Group Ltd.
diagnoses for consideration include feline bronchial asthma, pulmonary infiltrate
with eosinophils (this includes allergic bronchitis,eosinophilic bronchopneumonia,
pulmonary eosinophilic granuloma associated with Dirofilaria immitis infection)
and neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma, mast cell tumours). Parasitism, e.g. Oslerus osleri,
Cytology of the Respiratory Tract
85
Mastcells
Figure 5.12 BAL (canine). Eosinophilic inflammation. At least 10% of the nucleated cells are
eosinophils. Inset: Same case. Note the three mast cells (arrows). Source: Dunn (2010).
Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
Figure 5.13 BAL (canine). Eosinophilic inflammation. There is evidence of secondary
bacterial infection. Note the significant numbers of degenerate neutrophils and intra- and
extracellular bacterial rods.
Angiostrongyius vasorum,Crenosoma vuipis and Aelurostrongylus abstrusus
 ay  sdo os tt's a piso q oe ous (se)
round or an oval-shaped rather than a segmented nucleus (so-called globoid
eosinophils; Figure 5.15).
86
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.14 This canine BAL contains a first larval stage of a metastrongyle species.
Figure 5.15 BAL (canine). Globoid eosinophils have a round rather than segmented nucleus.
Dysplastic epithelial cells
Columnar and cuboidal epithelial cells can become dysplastic in response to
inflammation or chronic irritating stimuli, e.g. dust and smoke (Figure 5.2).
  s    e  s
dysplastic from neoplastic cells may be difficult.
Oytology of the Respiratory Tract
87
Figure 5.16  Haemosiderophages containing phagocytosed haemoglobin breakdown
product. Inset: Haemosiderin stains as bluish-black deposit with Prussian blue stain.
Source: Dunn (2010). Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
Squamous metaplasia
Normal columnar or cuboidal epithelial cells may be replaced by stratified squa-
mous epithelial cells. This represents an adaptive response of epithelial cells to
chronic inflammation or irritation.
Intrapulmonary haemorrhage
The presence of macrophages containing red cells or haemoglobin breakdown
products, e.g. haemosiderin (haemosiderophages) or haematoidin crystals, indi-
cates previous intrapulmonary haemorrhage (Figure 5.16). Possible causes
include trauma, pulmonary foreign body, infectious diseases (bacterial, fungal,
protozoal, parasitic), lung lobe torsion, feline bronchial asthma, congestive heart
failure, pulmonary thromboembolism, coagulopathies (e.g. dicoumarol toxicity)
and neoplasia (primary/metastatic).
Neoplasia (primary or metastatic)
Cytological differentiation of pulmonary carcinomas is not possible. Some primary
lung tumours, e.g. bronchogenic carcinomas, are more likely to involve the bron-
chial tree and as a result may exfoliate cels in TW or BAL specimens (Figure 5.17 and
Figure 5.18). Haemolymphatic neoplasia, e.g. lymphoma or malignant histiocytosis
(histiocytic sarcoma), may also involve the pulmonary parenchyma and can be
diagnosed by BAL cytology. In contrast, metastatic lung tumours tend to produce
interstitial lesions, and neoplastic cells are rarely seen. Fine-needle aspiration cytol-
ogy of discrete pulmonary masses may be more rewarding in many cases where
pulmonary neoplasia is suspected.
88
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.17
Pulmonary carcinoma (dog). The cells present in this BAL are showing obvious 
morphological features of malignancy (anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, variation in nuclear to
nucleus). Source: Dunn (2010). Reproduced with permission of BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
showing marked anisocytosis, anisokaryosis and variation in nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio.
Note the perinuclear vacuolation. Source: Niki Skeldon/Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd.
Reproduced with permission.
6
Biochemical and Cytological
Evaluation of Body
Cavity Effusions
Niki Skeldon and Emma Dewhurst
Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd, Newton Abbot, Devon, UK
Introduction
The visceral and parietal surfaces of body cavities are lined with mesothelium.
This is bathed in serous fluid which in healthy cats and dogs is minimal, but
increased amounts occur in various pathological processes. Analysis of effusions
can be useful to gain information about the mechanism of formation.
Sample collection and processing
Readers are referred to standard texts for techniques for sampling abdominal,
pleural and pericardial fluid (Bexfield and Lee, 2010). Processing of fluid samples
is covered in Chapter 1.
Classification of effusions
Traditional system
Traditionally, effusions have been classified as transudates, modified transudates
or exudates on the basis of total nucleated cell count (TNCC) and protein content
(Table 6.1) (Rizzi et al., 2008). This system is controversial: it is not used in
human medicine and does not address aetiology, and the term 'modified transu-
date' is a misnomer because many fluids so classified do not form as transudates
with subsequent modification of TNCC and protein
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat,First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
90
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Table 6.1Traditional classification of effusions based on TNCC and
protein contenta
TNCC (x 10%/L)
Protein (g/L)
Transudate
<1.5
<25
Modified transudate
1.0-7.0
25-75
Exudate
>7.0
>30
and modified transudates, while cell counts are more relevant when differentiating
modified transudates from exudates.
Source: Rizzi et ar. (2008). @ 2008 Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.
Cellcounts
Reference laboratories provide automated cell counts. Some in-house haema-
tology analysers provide a reasonably accurate TNCC (Giannasi et al., 2013;
Welles et al., 2011).
Total protein
 In practice,refractometry can be used to measure total protein. Many refractometers
have a scale calibrated for total protein. Where samples are opaque, refractometry
is performed on the supernatant after centrifugation to avoid false elevations.
Aetiological system
Recent publications classify effusions according to aetiology (Dempsey and
Ewing, 2011; Stockham and Scott, 2008; Zoia et al.,2009). The authors support
this approach and have adapted it for the following discussion. There are six
major pathogeneses of pleural and abdominal effusions:
Transudation: altered fluid dynamics (+/- decreased plasma oncotic pressure)
 Exudation: altered vascular and/or mesothelial permeability
Compromised lymphatic drainage or integrity
Haemorrhage
Ruptured viscus (+/- subsequent inflammation and exudation)
Neoplasia: cell exfoliation and/or any of the previously mentioned mechanisms
Effusions are classified as 'transudate, protein poor', ^transudate, protein rich’ or
exudate', unless fluid analysis reveals another specific mechanism, in which case
they are classified as such (e.g.*chylous',*bilious'). Table 6.2 provides guidelines for
the aetiological classification of effusions. Note that these values should be used
in conjunction with cytological and other clinicopathological findings to determine
the mechanism of effusion formation; they are not absolute decision limits. The
causes of different types of effusion are listed in Table 6.3.
Biochemical and Cytological Evaluation of Body Cavity Efusions
91
Table 6.2  Guidelines for the aetiological classification of effusions?
TNCC (x 10%/L)
Protein (g/L)
Transudate, protein poor
<1.5
<20
Proteinaceous effusione
<5.0d
>20
Exudate
>5.0e
>209
*Note that the values are guides only; they are not absolute decision limits - see text.
*Do not interpret in the presence of turbidity (e.g. lipid from chylous effusions).
cUnderlying problem may be (1) primarily a low-grade or proteinaceous exudate (inflammatory) with few cells
migrating to the fluid (e.g. FIP, vasculitis) or (2) primarily a protein-rich transudate with mild secondary inflamma-
tion (e.g. CHF).
dTNCC> 1.5 × 109 L with mostly neutrophils and/or macrophages supports an inflammatory component
(exudation).
"Except exudates associated with FIP or other vasculitides, where TNCC is often <5.0 × 10%/L.
slldouisoa no sabeudoou 'sludonau pou ane sllan yo Aualu aul y aepnxa ue se passilo aa nou pinousys
(e.g. neoplastic or chylous effusions); an effusion may be a low-grade exudate with a lower TNcC than this.
hypoproteinaemia.
Transudates
 Protein-poor transudates are formed when fluid dynamics are altered (see stand-
ard texts for information on Starling's Laws (Hughes and Boag, 2006)). The two
main causes are severe hypoalbuminaemia (usually <12g/L) and lymphatic vessel
obstruction. Increased hydraulic pressure gradient (e.g. due to portal hypertension)
  am ss o-nd r n i pn  
Protein-rich transudates form with increased hydraulic pressure in the lungs or
liver, usually due to heart failure or portal venous hypertension associated with
hepatic pathology, respectively. Vessels within alveolar capillaries and hepatic
sinuses are relatively more permeable to plasma proteins than elsewhere.
 Macroscopically, both protein-poor and protein-rich transudates are fairly non-
descript; fluids can be colourless to yellow or orange in colour and clear to slightly
turbid.
Cytologically, both forms of transudate consist of variable numbers of non-
degenerate neutrophils, macrophages, lower numbers of small lymphocytes and
mesothelial cells. Macrophages may have variable morphology, ranging from small
round, basophilic cells to large round cells with pale, highly vacuolated cytoplasm
(Figure 6.1). The nuclei of reactive macrophages usually appear more pleomorphic.
Most chronic effusions become secondarily inflamed and as a result multinucleate
macrophages, plasma cells, mast cells, eosinophils and reactive mesothelial cells
may be present (Figure 6.9).
Mesothelial cell morphology depends on whether cells are shed spontaneously
or harvested by traumatic puncture of the mesothelium (Figure 6.2, Figure 6.5
and Figure 6.12). It can be difficult to distinguish mesothelial cells from mac-
n e  s osq a  on pn  n is
92
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Table6.3
Characteristics of transudates and exudates; PLN/PLE, protein-losing
nephropathy/protein-losing enteropathy
Effusion
Pathogenesis
Mechanism
Conditions
Transudate,
Transudation
Altered
Hypoalbuminaemia?
protein poor
hydraulic and
Cirrhosis (dogs)
oncotic
PLN
pressures or
D
PLE
decreased
Lymphatic obstruction
ymphatic
External occlusionby
drainage
neoplasia, abscess,
other
D
Vessel blockage by
thrombosis,
inflammatory
or neoplastic cells
Lymph node
pathology
D
Lymphangiectasia
Portal hypertension
(pre-sinusoidal and
sinusoidal)
D
Cirrhosis
D
 ldiopathic portal 
hypertension
Transudate,
Congestive heart failure
protein rich
(CHF)
 Portal hypertension
(post-sinusoidal)
Exudate
 Exud ation
Increased
+
 Infectious
vascular/
D
Bacteria
mesothelial
D
Fungi (e.g.
permeability
Blastomyces,
Histopiasma,
Candida)
Viruses (e.g. FIP)
D
D
Protozoa (Leishmania,
Toxoplasma)
D
Parasites
(Mesocestoides)
 Non-infectious
D
Neoplasia
D
Foreign body
D
Bile or urine peritonitis
D
Pancreatitis
。
Steatitis
D
Ischaemic lesions
Haemorrhagic
Haemorrhage
Loss of
Trauma
 endothelial
+
Neoplasia
integrity
Coagulopathies
Biochemical and Cytological Evaluation of Body Cavity Effusions
93
Table 6.3
(Cont'd)
Effusion
Pathogenesis
 Mechanism
Conditions
Chylous
'Lymphorrhage'
Leakage of 
Physical lymphatic
lymph from
obstruction
ymphatics
 See under 'transudate,
protein poor'
Mediastinal
pathology
Lung lobe torsion
 Functional lymphatic
obstruction
D
Cardiovascular
disease leading to
passive venous
congestion
Lossof lymphatic integrity
D
Trauma
Surgery
 Congenital anomalies
D
Lymphangiectasia
Miscellaneous
Coughing
D
Vomiting
Diaphragmatic
herniation
 ldiopathic
Bilious
Ruptured
Leakage of 
Trauma
viscus and
bile from
Cholelithiasis
exudation
biliary tract,
Mucocoele
secondary
+
Cholangitis +/- biliary tract 
inflammation
infection
Neoplasia
Complication of surgery or
hepatic biopsy
Uroperitoneum
 Ruptured
Leakage of 
Trauma
viscus and
+
urine from
Urolithiasis
exudation
urinary tract,
Neoplasia
secondary
latrogenic
inflammation
Neoplastic
Any of the
Varied
 Epithelial (primary or
above
metastatic)
D
Carcinoma
Adenocarcinoma
D
Mesothelioma
 Round cell
 Lymphoproliferative
disease
(Continued)
94
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Table 6.3
(Cont'd)
Effusion
Pathogenesis
 Mechanism
Conditions
D
Mast cell tumours
Histiocytic malignancies
Mesenchymal
D
Haemangiosarcoma
Pericardial
Varied
Varied
+
ldiopathic
Neoplasia
0 Haemangiosarcoma
oChemodectoma
0Lymphoma
+
Trauma
+
 Coagulopathies
Cardiac disease
FIP
*Increased blood volume and hydraulic pressure may also contribute in cirrhosis and PLN.
Mesothelial cells are cells of mesodermal origin which display features of epithelial differentiation.
Source: adapted from Stockham and Scott (2o08). Reproduced with permission of John wiley and Sons.
Figure 6.1 Protein-rich transudate. Abdominal effusion. Cat. Large arrow, macrophages;
arrowhead, neutrophil; small arrow, lymphocyte; star, pyknotic cell.
nucleus, with stippled chromatin and sometimes prominent nucleoli, whereas
macrophages tend to have a paler, more vacuolated cytoplasm and a more
pleomorphic nucleus with coarse chromatin. As mesothelial cells become reac.
tive, cytoplasmic basophilia and nucleoli become more pronounced, and multi-
nucleation is common. Care must be taken not to over-diagnose malignancy,
especially in the presence of inflammation.
Biochemical and Cytological Evaluation of Body Cavity Efusions
95
Figure 6.2 Abdominal effusion with mesothelial cells. Dog. Note flat, “fish-scale' appearance
of the mesothelial cells suggesting harvest by traumatic puncture of mesothelium.
Exudates
Exudates form due to increased vascular and/or mesothelial permeability second-
tory changes occur secondary to a pre-existing effusion. Neoplastic and chylous
effusions often have a TNCC in the exudate category; these will be addressed
separately as they are not formed by exudation.
Macroscopically, exudates are usually turbid; simplistically, increased turbidity
equates to increased TNCC. Neutrophils predominate and usually appear degen-
erate in septic exudates due to bacterial toxins; the nuclei appear swollen with
indistinct nuclear lobes and pale-staining chromatin (Figure 6.3). Some bacteria
(notably Nocardia and Actinomyces spp.) produce weaker toxins and the degen-
erative changes may not be as pronounced. The presence of intracellular bacteria
helps distinguish infection from sample contamination (though be aware that
bacterial phagocytosis by leukocytes can occur occasionally in vitro) (Figure 6.3).
Macrophages may contain phagocytosed neutrophils (leukophagia).
Specific types of effusion
 See Tables 6.3 and 6.4 for causes and confirmatory tests for these different types
of effusion.
Haemorrhagiceffusions
Haemorrhagic effusions usually have a PCV of at least 10%, although anything
over 3% implies haemorrhage is contributing (Stockham and Scot, 2008)
Haemorrhagic effusions due to ruptured vasculature or viscera must be distin-
guished from iatrogenic haemorrhage incurred during sampling. The presence of
96
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.3 Exudate. Pleural effusion. Cat. Degenerate neutrophils. Inset: Note intracellular
bacteria (arrows), some of which are filamentous (this suggests Actinomyces/Nocardia spp.).
erythrocyte breakdown product, e.g. haemosiderin (confirmed by Prussian blue stain)
 or haematoidin crystals, implies chronicity and confirms previous haemorrhage
(Figure 6.4 and Figure 6.5).
The presence of macrophages containing phagocytosed erythrocytes (eryth-
rophagia) is significant if seen on slides prepared at time of sampling; however,
erythrocytes released iatrogenically at sampling can occur after sample collection
 Platelets are removed rapidly from body cavities; their presence implies very recent
or iatrogenic haemorrhage.
Clrylouseffusions
Chylous effusions are usually pleural but can form in the abdomen. They occur
due to leakage of chylomicron-/triglyceride-rich lymph and indicate compromise
of lymphatic vessels situated somewhere between the small intestine and the
thoracic vena cava (see Table 6.3 for possible causes).
not all are readily identified
1 macroscopically, especially in anorexic animals.
Pseudochylous' is a medical term describing homogeneous white fluids which are
 not chyle; these being rare in animals, the term is seldom appropriate.
Cytologically, small lymphocytes usually predominate and macrophages are
highly vacuolated due to lipophagia (Figure 6.7). There may be a characteristic
microvacuolated background (this is a useful feature highlighting the possibility of
chyle; Figure 6.8). Chyle can induce inflammation, so with chronicity neutrophils
 and lower numbers of mast cells, eosinophils and plasma cells may also be present
(Figure 6.9). Bacteria are rarely observed as chyle is bacteriostatic (organisms may
be present if repeated drainage induces infection).
Biochemical and CytologicalEvaluationofBodyCavityEffusions
97
Table 6.4 Ancillary tests relevant to effusions; AGP, acid glycoprotein; RT-PCR, reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction; PARR, PCR for antigen receptor rearrangement;
FeCoVfelinecoronavirus
Effusion
Indication
Comments/expected
findings
Exudate
Culture and
Septic exudate
sensitivity
Any unexplained
inflammation
Glucose?
Suspected
Serum glucose
infection
1.1 mmol/L > effusion
glucose supports sepsis
Lactate?
Effusion lactate at least 
1.5mmol/L >serum
lactate supports sepsis
Lipase
Suspected
Ratio of effusion lipase to
pancreatitis
 serum lipase is >2 (dog)
Effusion lipase
 concentration is four
times > upper serum
reference limit 
Haemorrhagic
PCV
Macroscopically
Usually >10%
bloody fluid
Prussianblue
Suspected 
Iron stains blue/green
staining of slides
haemosiderin in
macrophages
Chylous
Triglycerides
Macroscopically
Concentration in
creamy effusion,
effusion> 1.14 mmol/L
predominance
Concentration in
of small
effusion >concentration
ymphocytes
in serum
Cholesterol
As for
Concentration in
triglycerides
effusion<serum
concentration (and vice
versa if non-chylous)
Cholesterol: triglyceride
ratio <1
Bilious
Bilirubin
 Suspected biliary
Ratio of effusion
tract rupture,
bilirubin to serum
greenish fluid
 bilirubin is at least 2
Uroperitoneum
Creatinine/
Suspected 
Ratio of effusion
potassium
urinary tract
creatinine concentration
rupture
to serum concentration 
is>1b
Effusion creatinine
concentration is >4x
upper serum reference
limit (dogs)
FP
Albumin and
Suspected FIP
A to G ratio (effusion)
globulins
<0.4 is highly
suggestive; >0.9 FIP
unlikely (http://www.
dr-addie.com/WhatlsFIP:
htm#DiagnosisofFIP)
(Continued)
98
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Table 6.4  (Cont'd)
Effusion
Indication
Comments/expected
findings
Rivalta's test
See Box 6.1 and
http://www.dlr-addie.
com/WhatlsFIP.
htm#DiagnosisofFIP
Specificity poor (Fischer
et af., 2012)
FeCoV serology
Confirms exposure only.
Titres >1:1600 are
 supportive (Hartmann
et al., 2003); negative
titre does not rule out FIP
Apha 1 AGP
>1500 μg/ml supportive
of FIP (Bence et al.,
2005)
Immunofluorescent
An antemortem
staining of FeCoV
confirmatory
antigen in
test, moderate
macrophages
sensitivity
RT-PCR for FeCoV
Not widely available
Neoplastic
Flow cytometry for
Lineage
 Sample must be fresh
 specific antigen
identification of
markers
atypical round
cells
PARR
To help distinguish
neoplastic from
non-neoplastic
ymphoid cells
septic samples.
Note that with tirme the effusion and serum creatinine will equilibrate as it diffuses from the effusion to lymph and
blood.
Bilious effusions
Macroscopically, the effusion typically has a yellow-brown to greenish hue and
may be turbid (Figure 6.10).
 Neutrophils usually predominate as free bile induces peritonitis. A characteristic
feature is the presence of yellow-brown amorphous material (bile) in extracellular
clumps and within macrophages; rarely, macrophages contain bilirubin crystals
(Figure 6.11 and Figure 6.12)
Urinary tractrupture
Urinary tract rupture usually occurs due to trauma. The dilutional effect of urine
lowers the protein concentration; an effusion with moderate TNCC but dispropor-
tionately low protein raises suspicion of uroperitoneum. Initially, the effusion
resembles a protein-poor transudate, but with time inflammation develops.
Spermatozoa and urine crystals may be noted.
Biochemical and Cytological Evaluation of Body Cavity Effusions
99
Figure 6.4 Haemorhagic effusion (pericardial). Dog. Note the macrophage with
A large cluster of mesothelial cells and numerous erythrocytes are also present.
Figure 6.5 Same case as Figure 6.4. Haematoidin crystals (arrows) within three neutrophils
and a reactive mesothelial cell showing cytoplasmic 'ruffling? (arrowhead). Two macrophages
are also present. Inset: haematoidin crystals within a neutrophil.
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
Vasculitis induced by FIP causes exudation of protein-rich fluid into body cavities.
 Cell counts are disproportionately low, with inflammation being in the vessel walls
not the body cavity. Effusions in FIP usually have protein of > 40 g/L and TNCC of
2.0-6.0 x 109/L (Rizzi et al.,2008).
 Macroscopically, the fluid is pale to deep yellow, may contain fibrin strands
and may froth when shaken. Cytologically, the effusion is characterised by a
100
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Qinr
Figure 6.6 Chylous effusion. Cat. Macroscopic appearance.
Figure 6.7  Chylous effusion. Cat. Small lymphocytes predominate. Two macrophages (one
not intact), an eosinophil, erythrocytes and a non-classifiable ruptured cell are also present.
Biochemical and Cytological Evaluation of Body Cavity Effusions
1 01
Figure 6.8 Same case as Figure 6.7. Focused to highlight the microvacuolated background
containing lipid. Small lymphocytes predominate (arrow). Some cells have ruptured and are
non-classifiable (arrowhead and star).
Figure 6.9 Chylous effusion with inflammation. Cat. In addition to smallymphocytes and
material originates from ruptured cells.
heterogeneous leukocyte population with neutrophils usually predominating.
High numbers of macrophages may also be present. The cells are often located in
a stippled background fluid deposit containing protein *crescents', a drying artefact
which suggests high protein content (Figure 6.13). Histopathology remains the
mainstay of diagnosis, with immunohistochemistry to demonstrate viral antigen
within lesions being the gold standard (see Table 6.4 and Box 6.1 for ancillary
tests which may support a diagnosis of FIP).
102
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.10 Bilious effusion. Dog. Macroscopic appearance.
Figure 6.11s
 Same case as Figure 6.10. Note high cellularity of this direct smear and
presence of yellow-staining extracellular material (bile) (arrows).
Eosinophiliceffusions
Eosinophils have distinct rod-shaped (cats) or round (dogs) pink/orange cytoplas-
mic granules and a lobed nucleus. Often their presence in effusions is secondary to
 peripheral blood. They may be present in low numbers in inflammation. Their
Biochemical and Cytological Evaluation of Body Cavity Effusions
103
Figure 6.12 Same case as Figure 6.10. Deteriorated neutrophils, macrophages, reactive
mesothelial cell and yellow-staining extracellular material (bile). Inset: One macrophage
contains a needle-like bilirubin crystal (arrow).
Figure 6.13
Exudate. Abdominal effusion from a cat with suspected FlP: Note the protein
crescents.
Box 6.1
Rivalta's test methodology
Mix one drop of 98% acetic acid with 5 ml of distilled water.
Gently place one drop of the effusion on the surface of the mixture.
Positive: layer of gel forms at surface or drop slowly floats to bottom.
Negative: drop disperses.
104
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.14 Eosinophilic inflammation. Abdominal effusion. Dog. Two macrophages, one
neutrophil and one pyknotic cell are present. Eosinophilic inflammation may be associated
with parasitism (e.g. D. immitis), allergy/hypersensitivity and neoplasia (e.g. with lymphoma
or mast cell tumours).
presence in high numbers suggests parasitism (e.g. Dirofilaria immitis infection),
Neoplasticeffusions
Neoplastic cells from solid tumours or leukaemias may be present in effusions;
absence does not rule out neoplasia. Cytocentrifugation may be necessary to detect
rare neoplastic cells. The most common neoplasms diagnosed by effusion cytology
are carcinomas (primary or metastatic) and round cell tumours, e.g. mast cell
tumours, lymphoproliferative disease and histiocytic sarcoma ( Figure 6.15, Figure 6.16,
Figure 6.17, Figure 6.18, Figure 6.19 and Figure 6.20). Rarely, cells from haeman-
giosarcomas exfoliate into effusions.
Cells from carcinomas and adenocarcinomas can be difficult to distinguish from
reactive mesothelial cells displaying features which may resemble those associated
with malignancy. Mesotheliomas are rare neoplastic proliferations of mesothelial
cells, almost impossible to diagnose cytologically due to the difficulty distinguish-
 ing them from their reactive counterparts and from carcinomas; histopathology is
essential.
Specialist ancillary tests may be necessary to determine the lineage of
atypical round cells (see Table 6.4). Low numbers of mast cells can be seen with
inflammation, but high numbers imply visceral mast cell neoplasia (more
common in cats than dogs). Neoplastic mast cells may have finer, less obvious
stains are used.
Biochemical and Cytological Evaluation of Body Cavity Effusions
105
Figure 6.15 Pleural effusion. Dog. Carcinoma. Note anisokaryosis, prominent nucleoli of
Figure 6.16 Same case as Figure 6.15, demonstrating cytoplasmic *ballooning' of a
carcinoma cell (these are often referred to as 'signet ring' cells). Note inflammation, which is
common with carcinomas.
Pericardial effusions
 In dogs, approximately 50% are idiopathic, with most of the remainder being neo-
plastic. In cats, pericardial effusions are most commonly associated with CHF and
FIP. The usual criteria are applied to differentiate chronic from recent/iatrogenic
haemorrhage (see section Haemorrhagic effusions'). Exfoliated mesothelial cells
are often particularly reactive in pericardial effusions and can be difficult to distin-
guish from neoplastic cells (Figure 6.21).
106
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.17 Same case as Figure 6.15, demonstrating bizarre nucleolar morphology (arrow)
 and cytoplasmic vacuolation suggesting secretory product.
Figure 6.18 Pleural effusion. Cat. Lymphoma. Note the atypical large lymphoid cells with
scant, sometimes vacuolated cytoplasm, coarse chromatin, and often a single large
nucleolus (arrowheads).
Artefacts
Common:
 Starch granules from glove powder (see Figure 1.20).
 Ultrasound gel (see Figure 1.19).
D
 Lysed cells (especially in septic and chylous effusions due to increased cell
fragility) (Figure 6.8).
Biochemical and Cytological Evaluation of Body Cavity Effusions
107
Figure 6.19 Abdominal effusion. Cat. Large granular cell lymphoma.
Figure 6.20 Pleural effusion. Cat. Round cell neoplasm. Large atypical round cells with
relatively abundant, vacuolated cytoplasm, variable nuclear shape, coarse chromatin and
prominent nucleoli. Cytomorphology suggests lymphoid or histiocytic origin, but ancillary
tests are required for lineage determination. Three small lymphocytes also present.
Infrequent:
D
Diroflaria microfilariae due to peripheral blood contamination (endemic
areas).
D
Copious bacteria without inflammation suggests accidental enterocentesis or
sample contamination.
108
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.21 Pericardial effusion. Probably malignant. Cat. Note high cellularity. In some
reactive or neoplastic mesothelial cells or carcinoma cells. Inflammatory cells are also
present. Cat had an extensive thoracic mass involving pericardium.
Conclusion
 Effusion cytology is useful in a practice setting and in many cases provides a defin-
itive diagnosis. It is best performed on fresh samples. Reference laboratories are
essential when examination by a specialist cytologist or ancillary tests are required.
Acknowledgment
The authors thank Dr. Mike Scott for review of this chapter and, specifically, for
 provision of footnotes to Table 6.2. His insightful comments were invaluable.
References
Bence, L.M., Addie, D.A. and Eckersall, P.D. (2005) An immunoturbidimetric assay for ra pid
quantitative measurement of feline alpha-1-acid glycoprotein in serum and peritoneal
fluid. Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 34 (4), 335-340.
Bexfield, N. and Lee, K. (2010) BSAVA Guide to Procedures in Small Animal Practice, British
 Small Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley Gloucester.
Dempsey, S.M. and Ewing, PJ. (2011) A review of the pathophysiology, classification and
analysis of canine and feline cavitary effusions. Journal of the American Animal Hospital
Association, 47, 1-11.
Fischer, Y., Sauter-Louis, C. and Hartmann K. (2012) Diagnostic accuracy of the Rivalta
test for feline infectious peritonitis. Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 41 (4), 558-567.
Giannasi, C, Brown, A. and Skeldon, N. (2013) Evaluation of HemoCue WBC as a
bedside analyser in characterising abdominal effusions. BSAVA Congress Scientific
Biochemical and Cytological Evaluation of Body Cavity Effusions
109
Proceedings Abstracts. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley,
Gloucester, p. 558.
Hartmann, K., Binder, C., Hirschberger, J. et al. {2003) Comparison of different tests to
diagnose feline infectious peritonitis. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 17 (6),
781-790.
http://www.dr-addie.com/WhatIsFIPhtm#DiagnosisofFIP (accessed 23 August 2013).
Hughes, D.H. and Boag, A. (2006) Fluid therapy with macromolecular plasma volume
expanders, in Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 3rd
edn (ed. S.P. DiBartola), Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, MO, pp. 627-634.
Rizzi, T.E., Cowell, R.L., Tyler, R.D. et al. (2008) Effusions: abdominal, thoracic and pericar
dial, in Diagnostic Cytology and Haematology of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edn feds R.D.
Tyler, J.H. Meinkoth, D.B. DeNicola et al.), Mosby Elsevier, St. Louis, MO, p. 244.
Stockham, S.L. and Scott, M.A. (2008) Cavitary effusions, in Fundamentals of Veterinary
Clinical Pathology, 2nd edn (eds S.L. Stockham and M.A. Scott), Blackwell Publishing,
Ames, IA, pp. 831-867.
Welles, E.G., Oller, E., Spangler, E.A. et al. (2011) Validation of an in-office automated
baematology instrument,the Heska CBC-Diff.for total nucleated cell counts in body
cavity effusionsandcomparisonofdifferentialcell counts with manualobservations
from prepared smears.ASVCP Annual Meeting Abstracts, December 3-7, 2011, Nashville,
TN, p. 597.
Zoia, A., Slater, L.A., Heller, J. et al. (2009) A new approach to pleural effusions in cats:
markers for distinguishing transudates from exudates. Journal of Feline Medicine and
Surgery, 11, 847-855.
7
Cytology of Synovial Fluid
Kate Sherry
Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd,Newton Abbot,Devon,UK
Introduction
 n on    s sd e   p
through fenestrated capillaries lying just beneath a subintima (thereby excluding
larger proteins such as fibrinogen) which is then modified by constituents secreted
by the joint tissues. The two major cell populations of the intima are type A
synoviocytes (resident tissue macrophage derived) and type B synoviocytes
(secretory fibroblast related). The type B cells secrete fluid components such as
collagens, fibronectin, hyaluronan and lubricin. The normal viscosity of synovial
fluid is due to the hyaluronic acid content. Synovial fluid has two main functions:
to aid in the nutrition of articular cartilage by acting as a transport medium for
 nutritional substances, such as glucose, and to aid in the mechanical function of
joints by lubrication of the articulating surfaces.
Synovial fluid analysis can aid in the investigation of joint disease. Indications
for analysis can include stiffness, weakness, joint pain, pyrexia, swelling of the
limbs and joints (Figure 7.1) or joint deformity. Importantly, synovial fluid analysis
is only a component of the work-up of joint disease, and findings require correla-
tion with other clinical and laboratory findings including culture, serology, radiog-
raphy and other imaging modalities. In some circumstances, synoviocentesis may
be contraindicated, e.g. where there is overlying cellulitis or dermatitis or if the
animal is bacteraemic or has a coagulopathy.
Collection
 The following aspects merit consideration and preparation prior to sampling:
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
112
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 7.1  Joint distension due to synovial effusion. Source: John Dunn, Axiom Veterinary
Laboratories Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Restraint
This relies on clinical judgement of the veterinarian to establish whether physi-
cal immobilisation, sedation or anaesthesia is necessary.
Asepsis
s are seds st s se ssa si ar odas 
Equipment
Clippers, sterile gloves, sterile scrub solution and alcohol.
Sterile disposable 3ml syringes.
1.5 inch 22 G needles (large dogs) or 1 inch 25 G needles (small dogs and cats).
 Longer needles may be required for elbow, shoulder or hip joints.
Microscope slides with frosted ends.
 Plain and EDTA tubes: ideally pre-labelled tubes and slides with patient name
and joint sampled.
Approach
Synovial fluid sampling is usually performed with the animal in lateral recumbency
and the joint in question uppermost. Palpation of the joint in flexion and extension
should help to identify the joint space (Figure 7.2). Gentle advancement of the
sampling needle is necessary to avoid any damage to the articular cartilage. The
volume obtained will vary between joints, e.g. fluid is usually readily obtained from
the stifle but is more difficult to obtain from carpal and tarsal joints. Swollen joints
will typically yield more fluid. The plunger of the syringe should be released before
the needle is withdrawn from the joint space to minimise blood contamination.
Cytology of Synovial Fluid
113
Figure 7.2 Approach to carpal arthrocentesis. Source: John Dunn, Axiom Veterinary
Laboratories Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Readers are referred to suitable orthopaedic textbooks for detailed approaches
to specific joints.
Sample handling
 The amount of synovial fluid collected will vary, so it is important to prioritise
tests accordingly. While the sample is in the syringe volume, colour and turbidity
should be noted, and as the fluid is expelled onto a glass slide, viscosity should be
assessed. Any apparent blood contamination during sampling should also be noted.
Direct smears should be made immediately and air-dried for subsequent cytological
examination which includes a subjective assessment of cellularity and nucleated
cell differential count (smear preparation is discussed in Chapter 1). Depending on
the volume remaining, further tests may include total nucleated cell count and pro
tein concentration (EDTA or plain tube; protein cannot be measured from a sample
in a plain tube if sample has clotted due to blood contamination or inflammation)
and culture (plain tube or sample in culture medium). Regardless of the amount
collected, it is usually advantageous to prepare direct smears immediately to best
 preserve cell morphology. These slides should not be refrigerated prior to staining.
Synovial fluid properties
Volume
An approximate or subjective estimation of volume should be made. Volumes
depend on patient size, the joint sampled and the amount of effusion present. The
volume of joint fluid obtained in normal animals may range from 1 drop to 1.0 ml
in dogs and 1 drop to 0.25 ml in cats.
114
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 7.3  Synovial fluid from an inflamed joint. Note the increased volume obtained and the 
moderate turbidity of the sample. A plain or culture media are preferred for bacterial culture.
Source: John Dunn, Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Colour and turbidity
Normal synovial fluid is transparent and colourless or very light yellow or straw
coloured. When a fluid is blood tinged, haemarthrosis should be distinguished from
iatrogenic blood contamination. With haemarthrosis fluid is uniformly bloody
throughout collection. If the fluid was initially free of blood but at some point blood
is seen to enter the sample in a trailing wisp, this suggests contamination. Dark
yellow or xanthochromic fluids may indicate chronic haemorrhage and erythrocyte
breakdown and the formation of haemoglobin breakdown products. As a general
guideline more turbid fluids may have a higher nucleated cellularity (Figure 7.3).
Viscosity
Normal synovial fluid is very viscous because of high hyaluronanic acid content.
Although viscosity can be measured on a viscometer, in practice this is usually a
visual assessment best performed at the time of collection. When slowly ejected
from a needle, normal fluid forms a long strand that is at least 2.5 cm before sepa-
rating from the needle. When a drop is placed between thumb and forefinger, the
strand bridges the two digits as they are moved apart.
Normal synovial fluid does not clot but may exhibit thixotropy (this is the prop-
erty of certain gels to become fluid when shaken). On standing at room tempera-
ture, normal synovial fluid may assume a gelatin-like appearance but when shaken
it becomes fluid again.
Mucinquality
If there is enough fluid, this may be assessed with a mucin clot test. If not
s a  e  ard si ads  e  
Cytology of Synovial Fluid
115
EDTA degrades hyaluronic acid. One part synovial fluid is added to four parts
2.5% glacial acetic acid which causes the mucin to precipitate and sometimes
clot. It can be performed in a test tube or a glass slide. With inflammatory conditions
the proteases from the neutrophils degrade the hyaluronic acid and viscosity
decreases.
Total nucleated cell count
This can be quantified using either a haemocytometer or an electronic particle
counter. EDTA samples are preferable for nucleated cell concentrations and
cytology due to greater cell preservation. Hyaluronidase can be added to minimise
cell clumping.
 These vary from joint to joint but generally normal joints have total nucleated
cell counts <3000/μL and most cats <1000/μL.
Total protein
This is ideally measured by a quantitative biochemical assay because refractometry
measures other solutes and protein. Joint fluid can form a thixolabile gel if left
undisturbed for several hours; clots can be distinguished in normal fluid by gently
shaking the sample to restore fluidity. If a specimen forms a clot after collction,
this indicates intra-articular haemorrhage or inflammation with increased vascular
permeability and protein exudation (e.g. fibrinogen) into the joint space. Normal
synovial fluid has a low protein concentration <2.5 g/dL. Protein concentration
will increase with inflammatory disease.
Cytology
Normal synovial fluid is composed predominantly of mononuclear cells and
contains very few red blood cells (RBCs). The term *mononuclear cells' includes
monocytes, macrophages, lymphocytes and synovial lining cells which may not
be readily distinguishable morphologically. With inflammatory processes
ne utrophils or even eosinophils may be identified. Cellular morphology must be
interpreted cautiously in samples which are not fresh since exposure to EDTA or
 prolonged storage can result in altered morphology, e.g. cytoplasmic vacuola-
tion. A subjective assessment of cellularity can be made cytologically. Generally,
in the body of a normal smear, there are approximately 2 cells/field at 400x
magnification (Figure 7.4). Due to the high viscosity of synovial fluid, cells tend
to line up in rows (the so-called windrowing, Figure 7.5), and this characteristic
a u rr o  Pos  noe sos pu siss uanid
lular preparations it may not be possible to appreciate this feature. Cells are
often located in a characteristic pink granular proteinaceous background
fluid deposit (Figure 7.6 and Figure 7.7). Normal synovial fluid contains <5-12%
neutrophils.
11G
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 7.4 Note the low cellularity in this normal canine synovial fluid and appearance of
dark-staining mononuclear cells with a moderate amount of granular basophilic cytoplasm.
Thecells arelocated in a stippled eosinophilicfluid deposit.
Figure 7.5  Cell windrowing in synovial fluid from a dog with degenerative arthropathy. Cells
are seen to line up like rows of cut hay in a field. This property is due to synovial fluid viscosity.
Source: John Dunn, Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Cytology of Synovial Fluid
117
Figure 7.6 Synovial fluid from a dog. Note the thick granular to ropy background material
reflecting the high mucin content.
Figure 7.7 Note the increased number of neutrophils and protein 'crescents' (these are
often seen with high-protein fluids and relate to inflammation here).
Culture
This can be performed on fluid samples collected into plain tubes or blood culture
medium. The use of liquid blood culture media enables culture of larger volumes of
joint fluid, and these media contain resins that decrease the inhibitory affects of
antibiotics and intrinsic inhibitory substances in synovial fluid, as well as lytic
118
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
agents that release micro-organisms phagocytised by inflammatory cells. Blood
culture tubes or bottles should be inoculated at the time of fluid collection and
  on de on pn u e e u t ro p
some cases, culture of a synovial membrane biopsy may be necessary to obtain a
positive culture result.
Ancillary diagnostic tests
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
These are key to detection of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and low
positive or transient ANA titres may also be seen with rheumatoid arthritis.
However, low titres can also be detected with neoplastic, inflammatory or infec
tious disease, and sometimes, clinically normal animals and not all animals with
SLE have detectable ANA
Rheumatoid factor
This is the antibody (usually IgM) against the Fc portion of autologous IgG. This
is of limited diagnostic use since positive results can be due to other causes and
 negative results to not rule out the disease.
Classification of joint disease
The aim of synovial fluid analysis is to distinguish inflammatory joint disease from
degenerative joint disease (DJD). Haemarthrosis and neoplasia may also, less com-
monly, be distinguished. Further differentiation of disease processes requires cor-
relation with other historical, laboratory and imaging findings. The classification of
joint disease is summarised in Table 7.1.
Inflammatory arthropathies
These are either infectious or non-infectious (e.g. traumatic or immune mediated).
Generally the greater the inflammatory reaction, the more turbid and discoloured
and the less viscous the fluid becomes. They are characterised by increased numbers
of neutrophils within the fluid which are typically moderately to markedly increased.
Infectious arthritis
Infectious arthritis can be caused by bacterial or fungal agents and generally prese nts
with a very high nucleated cell count (mostly neutrophils). Neutrophil degeneration
and phagocytosed organisms (Figure 7.8) are usually not features and therefore can-
associated with
joint instability,
Sepsis, immune
congenital or
coagulopathy,
DJD may be
trauma or
neoplasia
mediated
 neoplasia
sasneo
Trauma,
10-90% neutrophils
Number of red cells
relative to leukocytes
<5% neutrophils,
<10% neutrophils,
is similar to blood
 Differential
cells
cells
<2.5 g/dL
Normal to
decreased
Normal to
increased
Increased
Protein
Total nucleated cell
 5000->100,000/μL
concentration
1000-10,000/μL
Increased RBCs
<3000/μL
Mildly to markedly
decreased
Viscosity
Normal to
decreased
Decreased
High
Clear to straw coloured
 Clear to straw coloured
Table 7.1  Classification of joint disease
Gross appearance
Cloudy, yellow to off 
white or red brown
Red, cloudy or
xanthochromic
Degenerative
Inflammatory
Haemarthrosis
arthropathy
arthropathy
Category
Normal
120
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 7.8
The presence of intracytoplasmic cocci bacteria from this fresh smear indicates
sepsis.
either haematogenously or via direct inoculation, e.g. secondary to a penetrating
wound. Infectious arthritis tends to present with solitary joint involvement and is
often acute in onset. Since infectious agents and neutrophil degeneration are often
not detected in septic joints, it may be advisable to always culture inflamed joints,
bearing in mind that a negative culture also does to rule out infection since micro-
organisms can be located in the synovial lining. Commonly cultured bacteria
from joints include Stapbylococcus intermedius, Stapbylococcus aureus and beta-
haemolytic Streptococcus spp. Haemolytic strains of Escherichia coli or Pasteurella
multocida are most common in cats with septic arthritis. Fungal arthritides are
 uncommon but have been reported as a sequela to osteomyelitis or disseminated
infection by Blastomyces dermatitidis, Cryptococcus neoformans, Aspergillus spp.,
Coccidioides immitis, Histoplasma capsulatum and Sporothrix schenckii. Other
infectious organisms implicated as causative agents include mycoplasma, bacterial
L-forms, spirochaetes (Borrelia burgdorferi), protozoa (Leishmania donovani),
viruses (calcivirus, coronavirus) and rickettsia (Ehrlichia canis, Rickettsia rickettsii).
Non-infectious arthritis
With the exception of trauma, this involves an immune-mediated process, namely,
a type III hypersensitivity response. Clinical signs are the result of immune complex
deposition within the synovial capsule. Multiple joints are involved either concur-
rently or consecutively; however, occasionally, only a solitary affected joint is
 affected. In addition to joint pain/lameness, other signals of systemic disease include
fever, generalised stiffness or ill-defined pain, peripheral blood cytopenias, neck or
back pain, lymphadenopathy or proteinuria. Since affected animals may present
with a 'shifting’ lameness, aspiration of multiple joints is advocated.
Cytology of Synovial Fluid
121
心
Figure 7.9  Direct smear from a dog with idiopathic immune-mediated polyarthritis. Note the
protein crescents and marked increase in cellularity Inset at higher power.
Non-erosive arthropathies
The majority of these immune-mediated arthritides are non-erosive. Immune-
mediated polyarthritis may be idiopathic and drug induced, or it may occur
secondary to infection or neoplasia. Other causes include borreliosis (Lyme's
disease), ehrlichiosis, breed-specific polyarthritis (e.g. polyarthritis-meningitis
syndrome in Bernese mountain dog, Boxer, Corgi, German Shorthaired Pointer,
Newfoundland or Weimaraner; juvenile-onset polyarthritis of Akitas; and synovitis-
amyloidosis of Shar-Pei dogs) and SLE. Although some cases of SLE will be sero.
positive for ANA, this is not necessarily the case, and a positive result may also be
seen in some cases of idiopathic polyarthritis. In rare cases of SLE, lupus erythema-
tosus cells (LE cells) may be seen. Crystal-induced arthritis (e.g. gout) has rarely
been described in dogs and cats.
Cytologically, increased numbers of non-degenerate neutrophils (Figure 7.9)
are seen although in rare cases increased numbers of lymphocytes and plasma
cells may also be present (typically in stifle joints and associated with ACL rupture )
Diagnosis of immune-mediated disease is dependent not only on demonstrating
joint inflammation but also on ruling out infection via culture, serology and/or
empirical therapy.
Erosive arthropathies
Types of erosive arthritis described in cats and dogs include rheumatoid arthritis,
 polyarthritis of greyhounds and feline progressive polyarthritis. Erosive arthritis is
suggested when there are lucent cyst-like areas in the subchondral bone due to
122
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
progressive erosion of cartilage and subchondral bone in the area of synovial
attachments, which results in loss of articular cartilage and collapse of the joint
space with narrowing or widening of the joint spaces on radiography. There is a
progressive loss of subchondral bone with deformation and destruction of affected
joints. Deformities are most frequent in the carpal, tarsal and phalangeal joints
and less frequent in the elbow and stifle. Other clinical features include morning
stiffness, swelling of more than one joint within a 3-month period, symmetrical
swelling of joints, mononuclear infiltrates observed microscopically in a synovial
membrane biopsy and a positive rheumatoid factor (RF) titre. However, some
idiopathic cases will also be seropositive for RF, and this is not a specific finding.
Infection or neoplasia may also cause erosive joint disease.
Degenerative joint disease
DJD is characterised by degeneration of articular cartilage with secondary changes
in associated joint structures. This can occur secondary to conditions such as osteo-
chondrosis,hip dysplasia, joint instability, trauma, nutritional disorders or neopla-
sia. Cytological abnormalities may be detected before radiographic changes are
readily apparent. The cytological changes are not as dramatic as those seen with
inflammatory disease, and generally a mild increase in the number of mononuclear
cells (Figure 7.10 and Figure 7.11) is the predominant finding, of which more than
10% are moderately to markedly vacuolated (Figure 7.12) or phagocytic
(Figure 7.13). These cells are probably a mixture of macrophages (histiocytes) and
synovial cells. Subsequent trauma to the joint may result in superimposed transient
mild inflammation and haemorrhage. If damage to articular cartilage is severe,
osteoclasts (Figure 7.14), osteoblasts (Figure 7.15) and chondrocytes may exfoliate
into the joint fluid.
Figure 7.10 In degenerative arthropathy, large mononuclear cells can be seen within small
clumps or individually.
Figure 7.11   Note that the majority of these large mononuclear cells display cytoplasmic
vacuolation. Source: John Dunn, Axiom Veterinary Laboratories Ltd. Reproduced with
permission.
 mononuclear cells or macrophage-type cells (double arrow) and smallymphocytes (single
arrow). Reactive synoviocytes can be difficult to differentiate from reactive macrophages.
Figure 7.13 Large mononuclear cell displaying phagocytosis of a neutrophil.
124
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 7.14Osteoclast in synovial fluid from a dog with degenerative arthropathy. These
cells indicate articular cartilage erosion and exposure of subchondral bone (500x). Inset:
Osteoclast (higher power) shows a further example at the same magnification.
Figure 7.15  Osteoblast/chondrocytes within the same fluid as Figure 7.14.
Haemarthrosis
Recent trauma may result in joint haemorrhage. As in other instances in
cytology, true haemorrhage must be distinguished from the much more common
artefact of blood contamination. This is best done at the time of sample collection.
 If haemorrhage has occurred sometime previously, the synovial fluid may appear
 xanthochromic or homogenously red and cloudy. Cytologically, erythrophagocyto-
sis and/or haem breakdown products (e.g. haemosiderin or haematoidin crystals)
(Figure 7.16) may be observed within macrophages. Besides trauma other causes
of haemorrhagic joint fluid include coagulation defects and neoplasia. A congenital
coagulation factor deficiency should be considered in a puppy or kitten presenting
with repeated episodes of haemarthrosis with or without a history of trauma.
Cytologyof Synovial Fluid
125
Figure 7.16
6 Blood contamination is common with joint aspiration. To help distinguish true
haemorrhage from contamination, fresh smears should be examined for the presence of
platelets, erythrophagia and haemosiderin or haematoidin crystals. The macrophage contains
numerous small golden haematoidin crystals.
Figure 7.17  Direct smear from an aspirate from a swollen metacarpal joint in a cat. This
cluster of cells displays anisocytosis, anisokaryosis and prominent nucleoli suggestive of 
Neoplasia
Synovial neoplasia is rare in cats and dogs. Although synovial sarcomas are often
cited as the most common neoplasm, studies have shown that the majority in
dogs are actually of histiocytic origin. Other types include synovial myxoma, fibro-
sarcoma, chondrosarcoma and other undifferentiated sarcomas. Histiocytic and
synovial cell sarcomas are also reported in cats. Cytological features of malignancy
may be noted on aspiration of synovial fluid (Figure 7.17) although definitive char-
 acterisation of the neoplasm may require histological evaluation of a biopsy sample
 or in some cases, immunohistochemical labelling to identify cell lineage.
8
Biochemical and
Cytological Examination
of Cerebrospinal Fluid
Kate English' and Holger Volk
'Department of Pathology and Pathogen Biology, The Royal Veterinary
College, North Mymms, Hatfield, Herts, UK
2Department of Clinical Science and Services, The Royal Veterinary
College, North Mymms,Hatfield,Herts,UK
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collection and laboratory analysis is indicated in the
investigation of disease processes involving the meninges, nerve roots or the central
nervous system (CNS). CSF analysis is a sensitive test, which can help to narrow
down the list of differential diagnoses, but rarely provides a definitive diagnosis.
The results of CSF analysis should be interpreted in conjunction with the clinical
presentation and diagnostic imaging findings.
When taking a CSF sample, the following should be taken into consideration:
 Owner consent: CSF collection is an invasive procedure requiring general
 anaesthesia with inherent risks for the animal. Poor collection technique may
increase the risk of iatrogenic damage to the underlying CNS.
 The animal should be intubated and carbon dioxide partial pressure kept
between 30 mmHg and 35 mmHg.
Contraindications
Thrombocytopenia (platelet count< 50 x 10/L) or other coagulopathies.
 because of the increased risk of iatrogenic haemorhage.
 Elevated intracranial pressure (ICP); the findings of diagnostic imaging and/or
neurological examination findings should be considered prior to CSF collection.
CSF collection sites and technique
A CSF sample is collected routinely at the cerebellomedullary cisternal site
(Figure 8.1, Figure 8.2, Figure 8.3 and Figure 8.4) or from the subarachnoid
H aa auaa e sh 'sieo pue sop u (9's a pe 5'g aa) 9i-st ie aeds
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytotogy of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
(A)
(B)
Figure 8.1Sagittal T2-weighted magnetic resonance image of a Labrador brain with an
(A) extended and (B) ventrally flexed head position. For cerebellomedullary collection, the
head needs to be bent ventrally to increase the size of the subarachnoid space (arrow).
Source:HolgerVolk,RVC.Reproduced withpermission.
Figure 8.2  The bony landmarks for the cerebellomedullary cisternal CSF collection site. The
landmarks for the midline are the external occipital protuberance (V) and the spinous process
of the axis (C2, *A). The needle with the bevelled edge pointing cranially is inserted through
the midline near the cranial border of the wings of the atlas (Ci), which can be found where the
midline intersects with an imaginary line between the cranial borders of the wings of C1 (*').
A slight loss of resistance is felt as the needle penetrates the dorsal atlanto-occipital membrane
and enters the subarachnoid space. Source: Holger Volk, RVC. Reproduced with permission.
Biochemical and Cytological Examination of Cerebrospinal Fluid
129
Figure 8.3  Image demonstrating the location of the tip of the spinal needle relative to the
arch of C1 for CSF collection. Arrow indicates tip of the spinal needlle. Source: Holger Volk,
RVC. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 8.4  Aseptic collection of CSF. As soon the atlanto-occipital membrane is penetrated,
the stylet is withdrawn and fluid is allowed to flow from the hub of the needle into sterile tubes.
Especially for the inexperienced CSF collector, it can be easier to remove the stylet once the
should be divided into at least two aliquots collected in separate tubes. The initial collection
may be contaminated with blood. Source: Holger Volk, RVC. Reproduced with permission.
is obtained from the site which is both caudal and closest to the lesion. However,
lumbar CsF collection is more commonly associated with iatrogenic blood con-
tamination of the sample. A cerebellomedullary cisternal CSF sample is therefore
often required even if the lesion is caudal to the cervical spinal cord.
130
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of theDog and Cat
Figure 8.5  The bony landmarks for the L5-L6 CSF collection site. The landmarks for the
midline are the dorsal spinal processes of L5 and L6. The dorsal spinal process of L6 can
be found cranial to an imaginary line between the cranial aspect of the ilium ('*). The needle
is inserted on the midline near the cranial border of L6 spinal dorsal process and then
advanced ventrally. Source: Holger Volk, RvC. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 8.6  Image demonstrating the location of the spinal needle relative to the dorsal spinal
process of L6. A slight loss of resistance is felt as the needle penetrates the dorsal interarcuate
allowed to flow from the needle hub. The arrow indicates needle location in relation to the
dorsal spinal process of L6. Source: Holger Volk, RVC. Reproduced with permission.
The dog or cat is placed in right/left lateral recumbency for a right-/left-handed
person. The haircoat is clipped and the skin is aseptically prepared. The shortest
possible (1.5-3.5 in) 22G spinal needle with stylet can be used for most small ani-
mals. Occasionally, a 20 G spinal needle needs to be used for larger animals.
Biochemical and Cytological Examination of Cerebrospinal Fluid
1 31
Processing of CsF
Ideally, once the CSF is obtained, it should be processed within 20min-1 h. Chapter 1
demonstrates how to prepare a sediment smear to concentrate the cells if a
cytocentrifuge is not available. Concentration of the cells is required even when
there is a significant pleocytosis (increased cellularity) in the CSF, as cell numbers
will still be relatively low compared to fluid samples from other sites. Although
recent articles have suggested that total nucleated cell counts will not be signifi-
cantly affected with 24-48-h storage, cell percentages can be significantly affected,
and this will influence interpretation. If delayed processing is unavoidable, then the
addition of 10% autologous serum may help preserve cell morphology but will
obviously have a dilutional effect on cell numbers and will increase the measured
 protein concentration. If there is sufficient fluid, CSF may be split into aliquots, to
which autologous serum can be added to one for cytology, and the second may be
left untreated for the cell count and protein measurement.
Grossappearance
Normal CSF is clear, colourless and non-turbid. If the sample is contaminated with
blood at the time of collection, it may appear haemorrhagic. Generally, if there has been
bleeding into the CSF prior to collection, the sample will appear xanthochromic (yel-
low, similar to icterus). If the sample appears turbid, then a pleocytosis is likely, although
cytological assessment will be needed to determine which cell types are present.
CSF protein concentration
The concentration of protein in normal CSF is very low (generally <0.25 g/L for
 pe e ss  e t>  s p
intervals will depend on the laboratory used). Protein concentrations of this mag-
nitude cannot be detected by re fractometry or measured with routine protein assays
on in-house chemistry analysers. A specific method for measurement of total CSF
protein is required. Increased protein may be seen with any of the differentials
which result in a pleocytosis as described in the following texts. Increased protein
may also be seen without an increased cell count. This is referred to as cytoalbumi-
naemic dissociation. This may be seen with differentials such as intravertebral disc
disease (IVDD), neoplasia, degenerative myelopathies or occasionally infectious
agents. Atypical cells, such as macrophages, may or may not be present.
Cell counts
Cell counts are generally performed using a manual haemocytometer (Figure 8.7).
 A cover slip is placed on top ensuring Neubauer rings are formed on either side,
and then the CSF is introduced to cover the surface. The haemocytometer is allowed
to stand for 5 min before a count of nucleated cells and erythrocytes is undertaken.
132
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
福
Figure 8.7 Haemocytometer. This shows one of the smallsquares at the edge of the larger
square. The three lines at the bottom of the picture represent the outline of the larger square.
This is a sample from a dog with Steroid Responsive Meningitis Arteritis (SRMA).
Note the pleocytosis. Source: Kate English, RVC. Reproduced with permission.
Usually, the count is performed in the four large corner squares and the central
square, and then the numbers are multiplied by a factor which depends on the
 depth of the haemocytometer chamber. It is considered optimal to perform a count
 on both sides of the haemocytometer and average the results. It can be challenging
ated cells appear granular at h
ifications, and if the condenser is moved
away from the stage,
the
be seen more easily, and also the
biconcave shape of the ery
ome more apparent (Figure 8.8).
Nucleated cell counts are
cells/uL although some feline studies
have cell counts of up to
ythrocytes are expected to be scarce.
 then moderate numbers of erythrocytes
s of erythrocytes (>500/μL) may
increase the nucleated cell count. Some
mulae to estimate the increase in the nu1
 nucleated cells resulting from severe
blood contamination; howevel
considered to be unreliable.
CSF cytology
Cell numbers can be semi-quantitatively assessed on cytology even if there is insuf-
ficient sample to perform other tests. Cytological examination of a stained sample
of CSF is useful since atypical cells may be identified even if the cell count is low.
Low numbers of large and small mononuclear cells can be seen in normal CSF
(Figure 8.9). Small mononuclear cells are often small mature lymphocytes. The
presence of macrophages, and large, reactive or granular lymphocytes, is unusual
 and may suggest a prior inflammatory stimulus.
Biochemical and Cytological Examination of Cerebrospinal Fluid
133
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Figure 8.8 Haemocytometer. The biconcave shape of the erythrocytes can be clearly seen
Reproduced with permission.
Figure 8.9 A large mononuclear cell(bottom) and a small lymphocyte (top) from an
Haemorrhage
 The presence of erythrophagia or cells containing haem pigment suggests previous
(Figure 8.10 and Figure 8.11).
134
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 8.10 Macrophages exhibiting erythrophagia. Macrophages are present.
One exhibits erythrophagia in this sample where there had been haemorrhage into
the CSF prior to sampling. Source: Kate English, RVC. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 8.11  Macrophages with haemoglobin breakdown pigment. The macrophages
Source: Kate English, RVC. Reproduced with permission.
Non-inflammatory cells
Meningeal lining cells are occasionally noted either discretely or in small clusters.
These can be present due to sampling artefact and may not indicate significant
 pathology. However, occasionally large clumps may be present in an animal with
meningioma (Figure 8.12)
Biochemical and Cytological Examination of Cerebrospinal Fluid
135
Figure 8.12 Meningeal cells. Note the abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and small dense
eccentrically located oval nucleus in the clustered cells. Source: Kate English, RVC.
Reproduced with permission.
Neutrophilic pleocytosis
Neutrophils may be seen in low numbers (usually <7% of the total nucleated cell
count) particularly if there is iatrogenic blood contamination. Neutrop hilic pleocy-
tosis exists when the number of neutrophils is increased and constitutes greater
than 50% of the total nucleated cell population (Figure 8.13). In dogs, neutrophilic
pleocytosis is commonly associated with steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis
(SRMA) which often presents with neck pain and joint effusions. In cats, the dif-
ferential diagnosis includes the dry form of feline infectious peritonitis (FIP). Other
causes of neutrophilic pleocytosis include trauma and acute IVDD. It may also
tis is very rare in dogs and cats (Figure 8.14). Other infectious agents and rarely
granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis (GME) may also present with a neutro-
philic predominance. Other rare differentials including a few breed-specific condi-
tions may also be considered.
Mononuclear pleocytosis
Mononuclear pleocytosis is characterised by increased numbers of large mono-
nuclear cells and/or small lymphocytes. In the dog, GME is a common cause of
mononuclear pleocytosis. FIP (cat) and other infectious agents such as
Toxoplasma gondii (cat and dog), Neospora caninum (dog) and fungal aetiolo-
 gies should also be considered as differentials. These disorders may also be asso-
ciated with a mixed pleocytosis where the distribution of mononuclear cells is
similar to that described earlier, but the CSF also contains a variable number of
neutrophils (Figure 8.15).
Figure 8.13 Neutrophilic pleocytosis. This sample is from a dog with SRMA. Note the
permission.
Figure 8.14 Bacterial meningitis. Note the intracellular cocci in the neutrophil next to the
erythrocyte. Source: Kate English, RVC. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 8.15 Mixed pleocytosis. This CSF sample is from a dog with GME. Note the mixed
 population of non-degenerate neutrophils, lymphocytes and large mononuclear cells 
resembling macrophages. Source: Kate English, RvC. Reproduced with permission.
Biochemical and Cytological Examination of Cerebrospinal Fluid
137
Figure 8.16 CNS lymphoma (dog). Note the high numbers of atypical lymphocytes in this CSF
scant to moderate cytoplasm and an eccentrically located irregularly shaped nucleus. Note the
Necrotising meningoencephalitis of small breed dogs and chronic canine
distemper may present with a mononuclear pleocytosis where lymphocytes
predominate. Other rare differentials including a few breed-specific conditions may
also be considered. Resolving bacterial meningitis (following antibacterial therapy)
may also have a lymphocyte predominant pleocytosis. Occasionally, a population
of atypical lymphocytes may be seen in animals with lymphoma (Figure 8.16).
Lymphomas involving the CNS do not always exfoliate cells into the CSF (so an
absence of atypical lymphocytes in CSF does not preclude this diagnosis). CNS
lymphoma is rarely primary and there is commonly involvement at other sites.
Eosinophilic pleocytosis
Eosinophilic pleocytosis is uncommon (Figure 8.17). A steroid-responsive
eosinophilic meningitis occasionally occurs in dogs and cats. Other potential causes
include protozoal and fungal infections and migrant parasites. It has also been
reported with IVDD.
Myelin
Myelin can quite often be seen in CSF samples (Figure 8.18). It can appear as
eosinophilic foamy material or as fibrillar strands or ribbons (this material stains
positively for myelin with Luxol fast blue). Myelin is more often seen in lumbar
samples. It may reflect sample artefact and therefore may not be indicative of CNS
pathology.
138
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 8.17 Eosinophilic pleocytosis CSF from a dog which was diagnosed with systemic
candidiasis. Source: Kate English, RVC. Reproduced with permission.
RVC. Reproduced with permission.
Additional testing
Currently, biochemical or enzyme markers are not considered routinely useful. In
inflammatory diseases, measurements of immunoglobulin fractions have been used
to try and better characterise the underlying disease. Antibody or antigen tests or
PCR testing may also be performed on CSF to check for certain infectious agents.
9
Cytology of the Eye
and Adnexal Structures
Roger Powell and David Gould?
'PTDS Ltd,Hitchin,Herts,UK
2Davies Veterinary Specialists, Hitchin, Herts, UK
Eyelids
Indications for cytological investigation
Eyelid conditions that may benefit from cytological investigation include
infectious, immune-mediated and neoplastic causes of blepharitis (Table 9.1). Not
all of these conditions can be definitively diagnosed by cytological investigation,
but the procedure may allow diagnosis of some conditions (e.g. demodicosis,
dermatophytosis, lymphoma, mast cell tumour) or aid in the exclusion of others.
Collection techniques
With the exception of eyelid biopsy, most collection techniques can be performed
in the conscious patient.
Hair pluck
A number of hair samples should be taken from different areas of the eyelid,
d    s a   a an o s s 
the hairs with ‘padded’ forceps in the direction of the hair growth. Low-field
microscopic examination under oil, ideally after applying a cover slip, should be
 performed, examining the hair shaft for evidence of mites and spores.
Eyelid skin scrape
Apply a drop of oil to the skin or a small scalpel blade. Gently squeeze the skin to
be sampled between finger and thumb to express follicular and possibly glandular
material. Scrape with the blade in the direction of the hair growth until capillary
Ooze is seen to ensure sufficient depth for deeper parasites such as Sarcoptes spp.
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytotogy of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Table 9.1
Causes of blepharitis
Aetiology
Examples
Infectious
Viral
Canine papillomavirus (Figure 9.1), feline poxvirus, feline
herpesvirus-1
Figure 9.1   Four nucleated squames with intranuclear
papilloma virus inclusions - indistinct hyalinised lightly
basophilic ovoid structures (arrow). Source: Roger
Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Bacterial
Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp.,Pseudomonas
spp. (Figure 9.2), others
(B)
(A)
(C)
Figure 9.2  Karyolytic neutrophils with
(A) diplococci (staphylococci) (B) two chains of cocci
(streptococci); (C) phagocytosed large bacterial rods
(Pseudomonas sp.). Source: A and B, Roger Powell,
PTDS Ltd; C, David Gould, Davies Veterinary Specialists.
Reproduced with pemission.
Table 9.1
(Cont'd)
Aetiology
Examples
Protozoal
Leishmania spp. (Figure 9.3)
Figure 9.3Macrophage (largest cell) with eight
phagocytosed Leishmania amastigotes (arrow). Source:
Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Fungal
Dermatophytes (Figure 9.4)
Figure 9.4 Hair shaft showing chains of refractile
circular structures (arrow) indicating arthrospores
(dermatophytosis - unstained KOH scrape). Source:
Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
(Microsporum canis, Trichophyton mentagrophytes,
Microsporum gypseum)
Parasitic
Demodex spp., Sarcoptes spp. (Figure 9.5)
(A)
(B)
Figure 9.5 (A) Single Demodex canis and (B) Sarcoptes
scabiei (unstained KOH scrapes). Source: Roger Powell,
PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
(Continued)
Table 9.1
(Cont'd)
Aetiology
Examples
Immune
Pemphigus (Figure 9.6), systemic lupus erythematosus,
mediated
uveodermatological syndrome, atopic/allergic disease
Figure 9.6  Inflammatory cells with two deeply basophilic
larger acantholytic nucleated squames (arrows), consistent
with pemphigus foliaceus. Source: Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd.
Reproduced with permission.
Neoplastic
Sebaceous adenoma (trichoblastoma), histiocytoma (see
Figure 4.23), lymphoma (see Chapter 2 and Figure 4.26),
squamous cell carcinoma (see Figure 4.13), mast cell tumour
(Figure 9.7), adenocarcinoma, melanoma, papilloma, feline
apocrinehidrocystoma,others
Figure 9.7 Fresh blood with several discrete well-granulated
mast cells and two eosinophils. Left inset: Well-granulated
mast cell. Right inset: Same cell rapid stained (Diff-Quik'), the
granules not being 'seen'. Source: Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd.
Reproduced with permission.
Miscellaneous
Meibomian gland impaction or granuloma (chalazion; Figure 9.8)
(A)
(B)
Figure 9.8
 (A) Multinucleated giant macrophage with densely
vacuolated cytoplasm (fat and yellow bilirubin) surrounded by
mature neutrophils. (B) Several overlapping notched
rectangular crystalline 'clefts' indicating cell degeneration and
cholesterol deposition in cystic structures such as chalazion.
Source: Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Cytology of the Eye and Adnexal Structures
143
Aetiology
Examples
Histiocytosis
Nodular fascitis
Feline eosinophilic blepharitis
Foreign body (Figure 9.9)
Secondary to entropion or ocular surface disease
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 9.9 (A) Barbed plant material in a foreign body reaction.
(B) Three square fragments of plant material, alongside blebbing
basophilic linear fungal/yeast strands (arrow). (C) Multinucleated
giant macrophage with a vacuolated phagocytic macrophage.
(D) Two plasma cells, one binucleate (top left). Source: Roger
Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with pemission.
 e  ssd s    s p a rs 
glass slide.
The material is covered with a cover slip to aid examination. Oil can be used
for this, allowing the mites to be spotted as they move around; however, if the
preparation is too thick, the squames can hide the mites. The use of potassium
hydroxide (KOH 1-10%) instead of oil will “clear’ the keratinised material,
making it transparent so mites are more easily seen. The KOH should be carefully
applied to the material under the cover slip and left for at least 30 min to allow
'clearing' before examination. Note, however, that the 10% solution of KOH
kills the mites so they no longer move. Look between and along the margins
of the hair shafts for parasites (Figure 9.5). Examine the base of the hair for
arthrospores (Figure 9.4).
144
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
'pnoy piaeg :aoinos 'sdeaoy qwny buisn azaanbs uejwoqlew joj anbuyoal ol'b aunbiy
Davies Veterinary Specialists. Reproduced with permission.
Meibomiangland squeeze
performing this technique may aid patient compliance.
Samples collected from the meibomian glands (Figure 9.10) should be submitted
for bacterial culture and sensitivity testing.
They may also be examined under low-field magnification for evidence of
Demodex mites (Figure 9.5). If air-dried, they can also be examined for bacteria
(Figure 9.2).
Eyelid biopsy
This should be performed under general anaesthesia.
 Eyelid biopsy (Figure 9.11) samples should be fixed in preservative and
submitted for histopathological examination. However, cytological examina-
tion of an impression smear of the biopsy sample immediately prior to fixation
formalin fumes as this distorts the cells and prevents detailed examination.
 If an infectious aetiology is suspected, eyelid biopsy samples should also be
submitted for bacterial and fungal culture.
Normal cell types
Keratinised squames (Figure 9.12) found on the outer haired surface of the eyelid.
Sebaceous epithelial cells have clear finely vacuolated cytoplasm and a central
dense staining nucleus (Figure 4.12). These are located in the epidermal layers
between the outer and inner surfaces of the eyelid.
 Columnar epithelial cells are found on the inner surface. These are longer thin cells
with blue vacuolar cytoplasm that may contain distinct irregular eosinophilic glob.
les. They have a polar/basal circular nucleus and a small nucleolus (Figure 9.13)
Cytology of the Eye and Adnexal Structures
1 45
Figure 9.11  Technique for eyelid punch biopsy. Source: David Gould, Davies Veterinary
Specialists. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 9.12  Individual anucleate angular polygonal keratinised squames with light
146
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 9.13 Small palisading cohesive strand of monomorphic columnar epithelial cells
(arrowhead) alongside lysed cellular material (arrow) and scattered mixed inflammatory cells.
Source: Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Reproduced with permission.
 Skeletal muscle fibres may be aspirated from the dermis and subcutis. These are dark
turquoise-coloured cells with fine striations and dense strap-like nuclei ( Figure 9.14).
Abnormal cytology
Inflammation
 Bacteria, most commonly cocci or rods, typically elicit a purulent neutro-
philic inflammatory response. The neutrophils usually appear karyolytic
(Figure 9.2). Foreign bodies and higher-order agents such as mycobacteria
Cytology of the Eye and Adnexal Structures
147
(A)
(B)
(B) Mixed lymphocytes, primarily small with a few intermediate and nucleolated larger ones
alongside occasional neutrophil (arrowhead) and dendritic cells (arrows) in a lymphoid follicle
forming in chronic inflammation. Source: Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
may elicit a more mixed pyogranulomatous to granulomatous response
characterised by increased numbers of mononuclear cells (e.g. lymphocytes,
plasma cells and macrophages). Some macrophages may be multinucleated
(Figure 9.9). Mycobacteria spp. can be seen as clear non-staining, linear or
curvilinear structures within macrophages (see Figure 2.5, Figure 5.11 and
Figure 15.2E), but the organisms can also be extracellular. Foreign bodies
may introduce environmental opportunistic fungi or yeasts (Figure 9.9B).
 More chronic lesions may induce angiogenesis and nodular lymphoid
follicular hyperplasia (Figure 9.15). Immune-mediated lesions are occasion-
ally sampled (Figure 9.6).
Other infectious agents
 Viral inclusions are typically intra-nuclear, appearing as variably distinct circular
to more oval or curved eosinophilic or basophilic smooth *clumps’ inside the
nucleus, displacing the chromatin into thick black grainy strands (Figure 9.1).
148
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Leishmania amastigotes consist of a central circular to oval dense nucleus and
a linear bar-shaped kinetoplast, positioned at right angles to the nucleus
(Figure 9.3).These may intracellular (within macrophages) or extracellular.
Dermatopbytosis. Arthrospores can be seen as chains of circular refractile
structures at the base of the hair shaft (Figure 9.4). When stained, they appear
as dark blue circular structures inside macrophages or hair shafts.
Neoplasia
The following neoplasms may more commonly involve the eyelids:
Sebaceous adenoma
Apocrine (basal cell) adenoma or trichoblastoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Histiocytoma
Lymphoma
Mast cell tumour
Please refer to Chapter 4 for images and cellular descriptions of these tumours.
Conjunctiva and cornea
Indications for cytological investigation
Causes of conjunctival and corneal disease in dogs and cats are listed in
Table 9.2. Diagnostic cytology should be employed in cases of severe, progres-
sive or recurrent conjunctivitis and keratitis and in those cases that are resistant
to empirical treatment.
Collection techniques
The appropriate collection techniques for conjunctival and corneal investigations
are listed in the following texts.
Conjunctival or corneal swabs
Swabs should be submitted for bacterial culture and sensitivity testing. Since
topical anaesthetics can inhibit bacterial culture, samples for bacterial culture
should be taken prior to application of a topical anaesthetic. To reduce the risk
of contamination, care should be taken to avoid contact of the swab with the
id margin or facial skin.
 If Mycoplasma infection is suspected, specific transport medium should be used.
Alternatively plain swabs can be used for PCR testing for certain agents such as
herpesvirus, Chlamydophila and Mycoplasma spp.
Cytology of the Eye and Adnexal Structures
149
Table 9.2
 Causes of conjunctival or corneal disease
Aetiology
Examples
Infectious
Viral
Feline herpesvirus-1, canine distemper virus,
canine adenovirus, canine herpesvirus-1
Bacterial
C. felis (Figure 9.16), P. spp. (Figure 9.2),
Streptococcus spp. (Figure 9.2), Mycoplasma
spp., others
Protozoal
Leishmania spp. (Figure 9.3)
Fungal
Fungal keratitis (Aspergillus spp., others) (Figure 9.17)
Immune mediated
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus; Figure 9.18),
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, eosinophilic
keratoconjunctivitis (Figure 9.19A and B), nodular
granulomatous episclerokeratitis, atopic/allergic
disease
Neoplastic
Lymphoma, mast cell tumour, melanoma, papilloma,
squamous cell carcinoma, others (see Chapter 4)
Miscellaneous
Feline corneal sequestrum, corneal epithelial cyst,
foreign body, subconjunctival orbital fat prolapse
Secondary to eyelid, lacrimal, intraocular or orbital
disease
Secondary to external irritants
Figure 9.16 Several nucleated squames, one with a basophilic Chlamydophila initial body
Exfoliative cytology
Samples for cytological examination ideally should be collected with a cytobrush
(Figure 9.20), which results in superior cell quality and yield in comparison
to collection with a swab. A topical anaesthetic should be applied prior to sam-
pling to improve patient compliance.
150
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(A)
(B)
Figure 9.17 (A) Fungal right-angle branching basophilic hyphae (arrows). (B) Less staining
and more irregular grainy branching fungal hyphae (arrows), genetic sequencing confirming
Scedosporium apiospermum. Source: Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 9.18 Epithelial cells (arrows) with bare lysed nuclear remnants (arrowheads) and
mixed inflammatory cells, mainly small lymphocytes, scattered mature neutrophils and a
Conjunctival snip biopsies can be taken under topical anaesthesia, light sedation
or general anaesthetic (Figure 9.21). An impression smear of the sample
may allow early diagnostic interpretation prior to fixation and submission of the
sample for histopathological examination, ensuring no formalin fume exposure.
Normal cell types
(Figure 9.22A). Goblet cells and columnar epithelial cells may also be present
(Figure 9.22B).
When sampling, if previous ultrasound examination has been performed,
ensure that gel does not contaminate the slides and obscure morphological
detail (see Figure 1.19).
Cytology of the Eye and Adnexal Structures
151
(A)
(B)
Figure 9.19 (A) Nucleated squames, lysed cells (x), two eosinophils (arrows) and two mast
cells (arrowheads). (B) Groups of neutrophils with three eosinophils (arrows), the latter not
always dominating in cases of eosinophilic keratitis as they are variably present at various
depths and also multifocally. Source: Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 9.20  Cytobrush for collection of conjunctival material. Source: David Gould, Davies
Veterinary Specialists. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 9.21  Technique for conjunctival snip biopsy. Source: David Gould, Davies Veterinary
Specialists. Reproduced with permission.
(A)
(B)
Figure 9.22 (A) Nucleated squames with a trafficking cytoplasmic neutrophil (arrowhead) -
emperipolesis - seen in inflammation. (B) Goblets cells (arrows), which look similar to
columnar cells but more rounded with vacuolar cytoplasm that can be globular and
Reproduced with permission.
Cytology of the Eye and Adnexal Structures
153
(A)
(B)
Figure 9.23 (A) Superficial nucleated squame with perinuclear grains of melanin seen in
chronic inflammation. (B) Irregular refractile crystalline clear material with a basophilic *halo
consistent with calcium salts seen in chronic keratitis. Source: Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd.
Reproduced with permission
Abnormal cytology
Inflammation
Neutrophilic inflammation may be due to acute bacterial or viral infection but
consider also immune-mediated disease or traumatic ulceration especially if
culture (and/or PCR) results are negative. Pannus is characterised by a more
chronic mixed or pyogranulomatous inflammatory response (Figure 9.18).
Chronic inflammation may result in epithelial dysplasia and the presence of per-
inuclear melanin granules in squamous epithelial cells (Figure 9.23A). It can
also be associated with dystrophic calcification if long standing (Figure 9.23B).
Eosinophilic keratitis is often associated with herpesvirus infection in cats, or it
may be immune mediated. The inflammatory response consists of variable numbers
of mast cells and eosinophils with lower numbers of neutrophils and small lymphocytes
(Figure 9.19).
Other infectious agents
Chlamydophila felis appears as indistinct basophilic to slightly purple initial
 and/or elementary intracytoplasmic bodies in squamous epithelial cells
(Figure 9.16).
 Mycoplasma spp. appear as small indistinct basophilic dots' on squamous epi-
thelial cells (see Figure 15.2H).
Fungal keratitis. Fungal hyphae stain as linear septate structures with parallel
walls. Hyphae branch at various angles. The presence of fruiting bodies (conidio-
phores) may allow speciation, or it can be done by culturing or genetic sequencing
(Figure 9.17).
154
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Neoplasia
 The tumour types are similar to those that can involve the eyelids.
Anterior chamber
The normal anterior chamber is essentially acellular but in anterior uveitis inflam-
matory cells traverse the blood-aqueous barrier and enter the aqueous humour
where they cause aqueous flare. Causes of anterior uveitis are listed in Table 9.3.
Most cases of anterior uveitis do not warrant cytological investigation of the
anterior chamber. If aqueous flare is not clinically visible via ophthalmoscopic or
slit-lamp examination, then aqueocentesis is not indicated.
Collection technique
 Aqueocentesis should be performed with the patient under general anaesthesia
should be applied and the ocular surface should be aseptically prepared using
dilute povidone-iodine solution at 1:50 dilution.
A 25-30 G needle attached to a syringe is passed into the anterior chamber via
the limbus. Forceps are required to stabilise the globe during passage of the
needle (Figure 9.24). It is important to closely visualise the needle tip during
 passage to ensure that it enters the anterior chamber and does not damage the
iris or lens. Approximately 0.1-0.2 mls of aqueous humour is slowly drawn into
the syringe before the needle is briskly withdrawn from the anterior chamber. If
volumes greater than 0.2 mls are withdrawn, the anterior chamber should be
re-inflated with balanced salt solution or sterile normal saline.
Table 9.3
Causes of uveitis in dogs and cats
Infectious
Viral (adenovirus and herpesvirus in dogs; feline infectious
peritonitis, feline immunodeficiency virus, feline leukaemia virus,
feline herpesvirus-1 in cats)
Bacterial (e.g. Bartonea spp., Leptospira spp., Borrelia burgdorfer,
Ehrlichia canis, penetrating injury or septicaemic spread)
Protozoal (toxoplasmosis, neosporosis, leishmaniasis)
Mycotic/algal
Parasitic (e.g. Angiostrongylus vasorum)
Non-infectious
Traumatic
Lens induced
Systemic disease (e.g. toxaemia, bleeding disorders, diabetes
mellitus, hyperlipidaemia, systemic hypertension, granulomatous 
meningoencephalomyelitis, systemic histiocytosis)
Neoplasia (most commonly lymphoma)
Autoimmune/immune-mediated disease
ldiopathic
Cytology of the Eye and Adnexal Structures
155
Figure 9.24 Technique for aqueocentesis sampling. Source: David Gould, Davies Veterinary
Specialists. Reproduced with permission.
Indications for cytological investigation
Aqueocentesis sampling may be indicated if lymphoma is suspected in an animal
with active aqueous flare. It is not generally useful in the diagnosis of other types of
ny snoanbe ai oui sho paus oi pun ou op asau auns smo renonu
in sufficient numbers. Less commonly, aqueocentesis is performed to collect samples
for culture, PCR or antibody testing in selected cases of infectious uveitis.
 Sampling of the anterior chamber carries some risk, including bacterial contami-
nation, iatrogenic damage to the intraocular structures (specifically the iris and
veterinary surgeons experienced in the technique.
Normal cell types
As mentioned previously, aqueous humour is essentially acellular (only the occa-
sional rare small lymphoid cell may be present). The presence of increased numbers
of any cell type is therefore considered abnormal.
Abnormal cytology
Infammation
● Many cases of anterior uveitis are idiopathic. Infectious causes are listed in
Table 9.3. The inflammatory response may vary from neutrophilic to lympho-
cytic, mixed or pyogranulomatous (Figures 9.25). These different inflammatory
categories may reflect the same disease process over time. Neutrophils may be
hypersegmented and pyknotic due to hydropic degeneration or centrifugation
of the sample (Figure 9.25C). Macrophages often contain phagocytosed melanin
156
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(B)
(A)
(C)
Figure 9.25 (A) Neutrophilic mixed uveitis with macrophages (arrows) and a small
lymphocyte (arrowhead). (B) Pyogranulomatous inflammation with admixed small lymphocytes,
(arrowhead). Source: Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
granules (Figure 9.26A and B). They may also be leukophagic (Figure 9.26C),
or if hyphaema is present, they may contain phagocytosed red blood cells or
 degraded haemoglobin product, e.g. haemosiderin (Figure 9.26D). Lymphocytes
may also be larger and reactive (Figure 9.27).
Neoplasia
Tumour types are similar to those that may involve the eyelids and conjunctiva,
lymphoma being the most commonly diagnosed. Neoplasia is often associated
with neutrophilic or (pyo)granulomatous inflammation.
Other intraocular tumours such as melanoma or adenoma/adenocarcinoma rarely
shed cells into the anterior chamber, although fine-needle aspiration (FNA) may be
useful for diagnosing some of these cases. Prior to sampling, the advice of an expe-
rienced veterinary ophthalmologist should be sought since FNA of intraocular
tumours carries significant risk, including haemorrhage and damage to intraocular
structures.
Cytology of the Eye and Adnexal Structures
157
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
obscuring the light purple nucleus. (B) Macrophage with melanin can have more linear
phagosomes resembling bacteria but are black, non-dividing and variable in size.
 e  i    d d g  o )
the reparative phase. (D) Macrophage with erythrophagocytosis and also phagosomes with
(haemosiderin). Source: Roger Powell, PTDS Ltd. Reproduced with permission.
(A)
(B)
Figure 9.27
(A) Reactive 'transformed’ lymphocyte (left) that is now activated by the
inflammatory process and circulating cytokines. (B) Activated reactive lymphocyte (left)
producing antibody in light blue vacuoles called Russell bodies. Source: Roger Powell,
PTDS Ltd.Reproduced with permission.
158
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 9.28 Technique for vitreocentesis sampling. Source: David Gould, Davies Veterinary
Specialists. Reproduced with permission.
Vitreous
Indications for cytological inwestigation
Cytological sampling of the vitreous is very rarely indicated. Because of the serious
risk of iatrogenic damage to the retina and lens, the technique should only be
 performed by an experienced veterinary ophthalmologist.
The main indication for vitreocentesis is infection of the intraocular structures
(endophthalmitis). Less commonly it may be performed in cases where neoplastic
infiltration of the vitreous is suspected.
Collection technique
sa r a id   d  ss
Immediately prior to sampling, topical anaesthetic should be applied and the
ocular surface should be aseptically prepared using dilute povidone-iodine
solution at 1:50 dilution.
Using forceps to stabilise the limbus, a 23-27 G needle attached to a syringe is
s d a au a  ai s a o  s
be 7 mm behind the dorsolateral limbus in the dog. Great care must be taken to
avoid iatrogenic damage to the lens, ciliary body and retina. After sample collection,
the needle is briskly withdrawn from the vitreous.
Cytology of the Eye and Adnexal Structures
159
Figure 9.29 Ultrasound-guided FNA of the orbit. Source: David Gould, Davies Veterinary
Specialists. Reproduced with permission.
Normal cell types
Since the vitreous is essentially acellular, the presence of more than a few cells
(especially non-lymphoid) within a vitreous sample is considered abnormal. The
 snoane  paendse asou on res are uaas so jo sad
Orbit
Indications for cytological investigation
Major causes of orbital disease in dogs and cats include:
Abscess/cellulitis/foreign body
Neoplasia
Cyst (e.g. zygomatic salivary gland cyst, lacrimal cyst)
 Inflammatory disease (e.g. myositis)
Collection techniques
Orbital FNA is performed with the patient under general anaesthesia. It may be per-
formed trans-orally or periocularly. Ultrasound guidance during sampling greatly
improves collection rates and reduces risk of iatrogenic damage to the eye ( Figure 9.29).
Normal cell types
The cell type varies depending on the area sampled. Aspirates often include epithe-
and, potentially, skeletal muscle fibres (Figure 9.14)).
160
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Abnormal cytology
Inflammation
Retrobulbar abscess. Aspirates consist of a large number of karyolytic neutrophils
Neoplasia
 Carcinomas are more common although the tissue of origin may not be determined
tither cytologically or histopathologically. The cells of salivary gland carcinomas
can show more obvious malignant features, and they may form acinar or tubular
structures similar to carcinomas located at other sites.
10
Cytology of the Urinary
Tract
Joy Archer
Department ofVeterinary Medicine,Queen's Veterinary School,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Three of the most common conditions affecting the urinary system are infections,
kidney disease and neoplasia. An indication of a disorder involving the urinary
tract (urethra, bladder, ureters and kidneys) can be obtained from microscopic
observation of urine sediment, along with the urine specific gravity (SG). This,
coupled with a recent history and physical examination, can determine further
investigations and/or treatments. It is important to bear in mind, however, that
only around 3o% of neoplasms which involve the urinary tract can be detected
by urine sediment analysis. Likewise, not all infections can be detected by sediment
analysis alone.
Collection techniques
Urine
Urine can be obtained by *free catch', catheterisation or cystocentesis. The latter
method is advisable if bacterial culture is required.
Bladder and urethra
Samples for cytology can be obtained by flushing the bladder with warm saline via
a urinary catheter and recovering the flush fluid. If a mass is visible on ultrasound
examination and is accessible, a suction biopsy of the mass can be performed under
sedation or light anaesthesia to collect small fragments of tissue via the catheter tip
(this technique is henceforth referred to as a catheter tip suction biopsy). If the mass
is not accessible through the urethra, an ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirate
 r s  d aq   , o ()
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
162
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Kidneys
Ultrasound-guided FNA or “Tru-Cut’ biopsies are usually performed under
analgesia or anaesthesia. If a “Tru-Cut' or wedge biopsy is required for histo-
access procedure may be used. The kidney is a very vascular organ and great care
with haemostasis is required, as haemorrhage post-biopsy is not uncommon.
 If the biopsy sample is obtained by ultrasound guidance, the potential for
transcoelomic metastasis should be considered if a malignant tumour is diagnosed;
this has occasionally been reported to occur with transitional cell carcinomas
(TCC) in dogs.
Sample preparation
Urine
The urine is mixed well and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5min. A set volume
of 5 ml or 3 ml is routinely used. After centrifugation the supernatant is used for
dipstick chemistry or discarded. The sediment pellet is gently resuspended in the
remaining urine, and a single drop, with or without the addition of a drop of stain,
e.g. modified Sternheimer-Malbin stain (Sedi-Stain, Becton Dickinson Co. Ltd), is
placed on a glass slide and covered with a cover slip. Special disposable plastic
counting chamber devices can also be used.
Washes
The fluid can be prepared as described for a prostatic wash or bronchoalveolar
lavage or a small volume (100-200 μL) can be spun in a special cytocentrifuge to
produce a concentrated preparation which can be air-dried and stained with one of
the Romanowsky-type stains for cytology.
Fine-needleaspirates
A drop of the tissue or fluid aspirate is expelled onto a glass slide and a thin film
is prepared. This is air-dried and stained with a Romanowsky-type stain in the
usual way.
 ss a  as ai sd e q rd aq o ses s
a clean glass slide (the cut surface should be gently *blotted’ free of excess blood
beforehand). This smear can be air-dried and stained for cytology as described in
Chapter 1. The remaining tissue can then be fixed in formal saline and processed
for histological examination.
Cytology of the Urinary Tract
163
Cytological evaluation
Urine sediment cytology
Urine should be evaluated within 30 min of collection or refrigerated and brought
to room temperature before the sample is processed. Knowledge of the SG and
method of collection is useful.
Normal urine produces very little sediment (Figure 10.1A and B).
This may include:
 Less than five white blood cells (WBC) per high-power field (hpf)
 Less than five red blood cells (RBC) per hpf
Less than five epithelial cells of the superficial bladder/urethral squamous
epithelial cells per hpf
Small numbers of crystals (see following text)
 Other materials can include fat droplets, sperm and amorphous fine granular
material.
'Free catch' urine may contain epithelial cells from the lower urinary tract and
contaminating organisms, bacteria, yeasts, fungi and, rarely, intestinal parasites.
 In unstained preparations, fat droplets may be easily confused with RBC
(Figure 10.2A, B and C).
 In stained preparations, stain precipitate or ultrasound gel may be mistaken for
bacterial organisms (cocci; Figure 10.9B). Crystals, most commonly struvite or
oxalate crystals, may also be present (Figure 10.1A and Figure 10.3).
(A)
(B)
川
iv
Figure 10.1  (A) Unstained urine sediment (microscope condenser lowered to view cells
using a 40x objective lens). (i) Struvite crystals may be seen in normal concentrated urine;
(i) the large cells are epithelial cells exfoliated from the bladder mucosa; (ili) the smaller cells
with internal structure are neutrophils; (iv) the small round cells with no internal structure are
red cells; (v) the very small round objects are fine particulate matter which may exhibit
Brownian motion and may be confused with cocci. (B) Unstained urine sediment (50x oil
objective lens). (i) Four large epithelial cells, (i) intermediate-sized WBC, (i) small round RBC
and (iv) a few spermatozoa can be seen.
(A)
(B)
(C)
福
Figure 10.2  (A) Urine sediment from a cat. Large numbers of refractile fat droplets (i) of
variable size are present. These are common in cat urine and can be confused with RBC
(i) in unstained preparations; (B) sample of the same urine stained with Oil Red-O (ScyTek
Laboratories Inc.) which stains fat orange/red; (C) urine sediment (unstained sample). The
WBC are the larger cells; RBC are smaller; and many appear crenated. Two smaller refractile
fat droplets are also present.
Figure 10.3 Urine sediment from a cat (stained sample). A large number of RBC, calcium
oxalate monohydrate crystals and a single large epithelial cell are present. These crystals can
be seen in healthy cats but also following ingestion of ethylene glycol (antifreeze) or, more
commonly, toxic plants, e.g. lilies.
Cytology of the Urinary Tract
165
(A)
(B)
Figure 10.4 (A) Urine sediment (unstained sample) viewed with a phase contrast
microscope. WBC and dark chains of rods and small round paler cocci can be seen in the
background; (B) urine stained with Sedi-Stain (Becton Dickinson Co. Ltd). A large number of
RBC and clusters/clumps of stained cocci are present.
Urinary tract infection (UTI)
The lower urinary tract is often infected by ascending bacteria; infections
involving the kidney may also be due to ascending bacteria or may be haematoge-
 nous in origin. If a UTI is suspected, a cystocentesis sample in a sterile container is
preferred for bacteriology (culture and sensitivity). A UTI is characterised by the
presence of large numbers of neutrophils which often contain intracytoplasmic
microorganisms (most commonly rods and cocci). These include gram-negative
Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp.and less frequently Klebsiella
on a pue a to am) dds sond pe ds snd 'ds
166
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 10.5 Urinary tract infection. Urine sediment showing large epithelial cells, neutrophils
and bacterial rods (E. cof).
福
Figure 10.6 Unstained sediment. Large numbers of growing yeasts (Candida spp.) These 
are common contaminants in urine. They can be seen as a rare cause of UTl in
immunocompromised animals.
Occasionally, yeast organisms are seen particularly in immunocompromised
animals or animals on long-term antibiotic therapy (Figure 10.6). In order to
visualise bacteria in urine sediment, there needs to be 10,000 rods/ml or 100,000
cocci/ml; however, only 1-10 bacterial organisms per ml need to be present for a
positive bacterial culture. Therefore, an inactive or a negative urine sediment on
microscopy of a dilute urine sample does not preclude the presence of a UTI.
Brownian movement of particles in sediment can also be confused with cocci.
If the UTI is severe or prolonged, there may also be inflammation of the bladder/
 urethral mucosa, resulting in the presence of large sheets of superficial epithelial cells
 in the urine sediment along with large numbers of RBC. If the UTI is long standing.
these epithelial cells may become dysplastic or may exhibit characteristics of squa-
mous metaplasia (Figure 10.7).
Cytology of the Urinary Tract
167
Figure 10.7 Urine sediment. Note the large epithelial cells demonstrating dysplastic
changes. Neutrophils and bacteria (rods) can also be seen.
Neoplasia
If there is haematuria and/or the urine sample appears cloudy and there are few
adsn a Pious soau e as a u eq  sdo
A large number of epithelial cells, particularly if there are changes in morphology.
should raise suspicion of neoplasia (benign polyps should be expected to exfoliate
epithelial cell types with more typical morphology). However, it is worth bearing.
in mind that urine is an inhospitable environment for epithelial cells, and many of
 the morphological changes may reflect degeneration or ageing.
Cytology of bladder washes, fine-needle aspirates
and impression smears
The cytological characteristics of inflammation and infection are similar to those
described earlier Neoplasia is more likely to be detected from an FNA or an impression
smear of a discrete mass in the bladder or urethra rather than by microscopic examina-
tion of urine sediment. In dogs and cats, the most common tumour is the Transitional
Cell Carcinoma (TCC) (Figure 10.8A, B, C, D, and E). In cats, 15% of tumours involv-
 ing the bladder or urethra are squamous cellcarcinomas. Polyps and benign masses are
 much less common and can be differentiated from carcinomas on impression smears
(Figure 10.9A and B). Other rare tumours include leiomyomas, leiomyosarcomas and
botryoid tumours.
Because most samples are obtained under ultrasound guidance, they may
easily be contaminated with ultrasound gel which can obscure morphological
detail unless care is taken with needle placement (Figure 10.9B and Figure 1.19).
168
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
E
Figure 10.8 (A) Unstained sediment from a bladder wash. Rafts of epithelial cells, many
with multiple nucleoli. Some cells are binucleated. The cytological appearance is suspicious
for a TCC of the bladder; (B) sediment from abladderwash.The epithelial cells possess large
nuclei with multiple prominent nucleoli; (C) cytospin preparation of a bladder wash. There are
numerous RBC in the background. Note the large epithelial cell in mitosis; (D) TCC. Cytospin
preparation of a bladder wash. This epithelial cell has assumed a 'signet ring' appearance;
(E) cytospin preparation of a bladder wash.Rafts of atypical cells consistent with a TCC
arepresent.
Cytology of the Urinary Tract
169
(A)
(B)
Figure 10.9(A) Impression smear of catheter tip suction biopsy of a polypoid mass
on the bladder wall which protruded into the lumen. The squamous epithelial cells show mild
anisocytosis and anisokaryosis. There are RBC and bacteria but no WBC in the background. This
was confirmed as a benign polyp on histology; (B) impression smear of a catheter tip suction
A o   s a      i s e po o
including anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, binucleation and increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio
Numerous RBC can be seen in the background which is a common finding with tumours. The
 magenta-coloured material is an ultrasound gel. A TCC was confimed on histology.
Renal cytology
Normal cell types
Individual renal tubular epithelial cells may be seen in urine and in FNA samples
(Figure 10.10A and B). In dogs, the cells are caudate shaped with pale basophilic
cytoplasm, while in cats they frequently contain numerous punctuate fat vacu
oles. Sometimes large rafts of normal tubular epithelial cells may be aspirated
(Figure 10.11).
170
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(A)
(B)
Figure 10.10  (A) FNA kidney. Clusters of normal renal tubular epithelial cells. These exhibit
mild anisocytosis and anisokaryosis. Note the dark intracytoplasmic granules. Renal
aspirates frequently contain a large amount of blood; (B) FNA feline kidney. A single normal
renal tubular epithelial cell with a caudate shape and discrete cytoplasmic vacuoles
(cytoplasmic vacuolation is more frequently observed in feline tubular epithelial cells).
Abnormal cytology
Inflammation
Aspirates may contain a few normal renal epithelial cells and a large number of
inflammatory cells (neutrophils, small lymphocytes and macrophages). The latter
are particularly prominent in granulomatous conditions, é.g. feline infectious 
 peritonitis (FIP) and mycobacterial infections in cats.
Cytology of the Urinary Tract
171
Figure 10.11
 Intact renal tubule consisting of a raft of normal renal tubular epithelial cells in
a background of blood.
Figure 10.12 FNA kidney (cat) Lymphoma. Large numbers of lymphocytes with a few
epithelial cells in a background of blood are seen. Inset: higher magnification of the FNA
showing a background of blood with single renal epithelial cell and numerous lymphocytes
with multiple prominent nucleoli.
Neoplasia
Primary neoplasms of the kidney are relatively uncommon in dogs and cats; how-
ever, secondary metastatic spread of some tumours to the kidney can occur.
Lymphoma
Renal lymphoma can be primary or result from secondary metastatic spread. It can
 occur as a single mass in one pole of the kidney or diffusely involve the renal paren-
chyma (Figure 10.12A and B). It is reported to be the most common tumour in cats.
172
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 10.13 FNA kidney (dog). The atypical renal epithelial cells demonstrate many criteria
 of malignancy. Note the abnormal mitotic figure to the right. This was confirmed as a primary
renal carcinoma on histology.
Figure 10.14 FNA kidney (dog). A raft of epithelial cells and one normal squamous epithelial
cell with a small nucleus and abundant pale basophilic cytoplasm are present. Many of the
epithelial cells are showing obvious criteria of malignancy (anisocytosis, anisokaryosis and
variation in nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio). This was confirmed as a TCC on histology.
Carcinomas
Primary renal carcinomas can arise from renal tubular epithelial cells. Although
only 1% of all tumours in dogs are located in the kidney, 85 % of these are reported
to be carcinomas. They are frequently unilateral (Figure 10.13). TCC occasionally
arise from urothelial cells in the pelvis or ureters but are much less common than
carcinomas of tubular epithelial origin or TCC involving the bladder and urethra
(Figure 10.14).
Cytology of the Urinary Tract
173
Nepbroblastoma
This is a rare renal tumour that usually occurs in young dogs and cats.
Mesenclrymaltumours
 These are uncommon in dogs and cats and constitute only 1 % of all renal tumours.
 They can be renal sarcomas, haemangiosarcomas or fibrosarcomas. Diagnosis of
such tumours is difficult from FNA preparations as they are poorly exfoliative and
the cells may be difficult to differentiate from hyperplastic fibrocytes as fibrosis is
common in chronic renal disease.
11
Cytology of the Liver,
Exocrine Pancreas and
Gastrointestinal Tract
Marta Costa and Kostas Papasouliotis
School of Veterinary Science  Langford Veterinary Services (Diagnostic
Laboratories), University of Bristol, Langford,Bristol,UK
Cytological examination of samples collected from the liver, pancreas and
gastrointestinal (Gl) tract may provide useful diagnostic information and in
many cases a definitive diagnosis. Limitations of this investigation include
the absence of tissue architecture and suboptimal sample quality in terms of
cellularity and preservation.
Liver
The presence of hepatobiliary disease can be established from the animal's
history, physical examination, laboratory testing and imaging; however, a specific
pathological process is rarely identified. This usually requires morphological
examination of the hepatic parenchyma via biopsy (fine-needle aspirate, core,
punch or wedge biopsy). Indications for cytological examination of hepatic
samples include:
The presence of abnormal laboratory test results indicative of hepatocellular
damage, cholestasis and/or hepatic dysfunction
Identification of focal or multifocal hepatic masses
Hepatomegaly of unknown cause
Altered hepatic echotexture on ultrasound examination
Presence of neoplastic disease in other organs
Assessment of therapy or progression of disease
Suspicion of gall bladder pathology (aspiration of the gall bladder to collect bile)
Collection of hepatic samples for cytological examination should be ideally pre-
ceded by assessment of the animal's coagulation status, although complications
 associated with fine-needle aspiration of the liver are few.
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytotogy of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
176
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Correlation between cytological and histopathological findings has been evaluated
in several studies and is reported to range from 28% to 83% with the highest cor-
relation found with the cytological assessment of biopsy imprints (Fondacaro et al.,
1999; Kristensen et al., 1990; Roth, 2001; Wang et al., 2004; Weiss and Moritz,
2002; Weiss et al., 2001). Diffuse diseases like lymphoma, hepatic lipidosis and neu-
trophilic (suppurative) hepatitis are readily diagnosed cytologically. Focal or multi-
focal hepatic masses may be more difficult to assess cytologically due to failure of
collecting representative material. Histopathology is required for the definitive diag-
nosis of hepatocellular adenomas, well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinomas,
nodular hyperplasia, fibrosis, chronic (e.g. lymphocytic periportal) inflammation,
 portovascular anomalies, amyloidosis and poorly exfoliative sarcomas.
Normal cytological findings
As in any vascular organ, peripheral blood contamination is expected. In addition
 to peripheral blood-derived leukocytes, occasional macrophages (i.e. Kupffer cells),
 mast cells and rare precursors of haemopoietic cells may also be present.
Hepatocytes are usually aspirated in sheets and clusters. Rare nuclei may contain
rectangular crystalloid inclusions (Figure 11.1). Binucleated cells and presence of
 multiple nucleoli are infrequent findings. In addition, dense clumps of biliary epi-
thelial cells are occasionally found in normal liver aspirates (Figure 11.2), as are
sheets of mesothelial cells (see Figure 6.2). Bile can also be identified as a granular
amorphous basophilic to greenish-grey material.
Figure 11.1 Normal hepatocytes, cat. Hepatocytes are large round to polygonal cells
(i.e. three to four times the diameter of a red blood cell), with a centrally located round to
slightly oval-shaped nucleus. Nuclear chromatin is coarse and most nuclei possess
a single prominent nucleolus. The cytoplasm is granular and lightly basophilic with pinkish
eosinophilic granules (due to the amphophilic tinctorial properties). Inset: Normal
hepatocytes in an aspirate from a dog exhibiting rectangular crystallid nuclear inclusions.
Cytology of the Liver, Exocrine Pancreas and Gastrointestinal Tract
177
Figure 11.2 Normal biliary epithelium, cat. Biliary epithelial cells are cuboidal to columnar in
shape and have a round nucleus with dark-blue clumped chromatin and a small amount of
pale to mildly basophilic cytoplasm.
Non-neoplastic disorders
Nodular regenerative hyperplasia
Cytological characteristics of hepatocytes from hyperplastic and regenerative
nodules are similar to those of normal hepatocytes and to those aspirated from
hepatocellular adenomas, although a higher percentage of binucleated hepato-
cytes may be reported. Histopathology may be required for a definitive diagnosis
in these cases.
Inflammation
Hepatobiliary inflammation may be difficult to detect cytologically. Neutrophilic
(suppurative) inflammation is more commonly identified (Figure 11.3), but care
must be taken to confirm that the neutrophils are hepatic in origin and not derived
from peripheral blood. The detection of neutrophils in close proximity to hepato-
cytes provides a high degree of confidence for a diagnosis of neutrophilic inflam-
mation. Neutrophilic inflammatory infiltrates are most frequently associated with
bacterial infection, although bacteria are rarely seen.
Mixed cell inflammation consists of variable numbers of neutrophils, mac
rophages, lymphocytes and plasma cells. In cases where macrophages and giant
cells predominate (Figure 11.4), the inflammation can be characterised as granu-
lomatous or pyogranulomatous although the authors believe these terms are
 more appropriate for a histopathological rather cytological diagnosis. Causes of
mixed cell inflammation include fungal infections, mycobacterial infections
(Figure 11.4), feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), hepatozoonosis, leishmaniasis
178
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 11.3 Neutrophilic inflammation (aspirate from a cat with cholangiohepatitis). Many
non-degenerate neutrophils are present among the sheets of hepatocytes. Inset: Aspirate
from a dog with a hepatic abscess. Many neutrophils, some showing signs of degeneration
(arrow), and a cluster of poorly preserved hepatocytes are present in a background
containing amorphous necrotic material.
infection. The macrophages contain intracellular negative staining rod-shaped bacteria. Inset:
Same case stained with Ziehl-Neelsen demonstrating the acid-fast (red) bacilli inside the
macrophages.
and toxoplasmosis. Mixed cell inflammation can also be seen with nodular
regenerative hyperplasia.
Lymphocytic inflammation is characterised by a predominance of small lympho-
cytes, with or without plasma cells. This type of inflammation is usually confined
to periportal areas and therefore may be missed. Differentials for lymphocytic
Cytology of the Liver, Exocrine Pancreas and Gastrointestinal Tract
179
Figure 11.5  Extramedullary haemopoiesis. Late red blood cell precursors (arrowheads) and
myeloid precursors (arrows) are present. Some of the hepatocytes (bottom right) contain
(arrowheads) and myeloid precursors (arrows) are present.
inflammation should always include small cell lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia especially if the infiltration is extensive.
Extramedullary baemopoiesis
temic inflammatory disease. Extramedullary haemopoiesis is identified by the pres-
ence of numerous haemopoietic cells at various stages of maturation, with the later
stages predominating (Figure 11.5).
Fibrosis
 Fibrosis is characterised by collagen deposition and presence of mesenchymal
cells (Figure 11.6). It occurs as a result of chronic inflammation or tissue dam-
age. Collagen appears as an extracellular eosinophilic matrix material which
should be differentiated from amyloid A protein deposits. The latter tend to be
darker in colour and can be identified under polarised light in smears stained
with Congo red.
Hepatic lipidosis
tion in the hepatocytes (Figure 11.7). It can be a primary (idiopathic) disorder or
secondary to a systemic disease (e.g. nutritional, metabolic, toxic).
180
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 11.6 Liver aspirate, dog. Strands of pink extracellular material associated with a
cluster/sheet of hepatocytes suggest fibrosis.
Figure 11.7 Hepatic lipidosis, cat. Accumulation of lipid in hepatocytes appears as
distinct, sharply delineated and variably sized cytoplasmic vacuoles (arrow). Some
hepatocytes appear distended with the nucleus pushed to the periphery. Hepatocellular
degeneration and necrosis may be present in severe cases. Inset: Same case at higher
magnification.
Steroid-inducedbepatopatlry
Steroid-induced  hepatopathy  is  characterised  cytologically  by   cytoplasmic
rarefaction (vacuolation) of the hepatocytes (Figure 11.8). Cytoplasmic rarefaction
is caused by glycogen accumulation or is a result of hydropic cell degeneration in
response to a toxic insult or hypoxia.
Cytology of the Liver, Exocrine Pancreas and Gastrointestinal Tract
1 81
Figure 11.8 Vacuolar hepatopathy, dog. Distended hepatocytes show cytoplasmic
rarefaction with indistinct vacuoles (arrow). In contrast to hepatic lipidosis where the nucleus
is often displaced by the lipid vacuoles, in steroid-induced vacuolar hepatopathy, the nucleus
of the hepatocyte remains central.
Figure 11.9  Normal hepatocytes with intracellular lipofuscin, dog. Hepatocytes exhibit a
fine granular blue-green intracytoplasmic pigment (arrows).
Pigmentaccumulation
Four main types of pigment may be identified during cytological examination
 of hepatic preparations: bile, haemosiderin, copper and lipofuscin. Lipofuscin is the
most commonly seen pigment. This appears as green-black granules in the cytoplasm
 of hepatocytes (Figure 11.9), particularly of older animals, and can be present in nor-
mal aspirates. This pigment accumulation must not be confused with the deposition
of bile. Cholestasis is recognised in cytological specimens by the presence of biliary
182
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 11.10  Cholestasis, dog. Hepatocyte margins are delineated by thick plugs of
green-black bilirubin pigment (biliary casts). Final diagnosis was hepatic carcinoma.
casts (Figure 11.5 and Figure 11.10). Haemosiderin appears as a golden-brown to
bluish-black granular pigment that may be present within hepatocytes and/or mac-
rophages. The presence of haemosiderin can be confirmed with a Prussian blue stain
and is most commonly indicative of haemolytic disease or prior blood transfusion.
A marked increase in the copper content of hepatocytes occurs in dogs with
inherited copper-associated hepatopathy (e.g. in Bedlington terriers) and in some
coarse pale blue-green granules which are often difficult to identify. Staining the
smears with rubeanic acid stain confirms the presence of copper.
Neoplasia
 In dogs, most primary hepatic tumours are hepatocellular in origin, whereas bile
duct carcinomas are the most common primary hepatic neoplasm in cats. Other
frequently diagnosed neoplasms in the dog include lymphoma, sarcoma (mostly
metastatic with haemangiosarcoma being the most common) and undifferentiated
carcinoma. In the cat, bile duct carcinoma and lymphoma account for the majority
of all hepatic neoplasms.
Hepatocellular neoplasia
Hepatocellular neoplasms range from a benign well-differentiated adenoma to the
 poorly differentiated malignant carcinoma (Figure 11.11). A recent article reviewed
the cytological features of well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinomas in dogs,
which included dissociation of hepatocytes, acinar and palisading arrangements,
multinuclearity, increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and presence of 'naked'
nuclei and capillaries (Masserdotti and Drigo, 2012). However, some of these
Cytology of the Liver, Exocrine Pancreas and Gastrointestinal Tract
183
macronucleoli, variation in the number of nucleoli).
features have been described in cytological reports from hyperplastic nodules,
and no comparison has been made between these two groups. In addition, cytology
alone cannot differentiate a hepatoma from a well-differentiated carcinoma or a
primary from a metastatic carcinoma (e.g. pancreatic carcinoma).
Biliary neoplasia
Biliary adenomas and carcinomas cannot be differentiated cytologically as in both
neoplasms the epithelial cells can appear morphologically normal (Figure 11.12).
However, in cats carcinomas occur more frequently than adenomas.
Anaplastic carcinomas and bepatobiliary carcinoids
In poorly differentiated anaplastic hepatocellular and bile duct carcinomas, the
aspirated cells appear less frequently hepatoid in origin. Cytologically, these
 a pn so osi  p  o s
anaplastic carcinomas.
   s  d e sn 
enterochromaffin cells. They cannot be distinguished cytologically from metastatic
neuroendocrine tumours (e.g. adrenal, endocrine pancreatic tumours; see Chapter 12).
Lymphoma
Lymphoma is the most common hepatic malignancy of dogs and cats. Infiltration
of the hepatic tissue with large lymphoid cells in animals with multicentric
lymphoma is readily recognisable in cytological specimens as the cells readily
exfoliate (Figure 11.13). Because lymphocytes are fragile cells, many bare nuclei
1 84
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 11.12 Biliary carcinoma, cat. A large number of biliary epithelial cells with round 
to oval deeply stained nuclei, finely reticulated chromatin and scant basophilic cytoplasm
surround a small cluster of hepatocytes with intracellular pigment (lipofuscin).
Figure 11.13 Lymphoma, cat. Three hepatocytes with vacuolated cytoplasm (short arrow)
   ( b ll o ie el  
may be present. Cellular morphology varies and immunochemistry may be
used to further classify the lymphoma. Typically, the cells are large (often greater
than three times RBC diameter) and round with a round or indented nucleus,
coarse chromatin, distinct nucleoli and a variable amount of dark-blue cytoplasm.
The lymphomatous cells may also be markedly pleomorphic, exhibiting marked
Cytology of the Liver, Exocrine Pancreas and Gastrointestinal Tract
185
Figure 11.14  Mast cell tumour. Aspirate from a cat with mildly heterogenous liver
on ultrasound and a previous history of splenic mast cell tumour. Abundant free
azurophilic granules and an increased number of mast cells are seen associated with
the hepatocytes.
anisocytosis, nuclear pleomorphism and multinucleation. Cells aspirated from
large granular lymphomas contain variably sized azurophilic cytoplasmic gran-
ules. Less frequently lymphoid cells can be small and morphologically unre-
markable and more consistent with lymphocytic inflammation. In such cases,
however, small cell lymphoma or chronic lymphocytic leukaemia should be
considered.
Mastcelltumour
A few mast cells can be seen in hepatic samples collected from clinically
healthy animals and animals with mixed cell inflammation of the liver. The
presence of increased numbers or clusters of mast cells associated with hepato-
cytes is highly suggestive a hepatic mast cell tumour (Figure 11.14). Other
cytological features suggestive of mast cell tumour are the presence of atypical
(pleomorphic and/or poorly granulated) mast cells (Book et al., 2011; Stefanello
et al., 2009).
Histiocytic sarcoma
Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma is another tumour that can involve the liver.
When markedly atypical cells are present (Figure 11.15), malignant neoplasia is
easily diagnosed, but determining these cells as histiocytic may require immunop-
henotyping.
186
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 11.15 Histiocytic sarcoma. Aspirate from a Bernese Mountain dog with
hepatosplenomegaly. A cluster of hepatocytes (arrow head) and a large number of
pleomorphic round cells are present. Some of the latter resemble macrophages, others
resemble mesenchymal cells. A mitotic figure (arrow) can also be seen.
The exocrine pancreas
The pancreas is rarely sampled unless a defined abnormal area such as a mass or a
cystic structure is detected on imaging.
Normal cytological findings
The exocrine pancreas represents the majority of the pancreatic tissue, and acinar
epithelial cells comprise most of the cells present in smears from normal pancreatic
tissue (Figure 11.16). Pancreatic nodules may represent hyperplasia, neoplasia or
inflammation. Hyperplastic nodules contain epithelial cells which morphologically
appear similar to normal epithelial cells although they may exhibit a slightly
higher nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, a prominent nucleolus and more noticeable
binucleation may be evident.
Non-neoplastic disorders
Inflammation of the pancreas can range from neutrophilic to lymphocytic. As most
cases of pancreatitis are diagnosed based on clinicopathological findings and
imaging, pancreatic aspiration and cytology are rarely performed.
The smears prepared following aspiration of an acutely inflamed pancreas are
highly cellular. Neutrophils with or without evidence of degeneration predominate,
 and variable numbers of acinar epithelial cells, which may exhibit dysplastic changes,
Cytology of the Liver, Exocrine Pancreas and Gastrointestinal Tract
187
Figure 11.16 Pancreas, cat. Normal pancreatic epithelial cells are polygonal in shape and
exfoliate in small sheets and clusters. They have a low nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, an
eccentrically located round nucleus with reticulated chromatin and occasionally a single
due to the abundant small pink apical granules (thought to be zymogen granules).
Figure 11.17 Pancreatitis, dog. An ultrasound-guided FNA of an enlarged pancreas.
Neutrophils (arrows) and poorly preserved pancreatic cells are present in a background
consisting of amorphous basophilic debris which is the result of the activity of the proteolytic
enzymes causingrapid deterioration of the cells.
are also present (Figure 11.17). Aspirates from a chronically inflamed pancreas
commonly contain low numbers of cells due to fibrosis. Cytological examination
may reveal a background of red blood cells and small amounts of calcium-rich
cellular debris with rare epithelial cells, the occasional reactive fibroblast and foci
of lymphocytes and neutrophils.
188
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
with a total protein concentration similar to that of a modified transudate.
Cytology of the fluid reveals the presence of low numbers of neutrophils, reactive
macrophages and rare reactive fibroblasts.
Neoplasia
 Both benign and malignant pancreatic tumours can cause obstruction of pancreatic
ducts, resulting in the release of pancreatic enzymes and subsequent development
of pancreatitis. If the inflamed parenchyma is aspirated rather than the neoplasm,
a diagnosis of neoplasia may be missed. The main difficulty in the diagnosis of
pancreatic carcinoma is distinguishing well-differentiated carcinoma cells with
minimal characteristics of malignancy
 from the benign or dysplastic epithelial cells
seen in adenomas or with pancreatitis,
 respectively. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma
is an uncommon neoplasm but is the most frequently diagnosed neoplasia of
the exocrine pancreas. It is readily recognisable on cytology as the cells exhibit
characteristics similar to those seen in cells from adenocarcinomas of other organs
(e.g. acinar arrangements, cellular pleomorphism, high nuclear to cytoplasmic
ratio, moderate to marked anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, prominent nucleoli,
cytoplasmic basophilia and fine vacuolation; Figure 11.18). Endocrine pancreatic
neoplasms are discussed in Chapter 12.
Figure 11.18 Carcinoma, pancreas, dog. Ultrasound-guided aspirate of a single pancreatic
mass. A cluster of round to polygonal epithelial cells with round to oval nucleus and
basophilic cytoplasm is present. Some (not depicted) were arranged in tubular or acinar
formations. Criteria for malignancy included moderate anisocytosis and anisokaryosis,
anisonucleolosis, nuclear moulding and atypical mitotic figures (arrow). Evidence of necrosis,
inflammation and previous haemorrhage was also noted in this aspirate. Inset: Same case
under higher magnification.
Cytology of the Liver, Exocrine Pancreas and Gastrointestinal Tract
189
Rarely, lymphoma and mesenchymal tumours arising from the supporting tissue
such as haemangiosarcoma, fibrosarcoma and liposarcoma can also involve the
pancreas. Apart from lymphoma, the mesenchymal neoplasms exfoliate poorly
and therefore are only occasionally diagnosed on cytological smears.
Gastrointestinal tract
The GI tract is most commonly evaluated by cytological examination of aspirates
 collected ultrasonographically, impression smears prepared from biopsy samples
 or endoscopically collected brushings.
The most common indications for cytological examination of the GI tract are the
 presence of a focal mass and/or increased intestinal wall thickness identified during
abdominal ultrasonography. Histopathology is almost always required for a final
diagnosis, but cytology can often provide a strong indication of neoplastic or
inflammatory disease.
Stomach
Normal cytological findings
Impression smears of normal gastric samples normally consist of mucus and
a variable number of mucus-secreting columnar epithelial cells arranged in
sheets and clusters. Gastric epithelial cells are columnar in shape with a single
round nucleus and finely granular cytoplasm. They are often arranged in a
honeycomb' pattern (Figure 11.19). Fragments of ingesta, spiral bacteria and
cells. Inset: Gastric epithelial cells arranged in a *honeycomb' pattern.
190
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 11.20 Helicobacter organisms. Spiral-shaped bacteria embedded in a mucus
background with low numbers of condensed neutrophils (arrow).
squamous epithelial cells covered with oropharyngeal flora (including Simonsiella
organisms) are also frequently seen.
Inflammation/infection
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic inflammation is the most common type of gastric inflam-
mation and may be associated with chronic hyperplastic and superficial gastritis,
atrophic gastritis and Helicobacter infection. Neutrophilic inflammation is uncom
mon and can also be associated with Helicobacter infection (Figure 11.20).
Although the presence of inflammation and spiral bacteria suggests Helicobacter
Neoplasia
Gastric neoplasia is rare, carcinoma in the dog and lymphoma in the cat being
the most commonly diagnosed neoplasms.
Carcinoma
Neoplastic cells exhibit morphological criteria of malignancy typical of carcinomas
in other locations (Figure 11.21), but sometimes their appearance may resemble
that of atypical lymphoid cells.
Lymphoma
Large cell lymphoma is easily diagnosed on cytology (Figure 11.24), but histopa-
thology is required to differentiate lymphocytic inflammation from a small cell
lymphoma.
Cytology of the Liver, Exocrine Pancreas and Gastrointestinal Tract
191
Figure 11.21 Gastric carcinoma with secondary septic neutrophilic inflammation, dog.
Clumps of epithelial cells with deeply basophilic vacuolated cytoplasm exhibiting 
anisokaryosis, open coarse chromatin, distinct nucleoli, anisonucleolosis and nuclear
moulding are present. Note also the neutrophils and extra- and intracellular rods (arrow).
The septic neutrophilic inflammation was likely secondary to ulceration in this case. Inset:
Higher magnification demonstrates the nuclear characteristics of malignancy.
Smooth muscle neoplasms
Leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma are uncommon gastric mesenchymal neoplasms
mostly seen in old dogs. The cells resemble those seen in intestinal leiomyomas/
leiomyosarcomas (Figure 11.25).
Intestines
Normal cytological findings
Intestinal epithelial cells are normally quite uniform, with round nuclei and
basophilic cytoplasm that may appear confluent (Figure 11.22). Mucus-producing
goblet cells with large cytoplasmic vacuoles and/or magenta-coloured granules
may also be identified. Well-differentiated small lymphocytes or a mixed
lymphoid population, including granular lymphocytes, may also be aspirated
from gut-associated lymphoid follicles.
Inflammation/infection
Cytology of inflammatory lesions reveals variable numbers of neutrophils,
macrophages, mast cells, lymphocytes and eosinophils. Lymphocytic-plasmacytic
 inflammation is the most common type (Figure 11.23),but this diagnosis cannot be
always made cytologically as sampling of gut-associated lymphoid tissue will result
in similar findings (see preceding text).
192
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 11.22 Normal duodenum. Impression smear from a biopsy sample. Sheet of regular
columnar epithelial cells with a round to oval nucleus and pale basophilic cytoplasm. A single
ymphocyte is also depicted (arrow).
Figure 11.23 Lymphocytic inflammation. Impression smear from a duodenum biopsy
sample. Smallymphocytes and large granular lymphocytes (with small intracytoplasmic
azurophilic granules) surround a cluster of epithelial cells. These lymphoid cells may
constitute a normal lymphoid population, or they may indicate lymphocytic inflammation or a
ymphoma. Histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen is often necessary to obtain
a definitive diagnosis.
Neoplasia
Lymphoma is usually characterised by high numbers of large lymphocytes
(Figure 11.24). Intestinal carcinomas/adenocarcinomas share cytological findings
similar to carcinomas located in other organs. Mesenchymal neoplasms, such as
gastrointestinal  stromal  tumour  (GIST),  leiomyoma  and  leiomyosarcoma
(Figure 11.25), are rare and cannot be diagnosed by cytology alone.
Cytology of the Liver, Exocrine Pancreas and Gastrointestinal Tract
193
Figure 11.24 Large cellymphoma, cat. Impression smear from a duodenum biopsy
sample. Atypical large lymphoid cells. The nuclei are greater than three times red blood cells
in diameter. A mitotic figure is also shown (top left).
Figure 11.25 Mesenchymal neoplasm. Impression smear from a duodenum biopsy sample.
A cluster of spindle-shaped cells showing mild anisocytosis and anisokaryosis is present.
The cells have an oval nucleus with finely granular chromatin and no distinct nucleolus.
Some cells have small clear cytoplasmic vacuoles. Cytoplasmic margins are poorly defined.
Histopathological diagnosis was uncertain (differential diagnosis included GIST and
leiomyosarcoma; immunohistochemistry was not performed).
194
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
References
Book, A.P., Fidel, J., Wills, T. et al. {2011) Correlation of ultrasound findings, liver and
spleen cytology, and prognosis in the clinical staging of high metastatic risk canine mast
cell tumors. Veterinary Radiology  Ultrasound, 52 (S), S48-554.
Fondacaro, J.V., Fuilpin, VO., Powers, B.E. et al. (1999) Diagnostic correlation of liver
aspiration cytology with histopathology in dogs and cats with liver disease. journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 13,254.
Kristensen, A.T., Weiss, D.J., Klausner, J.S. et al. (1990) Liver cytology in cases of canine
and feline hepatic disease. Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing
Veterinarian, 12, 797-806.
Masserdotti, C. and Drigo, M. {2012) Retrospective study of cytologic features of well-
differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma in dogs. Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 41 (3),
382-390.
Roth, L. (2001) Comparison of liver cytology and biopsy diagnoses in dogs and cats:
56 cases. Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 30, 35-38.
Stefanello, D., Valenti, P., Faverzani, S. et al. (2009) Ultrasound-guided cytology of spleen
and livera prognostic tool in canine cutaneous mast cell tumor. J Vet journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 23 (5), 1051-1057.
Wang, K.Y., Panciera, D.L., Al-Rukibat, R.K. et al. {2004) Accuracy of ultrasound-guided
fine-needle aspiration of the liver and cytologic findings in dogs and cats: 97 cases
(1990-2000). journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 224,75-78.
Weiss, D.J. and Moritz, A. (2002) Liver cytology. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small
Animal Practice, 32 (6), 1267-1291.
Weiss, D.J., Blauvelt, M. and Aird, B. (2001) Cytologic evaluation of inflammation in canine
liver aspirates. Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 30, 193-196.
12
Cytological Examination
of the Endocrine Glands
Walter Bertazzolo
Ospedale Veterinario Citta di Pavia, Pavia, Italy and Laboratorio
La Vallonea, Alessano (Le), Italy
Introduction
Cytological examination of endocrine tissues in companion animal practice is
limited to some neoplastic disorders of the thyroid gland, adrenals, endocrine
pancreas and other uncommon neoplasms (chemoreceptor tumours, carcinoids,
extramedullary paragangliomas). Many other disorders (e.g. atrophy, inflamma-
tion, degenerative disorders) cannot be adequately investigated by cytology and
require different diagnostic approaches (histopathology, serum biochemistry,
hormonal testing, etc.) to achieve a definitive diagnosis. Moreover, some endocrine
tumours are not easily investigated by cytology since they are often too small to
be sampled (e.g. parathyroid hyperplasia/adenomas) or are difficult to access
(e.g. pituitary tumours).
Cytology of the thyroid gland
The normal thyroid gland is composed of two lobes located laterally to the
upper trachea; the two lobes are sometimes connected by a thin isthmus. Normal
thyroid tissue is composed of follicular structures lined by a monolayered glan-
dular epithelium of cubical follicular cells. These cells produce thyroid hormones,
which are stored as thyroglobulin into the follicular cavity. This proteinaceous
 material is also called colloid since it appears as amorphous eosinophilic extracel-
 lular material in cytological and histological samples. Calcitonin-secreting neu-
roendocrine cells (C-cells) are also present between thyroid follicles. Since some
ectopic thyroid tissue may be present anywhere from the base of the tongue to the
heart base, some thyroid tumours may arise in unusual anatomic sites (e.g. cranial
mediastinum and heart base). Normal, hyperplastic or benign neoplastic thyroid
tissues have very similar cytological features. These different conditions cannot be
distinguished by cytology alone, and histopathological examination of a biopsy
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
196
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 12.1FNA from a thyroid nodule in a cat with clinical hyperthyroidism. The cells are
arranged in an acinar pattern (centre), have poorly defined cytoplasmic margins, abundant 
basophilic cytoplasm with deep blue granules, round uniform nuclei with fine chromatin and
indistinct small nucleoli.
Figure 12.2 FNA from a thyroid nodule in a cat with clinical hyperthyroidism. Note the
thyroid follicular cells in this field contain basophilic cytoplasmic granules.
(FNA) from normal, hyperplastic and benign neoplastic thyroid tissue, follicular
cells are often organised in an acinar arrangement which is reminiscent of the fol-
licular pattern seen on histology (Figure 12.1). These cells have a round to polygo-
nal shape often with indistinct cellular borders, a moderate to abundant basophilic
cytoplasm which sometimes contains deeply basophilic granules (considered to be
thyroxine by some authors although this has not been substantiated) (Figure 12.2).
Cytological Examination of the Endocrine Glands
197
Figure 12.3 FNA from a thyroid nodule in a cat with clinical hyperthyroidism. Note the
eosinophilic amorphous material which is probably colloid.
Eosinophilic intercellular or intracellular amorphous material (colloid) may also
be seen (Figure 12.3). Due to their paucity, C-cells are not usually identified in
cytological specimens of normal thyroid tissue. Since normal as well as neoplastic
thyroid tissue is extremely vascular, blood contamination is common in FNA.
Thyroid tumours arising from follicular cells may be benign (adenomas are
very common in cats) or malignant (adenocarcinomas are more common in dogs).
Tumours that arise from C-cells are mainly described in dogs and are called C-cell
adenomas or carcinomas (or medullary thyroid carcinomas). The clinical behav.
iour of a C-cell carcinoma seems to be less aggressive than that of a true adeno-
carcinoma in the dog (Carver et al., 1995). Unless a clear follicular pattern is
evident on histology, the histological appearance of follicular and C-cel tumours
may be very similar. Therefore, a definitive distinction between these tumours
must be based on specific immunohistochemical markers (thyroglobulin and
cytokeratin 20 for follicular cells; calcitonin and other generic neuroendocrine
markers, such as neuron-specific enolase (NsE), chromogranin A and synapto-
physin, for C-cells) (Doss et al., 1998; Espinosa de los Monteros et al., 1999;
Leblanc et al., 1991; Patnaik and Lieberman, 1991).
 In cats, an increase in thyroid gland mass is almost always due to hyperplasia or
adenoma and is often associated with clinically overt hyperthyroidism. Cytology
in these cases has limited utility since diagnosis is based on history, clinical
examination and hormonal testing. Thyroid gland enlargement is often found
during cervical palpation. Cytological examination of benign feline thyroid ade-
nomas usually shows the microscopic features described earlier (Figure 12.1,
 Figure 12.2 and Figure 12.3). Cats are rarely affected by thyroid carcinomas (less 
than 5% of hyperthyroid cats). These tumours usually have an aggressive local
 behaviour and high metastatic tendency but are highly responsive to radioiodine
therapy. A fixed thyroid mass that does not progress down the cervical area as it
198
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 12.4 FNA from an upper paratracheal mass in a cat. A group of cohesive cells with
variable nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio is evident. Two larger cells (arrows) have a larger nucleus
with a prominent nucleolus and intracytoplasmic pink material. Lower left inset: Malignant
thyroid follicular cells are showing marked anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, with large
prominent nucleoli. This cat was submitted for surgical removal of the mass, and thyroid
           s
dlissemination within 3 months (radioiodine therapy was not available at that time).
Figure 12.5Histopathology from the same case of Figure 12.4. A neoplastic malignant
tissue (upper right) (haematoxylin and eosin 200x).
grows must be considered potentially malignant, whereas large benign thyroid
tumours remain mobile and, as they become heavier, they may move to the lower
third of the neck or even into the cranial mediastinum. Malignant thyroid tumours
 in cats may show more marked cytological atypia than benign tumours (Figure 12.4
and Figure 12.5). However, since low-grade well-differentiated thyroid carcinomas
Cytological Examination of the Endocrine Glands
199
Figure 12.6 FNA from a thyroid nodule in a dog with overt hyperthyroidism and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A group of cohesive cells with indistinct cellular borders,
uniform oval nuclei with fine chromatin and indistinct nucleoli. The clinical course of this case
was more consistent with a benign thyroid tumour (the tumour was stable in size 1 year after
the dliagnosis), but since there was evidence of only very mild cellular atypia, differentiation 
between adenoma and carcinoma on a cytological basis was not possible.
are cytologically very similar to true adenomas in cats, it may be not possible to
distinguish these tumours by cytology alone.
Malignant tumours of follicular origin (adenocarcinoma) are more common in
 dogs and show aggressive clinical behaviour despite having relatively mild malig-
nant criteria on cytology (Figure 12.6). Adenomas are reported to comprise about
30-50% of canine thyroid tumours confirmed at necropsy. However, since they are
usually small and often do not cause hyperthyroidism, they may be underdiagnosed
by clinicians (Leav et al., 1976). On the cont
and
paratracheal masses,
whichmaycause
spirates from canine thy-
roid tumours are
 since neoplastic thyroid
tissue has a higher
parenchyma (Harari et al.,
1986). Therefore
essary to achieveadefinitive
thyroid carcinomas are often
(Figure 12.7A and B).
Colloidmaybe seenbetween
cells.
or
commonly, intracellularly
(Figure 12.8), and may appear pink to lightly blue (
: on cytology. These cells closely
resemble those observed in normal thyroid tissue and only rarely do they show
moderate to severe atypia (Figure 12.9 and Figure 12.10). Naked nuclei of uniform
size and shape are often seen, and these may retain the acinar organisation described
earlier. Despite this low-grade appearance, every canine cervical mass of thyroid
origin must be considered
1 potentially malignant, 
unless otherwise proven
(Figure 12.11). Since cytology in most cases cannot be used to predict the clinical
behaviour of the tumour, other criteria must be adopted to differentiate adenomas
200
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(A)
(B)
Figure 12.7
(A) FNA from an infiltrating cervical mass in a dog. A group of neoplastic thyroid
follicular cells showing very mild cytological atypia, organised in a palisading or acinar (upper
left inset) pattern. Some cells contain an eosinophilic intracytoplasmic globule of secretory
material (arrows) consistent with colloid. (B) Histological appearance of the same mass. Note
the microfollicular to solid growth pattern and the very mild cellular atypia (haematoxylin and
eosin 200x).
from adenocarcinomas (size, degree of invasiveness, mobility, presence/absence
of metastases, histological findings, etc.).
In one study, about one-third of canine thyroid carcinomas were proven to be of
C-cell origin, based on immunohistochemistry (Carver et al., 1995). The cytological
    ss    r 
neuroendocrine tumours (pheochromocytoma, islet cell tumours, chemoreceptor
tumours, carcinoids), but differentiation from thyroid adenocarcinoma cannot be
Cytological Examination of the Endocrine Glands
201
Figure 12.8 FNA from an infiltrating cervical mass in a dog. A large cluster of thyroid
follicular cells is admixed with extracellular pink material which is colloid.
Figure 12.9 FNA from thyroid carcinoma in a dog. Clusters of malignant thyroid follicular
cells showing moderate anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, variable nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio
and multiple nucleoli. These malignant features are relatively uncommon in canine thyroid
carcinomas.
achieved by cytology alone. Although a true acinar pattern is more typical of
adenocarcinomas, cells from neuroendocrine tumours may also arrange in a rosette-
  e  n  si   sn d ai
 of naked nuclei. When intact cells are present, they show a plasmacytoid appearance
and may be observed alone or in loosely cohesive clusters (Figure 12.12). These cells
have moderate to abundant, slightly basophilic and finely granular cytoplasm. The
nuclei are usually markedly monomorphic with fine chromatin and inconsistent
202
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 12.10 FNA from thyroid carcinoma in a dog. Clusters of malignant thyroid follicular
cells showing moderate anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, variable nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio
and multiple nucleoli. These malignant features are relatively uncommon in canine thyroid
carcinomas.
Figure 12.11Histopathology from a thyroid carcinoma in a dog. Despite the low-grade
appearance, this was a very aggressive tumour with invasive behaviour (haematoxylin and
eosin200x).
nucleoli. Nuclear pseudo-inclusion bodies are sometimes found and are considered
an invagination of the nuclear membrane (Figure 12.13). Several patterns of C-cell
carcinoma have been described on histopathology, including uncommon giant-cell
and oxyphilic variants (Patnaik and Lieberman, 1991); therefore, some discrepan-
cies from the previously described cytological pattern should be expected.
Cytological Examination of the Endocrine Glands
203
Figure 12.12 FNA from a thyroid nodule in a dog. A group of loosely cohesive cells with a
plasmacytoid appearance is present. This tumour was confirmed to be a C-cell carcinoma by
histology and immunohistochemistry (positivity for chromogranin A, NSE and calcitonin).
Figure 12.13 FNA from a thyroid nodule in a dog (same case of Figure 12.12). A group of
cohesive pleomorphic cells from a C-cell carcinoma. A nuclear pseudo-inclusion is evident
(arrow).
Cytology of the adrenal glands
iaeian pue sop u uoun ab aq on paodan ae sino peuapa
uncommon in cats. Adrenal tumours may arise from different areas of the adre-
nal gland, which is embryologically, morphologically and functionally divided
in two portions: an external cortical area (subdivided into three different
204
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
layers: glomerulosa, fasciculata and reticularis) that produces steroid hormones
(aldosterone in the external glomerulosa; cortisol, other corticosteroids and
sex hormones in the fasciculata and reticularis) and an internal medulla, which
produces catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine). The cells of the
adrenal cortex are of mesodermal origin. Neoplastic proliferations of this por-
tion are classified as adrenal adenoma and adrenal carcinoma, depending on
their biological behaviour. The cells of the adrenal medulla are derived from the
neuroectoderm and are classified as neuroendocrine cells. The cells in the adre-
nal medulla function as post-gangl
modified neurons that release catecho-
lamines after sympathetic stimulations.
Adrenal medullary tumours are called
pheochromocytomas and are therefore
considered neuroendocrine tumours
Extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas ma
ccur (usually near large thoracic and
abdominal vessels) and are called paragangliomas. A third category of adrenal
neoplasia can be due to metastases
of tumours located at other sites, e.g.
lymphoma, angiosarcoma, carcinomas, malignant melanoma and histiocytic
sarcoma. Many primary adrenal tumours are functionally active and secrete an
inappropriate amount of one or more hormones which cause related clinical
syndromes. Primary adrenocortical tumours usually cause hyperadrenocorti-
chromocytomas can cause 
 hypersecretion of catecholamines and consequent
clinical symptoms such as hypertension, tachycardia and tachypnea. Clinical
findings and laboratory tests are often useful in accurately addressing the origin of
many adrenal masses. However, some adrenal neoplasms are hormonally inactive,
produce a minimal amount of hormones or unusual hormones and can be found
incidentally during abdominal ultrasound or CT scan. In these cases, a diagnosis of
adrenal *incidentaloma’ is often given.
The definitive morphological classification of adrenal tumours is based on
histological features and requires a surgical approach or invasive biopsy. Cytology
may offer a minimally invasive
 diagnostic alternative in some selected cases,
although FNA is discouraged when pheochromocytoma is strongly suspected,
since sudden release of catecholamines and
catastrophic haemorrhage may occur
with this tumour. Based on the author's exp
, the distinction between adreno
cortical neoplasia and pheochromocytoma
straightforward on cytology.
quite
Pheochromocytoma shows
the
usual
cytological
1 features of neuroendocrine
tumours described for C-cell
 carcinomas of the thyroid gland (Figure 12.14).
Adrenocortical tumours are instead characterised by aggregates of polygonal to
rounded cells, with a low nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, abundant basophilic and
often microvacuolated cytoplasm, round eccentric nuclei with coarse chromatin
and small nucleoli (Figure 
 12.15 and Figure 12.16). Evidence of extramedullary
haematopoiesis may be seen in aspirates from adrenocortical neoplasms; therefore,
megakaryocytic, erythroid and myeloid precursors may also be observed. The dif-
ferential diagnostic cytological features of primary adrenal tumours are summa-
rised in Table 12.1. Cells may be arranged perivascularly in both adrenocortical
tumours and pheochromocytoma, and therefore this feature cannot be used for
differential diagnosis. Unfortunately, both cytology and histology cannot be used to
define the biological behaviour of adrenal neoplasms: only microscopic or macro-
scopic assessment of invasiveness of adjacent tissue and metastatic tendency should
Cytological Examination of the Endocrine Glands
205
Figure 12.14FNA from a canine pheochromocytoma. Numerous naked nuclei of uniform
size and shape with fine chromatin and indistinct nucleoli can be seen in rows or rosette-like
pattern. Lower right inset: A rare intact round cells with moderate amount of slightly
basophilic and granular cytoplasm and an eccentric nucleus with the same features of the
other naked nuclei.
Figure 12.15 FNA from a functional adrenocortical tumour in a dog with
hyperadrenocorticism. Note the clusters of cohesive cells, with moderate to abundant
basophilic cytoplasm containing numerous vacuoles (inset).
be considered reliable indicators of malignancy (Labelle et al., 2004). A specific
 proliferative index of cell cycle (the nuclear protein Ki-67) has been also used as a
marker of malignancy for adrenocortical tumours, but such a tool is not commonly
available in diagnostic laboratory settings (Labelle et al., 2004).
206
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 12.16FNA from a functional adrenocortical tumour in a cat with primary
hyperaldosteronism. The cytological features of this case are very similar to those found
in other functional and non-functional adrenocortical tumours in dogs.
Table 12.1
Summary of cytological features of adrenocortical tumours and
pheochromocytoma
Adrenocortical tumours
Pheochromocytomas
General
Many intact cells, singly
Many uniform naked nuclei, often 
 architecture
or in cohesive clusters, with
located in a finely granular and
distinct cellularborders
basophilic background; rare intact
round and plasmacytoid cells
Nuclear to
Low
High
cytoplasmic ratio
Cytoplasm
Basophilic and markedly
Pale blue, finely granular
vacuolated (small- to
medium-sized lipid vacuoles)
Nucleus
Round to oval, central to
Round to oval, with fine chromatin
paracentral with coarse/
condensed chromatin
Nucleoli
Indistinct to prominent
Indistinct
Other features
Haematopoietic precursor
cells (extramedullary
haematopoiesis)
Cytology of the endocrine pancreas
The normal endocrine pancreas consists of small islands of neuroendocrine cells
scattered within the exocrine pancreatic parenchyma. These endocrine cells are
morphologically identical yet functionally different based on their final hormonal
Cytological Examination of the Endocrine Glands
207
Figure 12.17  Immunohistochemistry from a gastrin-secreting tumour infiltrating the pancreas
and the duodenal wall (anti-gastrin polyclonal antibodies (ABC method), haematoxylin
counterstain 100x). Source: Paola Roccabianca, DVM, Dipl ECVP, University of Milan, Italy.
Reproduced with permission.
product. Most of them secrete insulin, while others may produce glucagon, somatosta-
tin and pancreatic polypeptide (and even gastrin during foetal life). Islet cell tumours
 are uncommon in dogs and rare in cats. They arise from the neuroendocrine islet cells
and may produce and secrete one or more hormones. Based on the predominant hor-
monal activity, these tumours are called insulinomas, glucagonomas, somatostatino-
mas or gastrinomas; insulinomas are
mon in small animal practice. The
definitive classification of an islet
on demonstration of hormonal
secretion (e.g. demonstrating
with hypoglycaemia} or
by immunohistochemistry
l on histology and
cytology. Moreover, their
 the biological
behaviour, and only the
tology) and/or the presence
nant tumours. Although isle
of diagnosis, they
are frequently malignant and
 situation in humans.
Cytological samples from islet
features of other neuroen-
docrine neoplasms: samp
naked nuclei of similar size and
orphous,slightlybasophilic
background (Figure 12.18). This
Its from the rupture of the cellular
membrane which is fragile in n
lours. The nuclei are oval and have
finely stippled chromatin with
1 indistinct nucleoli. Mild anisokaryosis is often evident.
and the nuclei are arranged
1 in rows or rosette-like patterns (Figure 12.18 and
Figure 12.19). When intact cells are present, they show the typical plasmacytoid-like
cytoplasm that may also be vacuolated in some cases (Figure 12.19). Rarely, small
clusters of intact cells may be found, reminiscent of their growth pattern in small nests
clearly visible in histological samples ( Figure 12.20).
Figure 12.18  Intra-operative FNA of a pancreatic islet cell tumour in a dog. Note the naked
oval nuclei arranged in rows in a basophilic background.
Figure 12.19  Imprint from an islet cell tumour in a dog with severe hypoglycaemia
and hyperinsulinaemia. Some intact round cells with a plasmacytoid appearance can
be seen among the naked nuclei.
Figure 12.20 Histopathology from an insulin-secreting pancreatic islet cell tumour in a dog.
Nests and cords of neoplastic neuroendocrine cells are separated by thin fibrovascular
stroma (haematoxylin and eosin 200x). This histological pattern is common to many
neuroendocrine tumours and histology alone often cannot be used to definitively classify a
specific neoplasm.
Cytological Examination of the Endocrine Glands
209
Other neuroendocrine tumours: Chemoreceptor
tumours and carcinoids
Chemoreceptor tumours
(chemodectoma
10
 non-chromaffin
1paraganglioma)
arise from neuroendocrine cells closely associated with large vessels which are involved
in the regulation of respiration, blood pressure and systemic perfusion. Although they
may be found in several anatomic areas, usually near big arterial vessels, chemod-
ectomas usually originate from the aortic body, giving rise to the typical heart-base
tumour (Figure 12.21), and less commonly from the carotid body in the upper lateral
cervical area. Even if most l
ctomas are biologically benign, they
may cause cardiac dysfunc
ture resulting in haemopericardium.
Cytological sampling
 anatomic location unless they
arevery
largeorth
Figure 12.22). The cytological
appearance
of
Che
01
neuroendocrine tumours with
naked nuclei in a sligl
Figure 12.23). Anisokaryosis may
be marked in chemod
 in benign
tumours. Intact cells have the typical
plasmacytoid-like app
nenroendc
cells. A definitive diagnosis of a
chemodectoma must be ba
 pattern of a neuroendocrine
tumour and immunohisto
(positivity
tor：
generic
neuroendocrine markers
such as chromogranin A, synaptophysin and NSE)
 {Doss et al., 1998). Other differen-
tial diagnoses (C-cell carcinoma, thyroid adenoma/adenocarcinoma and parathyroid
tumours) may be ruled out by histology and immunohistochemistry (positivity for
calcitonin, thyroglobulin and parathyroid hormone, respectively), since all these
tumours may be found in the cervical or the cranial mediastinal area.
Carcinoids are rare neuroendocrine tumours that arise from neuroendocrine
cells dispersed throughout the gastrointestinal tract (gastric and intestinal wall, gall
bladder and liver). They have been described mainly in dogs and rarely in cats. This
group of tumours shares the same features of other neuroendocrine neoplasms
(typical growth pattern on histology; histochemical positivity for Grimelius stain;
Figure 12.21  Heart-base tumour (chemodectoma) in a dog (arrow)
Figure 12.22 Lateral thoracic radiograph from a dog with metastatic chemodectoma
of the heart base. Several pulmonary nodules are evident.
Figure 12.23 Ultrasound-guided FNA from a lung nodule in Figure 12.22 (metastatic
chemodectoma in a dog). Note the similarity to other neuroendocrine tumours previously
described.
Figure 12.24 Ultrasound-guided FNA from a dog with multiple nodules in the liver
(carcinoids). Naked uniform oval nuclei and the occasional round intact cell surround a small
cluster of hepatocytes on the right. Note the difference between the neuroendocrine nuclei
and intact hepatocytes (the latter are more rounded, with reticular to coarse chromatin and a
visiblenucleolus).
Cytological Examination of the Endocrine Glands
211
Figure 12.25 Histology from a liver nodule in a dog (carcinoid, same case as Figure 12.23)
Islands of neoplastic neuroendocrine cells separated by thin fibrous stroma (on the left) are
invading the liver parenchyma (on the right) (haematoxylin and eosin 100x). Source: G. Tortorella.
DVM, Laboratorio La Vallonea, Italy. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 12.26 Immunohistochemistry of a liver nodule (carcinoid) in a dog (same case as
Figure 12.23 and Figure 12.24). Strong cytoplasmic positivity for chromogranin A (avidin-
biotin peroxidase 200x). Source: G. Tortorella, DVM, Laboratorio La Vallonea, Italy.
Reproduced with permission.
immunohistochemical positivity for chromogranin A, NSE and synaptophysin;
and presence of neurosecretory granules on electron microscopy). Cytology of a
carcinoid is rarely performed because these tumours are often small and difficult to
sample by FNA. Sometimes, however, they may reach considerable size, allowing
ultrasound- or CT-guided FNA cytology. A cytological distinction between hepatic
carcinoid and hepatocellular carcinoma is not easy, since aspirates from both these
tumours may consist of many naked nuclei. Naked nuclei from carcinoids are
 however more oval with fine chromatin and inconsistent nucleoli compared with
those derived from ruptured neoplastic hepatocytes, which closely resemble those
of normal hepatocytes (more rounded, with coarse chromatin and a clearly visible
nucleolus). The presence of intact cells with a typical neuroendocrine round-cell
appearance will allow the diagnosis of carcinoid instead of hepatocellular carci
noma, although histology and immunohistochemistry are necessary for a definitive
diagnosis (Figure 12.24, Figure 12.25 and Figure 12.26)
212
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
References
Carver, J.R., Kapatkin, A. and Patnaik, A.K. (1995) A comparison of medullary thyroid
carcinoma and thyroid adenocarcinoma in dogs a retrospective study of 38 cases.
Veterinary Surgery,24,315-319.
Doss, J.C., Grone, A., Capen, C.C. et al. {1998) Immunohistochemical localization of
chromogranin A in endocrine tissues and endocrine tumors of dogs. Veterinary Pathology,
35, 312-315.
Espinosa de los Monteros, A., Fernandez, A., Millan, M.Y. et al. {1999) Coordinate
expression of cytokeratins 7 and 20 in canine and feline carcinomas. Veterinary
Pathology, 36, 179-190.
Harari, J., Petterson, M.E. and Rosenthal, R.C. {1986) Clinical and pathologic features of
thyroid tumors in 26 dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association , 188,
1160-1164.
Labelle, P, Kyles, A.E., Farver, T.B. et al. {2004) Indicators of malignancy of canine
adrenocortical tumors: histopathology and proliferation index. Veterinary Pathology, 41,
490-497.
Leav, I., Schiller, A.L., Rijnberk, A. et al. (1976) Adenomas and carcinomas of the canine
and feline thyroid. American Journal of Pathology, 83, 61-93.
Leblanc, B., Parodi, A.L., Lagadic, M. et al. (1991) Immunocytochemistry of canine thyroid
tumors. Veterinary Pathology, 28, 370-380.
Patnaik, A.K. and Lieberman, PH. (1991) Gross, histologic, cytochemical, and immuno-
histochemical study of medullary thyroid carcinoma in sixteen dogs. Veterinary Patbology,
28, 223-233.
13
Cytology of the Male and
Female Genital Tracts
Gary C. W. England' and Kristen R.
Friedrichs?
'School ofVeterinary Medicine andScience,University of Nottingham,
Sutton Bonington, Loughborough, UK
2 Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Introduction
Cytological evaluation is an important part of the clinician's armoury for
 diagnosis of common reproductive tract diseases. The purpose of this chapter is
 mon reproductive tract diseases in the dog and cat. The reader is encouraged to
consult with veterinary specialists or refer to veterinary textbooks for additional
information regarding the specific diagnosis and treatment of disorders of the
reproductive system.
Cytology of the male genital tract
Cytological evaluation is useful for determining the cause of abnormal discharges,
swellings and masses associated with the testes, scrotum, prostate, penis and
prepuce as well as to evaluate semen for breeding soundness and in cases
 of reproductive failure. Some disorders are unique to the intact male dog (e.g. pros-
tatitis), whereas others affect intact and neutered male dogs equally (e.g. prostatic
tumours).
Collection of specimens
Preputial discharge collected on saline-moistened cotton-tipped swabs can be gently
rolled onto a glass slide, and an additional sample transferred to bacterial transport
medium in case culture is indicated. Fine-needle aspirates (FNA) of masses or swell-
ings associated with the testes, prostate or external genitalia can be collected with a
22G or 25G needle. Complications from FNA are uncommon but may include
dissemination of infection, seeding of tumour cells or haemorrhage. Ultrasonographic
 guidance for FNA of the testes and prostate is recommended to target the intended
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytotogy of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
214
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
lesion and provide a measure of safety. Collection of semen and prostatic fluid
through ejaculation for reproductive evaluation is described later.
Prostatic wash can be used to collect cytological specimens from dogs with
prostatomegaly. The bladder first should be emptied and rinsed with sterile
saline, and the last wash fluid saved for possible culture (pre-massage). The
length of urinary catheter required to reach the prostate should be estimated,
 si rao  a e ad an  i sd e 
inserted into the penis and advanced to the prostate. The appropriate location
of the catheter tip is confirmed by digital rectal palpation, and the prostate is
gently massaged before 5-10 ml sterile saline is infused with a syringe and then
the wash fluid or from the cellular pellet after centrifugation, and an aliquot
saved for possible culture (post-massage). Culture of pre- and post-prostatic
massage samples as well as a urine sample aids in localisation of the infection
to the prostate, urinary tract or both.
 Disorders of the testicle and scrotum
Changes in the size or consistency of the scrotum may be unilateral or bilateral
and acute or chronic in presentation. In addition to a complete medical work-up,
examination of semen and FNA of the testes can be useful in establishing the
aetiology and likely prognosis.
Infectious orchitis and epididymitis
In dogs and cats with acute orchitis/epididymitis, substantial swelling, heat and
pain are typically present in the testes. In countries, where Brucella canis is present
(rare in the United Kingdom), this organism must be considered for any dog with
this presentation. Cytological examination of FNA of the testes reveals neutro-
philic or pyogranulomatous inflammation in cases associated with bacterial or
fungal infection, respectively. Frequently there will be inflammatory cells in the
ejaculate if the male is able to ejaculate.
Testicular tumours
In many cases of testicular neoplasms, there is enlargement of one testis with a
normal-sized or atrophied contralateral testis. Sertoli cell tumours and seminomas
are more common in cryptorchid testes (these may be diagnosed by an FNA of
the abdominal or inguinal mass). Common testicular tumours including Sertoli
cell tumours (Figure 13.1), interstitial (Leydig) cell tumours (Figure 13.2 and
Figure 13.3) and seminomas (Figure 13.4) often can be differentiated cytologically.
      ad  s n 
syndrome (gynaecomastia and attraction of male dogs), symmetrical hair loss,
Cytology of the Male and Female Genital Tracts
215
Figure 13.1Sertoli cell tumour, dog (FNA). Tumour cells are round with moderately high
nuclear to cytoplasmic (N:C) ratios and are arranged individually (inset) or in aggregates. The
basophilic cytoplasm often contains moderate numbers of clear vacuoles. Nuclei have finely
stippled chromatin.
Figure 13.2  Interstitial cell tumour, dog (FNA). Tumour cells are arranged in clusters and 
vacuoles. Nuclei are eccentrically located.
216
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 13.3 Interstitial cell tumour, dog (FNA). Palisading of tumour cells along the long
axis of a capillary is observed in this low power view.
Figure 13.4 Seminoma, dog (imprint). Tumour cells are round and individualised with high
small amount of lightly basophilic cytoplasm may contain a few discrete vacuoles.
Disorders of the prostate
Normal cell types
Cytology of the normal prostate consists of sheets or rows of uniform cuboidal
epithelial cells with moderate amounts of basophilic cytoplasm and small, round
basally located nuclei with condensed chromatin.
Cytology of the Male and Female Genital Tracts
217
Figure 13.5 Benign prostatic, hyperplasia, dog. Hyperplastic prostatic epithelium with
increased N:C ratio and cytoplasmic basophilia.
Figure 13.6 Benign prostatic hyperplasia, dog. These prostatic epithelial cells have
prominent cytoplasmic vacuolisation.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
dogs. Glandular enlargement is symmetrical and non-painful but can lead to
partial or complete urethral obstruction. In early stages, haemospermia is noted
within the ejaculate without an increase in the number of white blood cells. Cells
collected by aspiration or prostatic wash resemble those of normal prostatic
218
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 13.7  Infected prostatic cyst, dog (FNA). Numerous degenerate neutrophils with
pale, swollen nuclei are present. Chains of cocci are seen within neutrophils and in the
background.
epithelium and are often arranged in large “honeycomb' clusters. Additional
cytological features of hyperplasia are present (higher nuclear to cytoplasmic
(N:C) ratio, increased cytoplasmic basophilia and vacuolisation, finely stippled
chromatin and a small nucleolus; Figure 13.5 and Figure 13.6). Prostatitis may
be a sequela to BPH.
Prostatic and paraprostatic cysts
Prostatic and paraprostatic cysts are primarily seen in intact dogs and may occur
 guria and abdominal distension. Aspirated fluid is often amber, blood tinged
or green brown in colour. Frequently the fluid is acellular or may contain a few
red blood cells, neutrophils, normal prostatic epithelial cells and macrophages.
Prostatic cysts that become secondarily infected contain higher numbers of
neutrophils containing intracellular bacteria (Figure 13.7).
Prostatitis and prostatic abscess
Prostatic infections are generally limited to intact dogs. Dogs with prostatitis
may present with fever, caudal abdominal pain, penile discharge and stranguria.
The prostate may be enlarged and painful upon rectal palpation. Ultrasonographic
imaging of the prostate may detect the presence of cavitations that indicate
infected cysts or an abscess. Fine-needle aspiration is not recommended if
Cytology of the Male and Female Genital Tracts
219
Figure 13.8 Prostatitis, dog (FNA). Necrotic prostatic epithelial cells are surrounded by
degenerate neutrophils. Bacterial rods are seen within neutrophils and in the background.
Escherichiacofiwascultured from thissample.
prostatic abscessation is suspected because of the risk of rupture and subsequent
peritonitis (a safer option is to collect the sample by prostatic wash or by ejacu-
lation if the dog is not in too much pain). Smears prepared from a prostatic wash
contain numerous degenerate and non-degenerate neutrophils, some of which
may contain bacterial organisms (Figure 13.8). Intact or necrotic prostatic
epithelial cells may be present. Samples of wash fluid or aspirated material
should be submitted for culture and sensitivity, and castration should be consid-
ered in non-breeding dogs.
Prostatic neoplasms
Both intact and neutered male dogs may develop prostatic tumours. Common
 presenting signs include stranguria or difficulty defecating due to prostatomegaly.
Metastasis to regional lymph nodes and vertebrae is common with wider dissemi-
nation possible. Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) and primary prostatic adeno-
carcinoma occur most commonly and generally are cytologically indistinguishable
In addition, TCC of the bladder and urethra may extend into the prostate. Aspirates
of prostatic tumours consist of moderately to highly pleomorphic epithelial
cells arranged in sheets, in clusters and occasionally as individual round cells
(Figure 13.9). Multinucleation and cytoplasmic vacuolisation are common, and
some cells may contain a round pink cytoplasmic inclusion which may represent
glycosylated protein (Figure 13.10). Necrosis may accompany large tumours. In
washes of the prostate, tumour cells are less well preserved than in FNA, but clusters
of pleomorphic epithelial cells often are readily identified (Figure 13.11).
Figure 13.9 Prostatic carcinoma, dog (FNA). Moderately pleomorphic tumour cells are
arranged in sheets and clusters. Several binucleate and multinucleate cells are present.
Figure 13.10 Prostatic carcinoma, dog (FNA). Cell and nuclear size and N:C ratio vary
markedly. The large multinucleate cell contains one large (lower) and four smaller nuclei
(asterisks) and a smooth magenta cytoplasmic inclusion (black arrow). Nuclear chromatin is
clumped, and prominent nucleoli are visible.
Figure 13.11 Prostatic carcinoma, dog (wash). Variation in cell size and cytoplasmic
vacuolisation are apparent within this cluster of poorly preserved tumour cells.
Cytology of the Male and Female Genital Tracts
221
Figure 13.12 Prostatic metaplasia secondary to oestrogen exposure, dog (FNA). The
specimen consists exclusively of mature, cornified squamous cells. Inset: Squamous
epithelial cells (higher magnification).
Squamous metaplasia
Squamous metaplasia results from chronic exposure to oestrogen usually second-
ary to an oestrogen-producing Sertoli cell tumour. Detection of prostatic squamous
metaplasia may be the first clue to the presence a Sertoli cell tumour in a scrotal or
undescended testicle. The prostatic wash consists of numerous mature, cornified
squamous epithelial cells (Figure 13.12). Concurrent neutrophilic inflammation or
bacterial infection may be present.
Disorders of the penis and prepuce
Balanitis and posthitis
 Bacterial infections of the external genitalia may result in purulent discharge that
e -e so  o ss  xa q 
extracellular bacteria and exfoliated mature squamous cells.
Penile and preputial neoplasms
Tumours of the penis and prepuce are rare with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
and transmissible venereal tumour (TVT) most commonly seen. The cytological
appearance of SCC is similar to that in other locations (see Figure 4.13). TVT is
a contagious tumour endemic within large populations of stray dogs in some
tropical and subtropical urban environments. TVT may be found on the mucosa
222
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 13.13 Transmissible venereal tumour. Tumour cells are round and individualised
with moderately high N:C ratios. Many contain discrete cytoplasmic vacuoles. Nuclei are
eccentrically located with coarsely stippled chromatin and often possess a prominent
nucleolus.
of the penis or prepuce of young, sexually mature dogs and less often on the oral
a   ss axa e d e s a s s 
and have a characteristic cytological appearance (Figure 13.13).
Semen collection and evaluation
Semen quality is often studied in an attempt to predict the fertilising capability
of the male animal. Semen collection in the dog has been performed using an
artificial vagina, although most commonly it is collected by manually stimulating
can be collected separately into test tubes with the second (semen-rich) and third
(prostatic fluid) fraction being most clinically relevant. Semen can be collected
successfully from the tom cat using an artificial vagina if the tom previously has
been trained. Full evaluation of semen involves assessment of sperm motility,
concentration, morphology and percent live sperm. This section will focus on the
 cytological evaluation of stained semen specimens, and the reader is referred to
 other sources for information regarding a complete fertility examination in a male
dog (Root Krustritz, 2007).
Common conditions affecting semen quality
Disordersofsperm
The absence of sperm in an ejaculate is called azoospermia and may result from
specific testicular pathology or from incomplete ejaculation in a young or nerv.
ous dog. Abnormal sperm morphology is referred to as teratozoospermia. In gen-
Cytology of the Male and Female Genital Tracts
223
D
   s a p   i     
sperm with broken neck. (B) Dead sperm with bent tail. (C) Live sperm with hairpin bend
to tail. (D) Live sperm with distal cytoplasmic droplet. Dog, nigrosin-eosin, 1000x oil
immersion.
eral, when more than 40% of sperm are morphologically abnormal, there is a
decline in the fertility. The causes of teratozoospermia are often unknown,
although many cases are the result of early stages of testicular degeneration
(Figure 13.14) following some (often unknown) testicular insult. Many of these
animals subsequently become azoospermic. Repeated semen evaluation after two
In some cases, teratozoospermia is seen in older dogs as a result of senile
 degenerative changes within the testes.
Dogs and cats that have severe bacterial inflammatory disease affecting the
testes, epididymides, prostate or urethra are usually unable to ejaculate as a result
of pain. However, in mild cases,it is possible to identify inflammatory cells including
neutrophils, lymphocytes and macrophages in collected semen samples, and this
often has an adverse impact upon sperm morphology and motility. Identification of
 p    rd  s p 
reproductive tract to identify the site of the primary problem.
Cytology of the female genital tract
Cytological evaluation is useful for determining the cause of abnormal dis-
charges, swellings and masses associated with the ovary, uterus, vagina, vestibule
and vulva. Disorders of the reproductive tract primarily occur in intact females.
Cytological evaluation of vaginal smears plays an important role in the accurate
 ieun sa jo suaussae au yo ied aq Pious pue saaa jo su!
to conceive.
224
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Collection of specimens
Smears may be prepared from vaginal or uterine discharges by collecting material
on a saline-moistened cotton swab and rolling it onto a glass slide. An additional
sample can be transferred to transport medium in case culture is warranted. A
vaginal speculum may be used to visualise the vestibule, urethral opening and vag-
inal mucosa and facilitates collection of FNA from vaginal masses. Cranial
vaginal and cervical abnormalities require endoscopic inspection and collection
of either a 'grab biopsy' or FNA through the instrument port of the endoscope.
Ovarian or uterine masses within the retroperitoneal space and abdominal cavity
can be aspirated using ultrasonographic guidance; however, tumour seeding may
be a concern when aspirating ovarian tumours. Collection of vaginal cytology for
breeding management is described later.
Infectious and inflammatory disorders
Vulval discharge may originate from the vagina or uterus and may vary in character
ductive history along with physical examination, imaging and assessment of cyto-
logical specimens is necessary to differentiate between the various causes of vulval
discharge. Small numbers of neutrophils and normal bacterial flora can be expected
in vaginal swabs from dogs without reproductive disease. However, large numbers
Table 13.1 Differentials for vaginal discharge 
Quality of discharge
Differentials
Clear
Oestrus
Mucoid
Metoestrus
Normal pregnancy
Purulent
Juvenile vaginitis
Vaginitis
Purulent/haemorrhagic
Pyometra
Metritis
Haemorrhagic
Pro-oestrus
Oestrus
Follicular cysts
Vaginal ulceration
 Placental separation
Sub-involution of placental sites
Transmissible venereal tumour
Cystitis
Urinary tract neoplasms
Haemorrhagic (brown coloured)
Abortion
Haemorrhagic (green/brown coloured)
 Parturition
Dystocia, placental separation
Cytology of the Male and Female Genital Tracts
225
Figure 13.15 Vaginitis, bitch (cotton swab). Intermediate vaginal epithelial cells are
accompanied by numerous degenerate neutrophils, some of which contain bacterial rods.
of neutrophils and bacteria, especially if the bacteria are found within neutrophils,
support an infection within the reproductive tract (Figure 13.1.5). Diagnosis of a
closed pyometra is based on a recent history of oestrus and corroborating results
fluid-filled uterus is not recommended because of risk of leakage and subsequent
peritonitis.
Neoplastic disorders
Tumours of the vulva and vagina may be found in intact and spayed females
and are more common than tumours of the uterus. Leiomyomas are the most
common tumour at these
locations. Cytologically, these tumours consist
of aggregates of elongate spindle cells with cigar-shaped nuclei. Where it is
endemic, transmissible venereal tumours may be seen on the external genitalia
of sexually mature female dogs that roam {Figure 13.13). A variety of other
tumours may involve the skin and submucosa of the vulva and vagina including
mast cell tumours (see Figure 2.23 and Figure 4.24), melanocytic tumours (see
Figure 4.21) and TCC
Ovarian tumours are uncommon in cats and dogs, and there are few reports
of the cytological appearance of these tumours (Bertazzolo et al., 2004). Ovarian
tumours include epithelial or papillary tumours, germ cell tumours (dysgermi-
noma, teratoma and embryonal carcinoma) and sex-cord stromal tumours
(granulosa cell tumour, thecoma and luteoma). Ovarian cysts also may be
reported as a mass in the region of the ovary. Dysgerminomas and granulosa cell
tumours appear cytologically similar to seminomas and Sertoli cell tumours,
respectively.
226
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Vaginal cytology for breeding management
Exfoliative vaginal cytology
Microscopic examination of exfoliated vaginal epithelial cells is a simple method
for monitoring the stage of the oestrous cycle when performed serially. The increase
in plasma oestrogen during pro-oestrus and oestrus causes thickening of the
vaginal wall, probably as a mechanism to protect the otherwise delicate mucosa at
the time of mating. Oestrogen causes thickening of the vaginal mucosa predomi-
nantly via an increase in the number of cell layers. The mucosa changes from a
cuboidal epithelium (in anoestrus) through a transitional phase (during pro-oestrus)
into a stratified, keratinised s
squamous epithelium (during the fertile period). After
the end of the fertilisation period,
,as progesterone concentrations increase,there is
rapid sloughing of the newly
 developed epithelium and an uncovering of a simple
cuboidal epithelium similar to that observed during anoestrus.
Vaginal cells may be collected by aspiration of the vaginal cavity using a plastic cath-
eter or by using a saline-moistened cotton swab gently rolled over the surface of the
vaginal mucosa. Swabs should be introduced and removed using a smallspeculum or
 guard to avoid contact of the swab with the vestibule or skin, since collction of cells
from these locations can give erroneous results. The swab should be lightly rolled onto
a glass slide, or aspirated fluid can be spread as a thin film using a blood film technique
 (see Chapter 1). Routine Romanowsky-type stains are sufficient for evaluation and are
tasy to use. Trichrome stain has the advantage of identifying keratinised cells, but the
procedure is technically more complicated. During pro-oestrus, as plasma oestrogen
concentrations increase, the surface epithelial cells change from small circular cells with
little cytoplasm ('parabasal cells') to larger, irregularly shaped flatter (squamous) nucle-
ated cells (*intermediate cells') (Figure 13.16). During oestrus they become large inter-
erythrocytes are present.
Cytology of the Male and Female Genital Tracts
227
Figure 13.17 Early oestrus. Large intermediate epithelial cells, many covered in bacteria,
and erythrocytes are present. Neutrophils are absent.
 mediate epithelial cells (Figure 13.17) and then cornified squamous cells (superficial
cells'). The latter are anuclear or have a ghostlike' or small pyknotic nuclear remnant
(Figure 13.18). After the end of the fertilisation period during sloughing of the epithe-
lium,the superficial cells disappear and small parabasal and intermediate cells reappear
in the vaginal smear (metoestrus) (Figure 13.19). Neutrophils are generally present in
small numbers in the anoestrus vaginal smear but disappear during the fertile period
 because the thickened mucosa is a barrier to their migration to the mucosal surface.
These neutrophils reappear, often in large numbers, during metoestrus.
of epithelial cells are anuclear as in most bitches this coincides with the fertile
period (Figure 13.20). Further mating or insemination is rarely successful once
metoestrus is identified.
In queens, similar changes are noted in vaginal cytology during pro-oestrus and
oestrus; however, although epithelial cells are large and irregular in outline, they
often remain nucleated. Furthermore, at the end of oestrus, whether ovulation
occurs or not, a substantial influx of neutrophils is not apparent.
Ovarian remnant syndrome
Bitches and queens that are thought to have an ovarian remnant after ovario-
hysterectomy usually return to oestrus at intervals similar to those in intact females.
Collection of a vaginal smear when the female is demonstrating oestrous behaviour
228
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 13.18 Oestrus (mating time). The majority of epithelial cells are cornified and
anuclear. Cells are large and irregular and covered in bacteria. Neutrophils are absent.
Figure 13.19 Early luteal phase. There is a substantial influx of neutrophils, and the
epithelial cells are no longer cornified. Here small intermediate epithelial cells are present.
Some erythrocytes remain.
Cytology of the Male and Female Genital Tracts
229
Fertilisation period
cell
80%Anuclear
Percentage
PlO
Met/dioestrus
Anoestrus
Oestrogen
Progesterone
con
Hormone
Luteal phase
-40
-20
D
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Days in relation to pre-ovulatory LH surge
Figure 13.20:
 Schematic representation of the hormone concentrations and stages of the
oestrous cycle in the bitch (P = pro-oestrus, O = oestrus [vertical arrow]) in relation to the
fertilisation period and percentage of anuclear vaginal epithelial cells. Source: Adapted from
will show the presence of large intermediate and cornified epithelial cells. Care
should be taken to ensure that the smear has not been contaminated with vulvar or
perineal epithelial cells.
References
Bertazzolo, W., Dell'Orco, M, Bonfanti, U. et al. (2004) Cytological features of canine
ovarian tumours: a retrospective study of 19 cases. Journal of Small Animal Practice,
45,539-545.
Root Kustritz, M.V. (2007) The value of canine semen evaluation for practitioners.
Theriogenology, 68, 329-337.
14
Cytology of Mammary
Gland Lesions
Reinhard Mischke
Small Animal Clinic,University ofVeterinary Medicine Hannover,
Hannover, Germary
Optimal cytological interpretation requires availability of representative samples
with adequate cellularity and access to detailed patient clinical information (i.e.
good communication with the clinician) and experience regarding the cytological
 patterns and biology of mammary tumours in dogs and cats.
Indications for cytological investigation
The primary objective of cytological examination of mammary lesions is to dif-
ferentiate primary inflammatory lesions from benign hyperplastic or neoplastic
lesions and malignant tumours with respect to prognosis and treatment. The
most reliable predictors of malignancy are clinical and histological evidence of
tumour infiltration into surrounding tissue or vessels or metastases. Although
infiltrative behaviour cannot be directly assessed by cytological examination,
cytological detection of local and distant metastases in possible target organs
confirms that a tumour is malignant. If a mammary lesion is suspected to be
 malignant, further investigations should be undertaken in order to more precisely
define the prognosis before surgical excision, which is usually the treatment of
choice, is attempted. These include diagnostic imaging of potential metastatic
sites (e.g. three-view thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound) and cyto-
logical examination of ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirates of regional lymph
 nodes, suspected metastatic lesions in distant organs (e.g. liver, spleen and lung)
and/or body cavity effusions. In the case of carcinoma (especially inflammatory
carcinoma), cytological detection of distant metastases including bone marrow
infiltration implies a poor prognosis.
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
232
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Collection techniques
Samples from mammary lesions
Cytological specimens from solid and cystic lesions can be obtained by fine-needle
aspiration biopsy (FNAB) which may be ultrasound guided, whereas imprints and
scrapings can be taken from ulcerated lesions, surgical biopsies or surgically
removed lesions. FNAB is especially useful for the investigation of small mammary
lesions during the early stages of development when it may be difficult to persuade
an owner to opt for a surgical biopsy. However, early diagnosis and treatment is
very important, because early surgical resection is an important prognostic factor.
With respect to the often mixed or complex composition of mammary lesions
within the same gland), multiple aspirates are crucial in order to increase the prob-
ability of harvesting representative cells from all relevant components of the lesion
(this is especially true for mesenchymal tumours which tend to exfoliate cells in low
numbers). Sample collection from different areas of the lesion also reduces the risk
of non-diagnostic specimens, e.g. from inflamed, cystic or necrotic areas of a pri-
marily malignant neoplastic lesion. When aspirating large mammary gland lesions
or an enlarged lymph node for metastatic tumour cells, avoid sampling the centre
of the node which may be necrotic.
Mammary secretion
-oo r aenape ans ae suas adu r o paedard sies
logical diagnosis of diffuse inflammatory lesions, whereas diagnosis of focally
inflamed or infected mammary gland lesions requires FNAB. Nipple secretions are
unlikely to provide adequate information for the diagnosis of neoplastic mammary
gland lesions.
Normal cell types and cytological appearance
of normal lactating mammary gland
As a consequence of marked hypertrophy, aspirates from lactating mammary
glands have a higher cellularity than non-lactating glands which usually contain no
or only a very small number of tissue-specific cells. Mammary secretory epithelial
cells which derive from secretory acini are uniform in size and shape and have a
moderate amount of granular, basophilic cytoplasm and a round, dark nucleus (the
nuclei are also of similar size and shape). Occasionally, small sheets and clusters of
secretory cells are observed, which may be arranged in acinar formations
(Figure 14.1). Epithelial cells derived from excretory ducts have basilar, ovoid
nuclei with scanty basophilic cytoplasm (Figure 14.2). Clusters and small sheets or
fragments of ductules with prominent intercellular borders may also be present.
Because ductal and acinar epithelial cells and intra- and interlobular connective
tissue undergo regular cycles of proliferation, individual hyperplastic and dysplastic
Cytology of Mammary Gland Lesions
233
Figure 14.1 Imprint of normal canine mammary gland. Sheet of apocrine epithelial cells
with abundant basophilic cytoplasm and a round nucleus, most of which contain a centrally
locatednucleolus(arrows).
Figure 14.2 Imprint of normal canine mammary gland. A monolayered sheet of normal
ductal cells characterised by scanty basophilic cytoplasm and ovoid nuclei.
cells may be present in older animals. In addition, myoepithelial cells, which line the
secretory acini and teat sinuses, may be seen as spindle-shaped cells or free, darkly
 s  he  ss e'tl a)  o s
also contain foam cells ( Figure 14.4) and/or pigment-laden macrophages ( Figure 14.5).
234
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 14.3  Normal myoepithelial cells are elongated darker cells with oval nuclei (arrows).
They can be seen here within a sheet of ductal epithelial cells.
Figure 14.4Two foam cells (ipid-laden macrophages) in normal canine mammary
secretion. These are large individual cells with abundant cytoplasm containing clear
cytoplasmic vacuoles and a round to oval-shaped, eccentrically located nucleus. Note
the low nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio.
 Foam cells originate from histiocytes, and immunophenotypic analysis suggests they
may also derive from mammary epithelial cells. In addition, erythrocytes, clear lipid
droplets and adipocytes may be present. The background usually contains a moder-
ate amount of basophilic proteinaceous material.
Cytology of Mammary Gland Lesions
235
Figure 14.5 Normal canine mammary secretion. The pigment-laden macrophages contain
basophilic secretory material and are situated in a lightly basophilic proteinaceous background.
Figure 14.6  Normal canine mammary secretion with individual foam cells and a single
neutrophil in a basophilic proteinaceous background containing many lipid droplets.
Normal mammary secretions are protein rich but hypocellular. Low numbers
of foam cells, individual secretory and ductular epithelial cells, macrophages
and the occasional neutrophil and lymphocyte are present in an eosinophilic to
basophilic proteinaceous background containing large numbers of lipid drop-
lets (Figure 14.6).
236
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 14.7 Purulent necrotising mastitis in a cat caused by Escherichia cofi. This aspirate
reveals degenerate neutrophils with swollen unstructured nuclei (note the absence of
and extracellularly.
Mastitis
Aspirates from focal or diffuse, inflammatory mammary lesions are usually associated
with postpartum lactation or pseudopregnancy. They are cellular, and the composition 
of inflammatory cell types varies with the type and pathogenicity of the causative
agent and the stage of disease. Bacterial infection results in purulent inflammation,
and neutrophils may exhibit degenerative changes (karyolysis and/or karyorrhexis),
suggesting the presence of bacterial toxins (Figure 14.7). In addition, such smears
contain large amounts of necrotic cellular debris. Bacteria (especially coliforms,
Streptococcus spp. and Staphylococcus spp.) can be visualised in neutrophils and, less
commonly, in macrophages ( Figure 14.7). Secretions of inflamed mammary glands or
 aspirated material should be submitted for culture and sensitivity in order to deter-
 mine appropriate antibiotic therapy.
In more chronic cases and non-septic inflammatory lesions, non-degenerate neu-
 trophils, reactive pigment-laden macrophages, lymphocytes and plasma cells are
 present in varying numbers (Figure 14.8). Dysplastic mammary epithelial cells may
also be present in association with inflammatory changes. These cells require cau-
tious interpretation since they may exhibit morphological changes which mimic
those associated with malignancy (Figure 14.9 and Figure 14.10).
 Feline mammary fibroadenomatous hyperplasia
Feline mammary fibroadenomatous hyperplasia may be suspected on the basis of
the signalment, history and clinical appearance of the lesions (i.e. it is observed
most frequently in young intact females or in older male and female cats; it may
Figure 14.8 Non-degenerate neutrophils and foamy macrophages in the secretion of an
inflamed mammary gland in a dog.
Figure 14.9 Mammary secretion of a dog with mastitis. Cluster of epithelial cells (bottom
Figure 14.10 Same case as in Figure 14.9. Epithelial cells showing marked dysplastic
changes (e.g. macrokaryosis) are surrounded by macrophages and a neutrophil.
238
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
be induced by the use of synthetic progesterone compounds). Aspirates may help to
confirm the tentative diagnosis and rule out the main differential diagnoses which
are malignant neoplasia and mastitis. The cytological appearance is characterised
by small clusters of relatively uniform cuboidal ductular epithelial cells with round
nuclei, small nucleoli and scant cytoplasm. A mild to moderate degree of anisocy-
tosis and variation in nuclear to cytoplasm ratio may be evident, but the cells lack
the nuclear criteria of malignancy. A reactive mesenchymal component is repre-
sented by spindle-shaped stromal cells with indistinct cytoplasmic margins, oval-
shaped nuclei with prominent nucleoli and increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio.
The stromal cells are usually embedded in a pink intercellular matrix material.
Solid benign lesions (adenoma, canine lobular hyperplasia)
Aspirates from benign neoplasms of the mammary gland such as adenomas
and papillomas appear similar and cannot be differentiated with confidence on a
cytological basis from lobular hyperplasia. Aspirates normally contain sheets or
clusters of relatively uniform epithelial cells with small nuclei (Figure 14.11)
The cells may be arranged as palisading, papillary,acinar and trabecular structures
which may provide clues to the histopathological of the lesion under investigation.
 Pigment-laden macrophages may also be present. There is a tendency for cytology
to underdiagnose malignancy, and since there is a low incidence of benign mammary
 tumours in cats, diagnosis of a benign lesion requires extreme caution especially
Figure 14.11 Mammary adenoma in a dog. This tissue aspirate depicts a sheet of glandular
      i   e   ll 
cytoplasmic ratio. The nuclei are of similar size with a fine granular chromatin pattern and
small round nucleoli. Source: Simon, D., Schoenrock, D., Nolte, I. et al. (2009) Cytologic
accuracy with comparison to histopathology and association with postoperative outcome.
Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 38, 521-528. Reproduced with permission of John Wiley and Sons.
Cytology of Mammary Gland Lesions
239
in an older cat with no history of progesterone administration. The aspirated cells
from most mammary tumours are usually located in a background containing
variable amounts of blood, basophilic proteinaceous material, lipid droplets and
foam cells.
Benign mixed and complex mammary tumours
 In dogs, benign tumours often involve epithelial and stromal elements (e.g.
complex adenomas, fibroadenomas, benign mixed tumours). Benign complex
adenomas or papillomas, fibroadenomas and benign mixed tumours character-
istically yield specimens consisting of sheets and clusters of uniform-appearing
epithelial cells in addition to individual or clumped spindle-shaped myoepithe-
lial cells (complex tumours) or spindle or oval-shaped cells of mesenchymal
free oval-shaped nuclei. The mesenchymal component may be represented by
fibrous, cartilaginous or osseous elements {i.e. fibroblasts, chondroblasts or
osteoblasts and osteoclasts may be present). Pink extracellular matrix material
(e.g. collagen, chrondroid or osteoid) may be observed either as small discrete
deposits or it may form a more diffuse background. Myoepithelial and mesen
chymal cells tend to exfoliate poorly; therefore, these benign complex or mixed
tumours may be difficult to diagnose on a cytological basis due to the low num-
ber of cells present.
Figure 14.12 Aspirate of a mixed mammary tumour in a dog. This lesion consists of
a secretory epithelial component (bottom) and mesenchymal component consisting of
spindle-shaped cells associated with a large amount of an extracellular pink matrix
material(top).
240
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 14.13  Aspirate of a mammary gland cyst (dog). These macrophages which
tend to accumulate along the feathered edge of the smear contain lipid vacuoles and
pigment.
Mammary cysts
 aged or older bitches. They form as a consequence of mammary dysplasia in which
dilated ducts expand to form large cavities. Mammary cysts can occur as individ-
ual or multiple lesions (polycystic mastopathy), and they may be associated with
benign and malignant mammary tumours. Therefore, aspiration should also
include solid areas, if present, to rule out the presence of concurrent mammary
gland neoplasia. The yellow-brown or blood-tinged aspirated fluid is generally
hypocellular unless there is concurrent inflammation (Figure 14.13). Vacuolated
foam cells and pigment-laden macrophages predominate. Numerous neutrophils
may be present in cysts which become inflamed or infected (Figure 14.14).
   o   r  
(Figure 14.15) and epithelial cells derived from the cystic lining may also be seen
especially in aspirates from cysts lined with papillary outgrowths. These epithelial
cells may be arranged in dense sheets or clusters, and mild variation in nuclear size
and shape may be evident.
Malignant epithelial neoplasms
Adenocarcinomas arising from glandular epithelium are the most common
malignant mammary neoplasm (and are the most common mammary tumour
in cats). Less common malignant epithelial neoplasms include ductal carcino-
mas, anaplastic carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas. The diagnosis of
malignant epithelial mammary tumours is based on the general cytological
characteristics, i.e. the presence of pleomorphic epithelial cells showing marked
Cytology of Mammary Gland Lesions
241
   i         t m
and associated bacterial infection. Some of the degenerate neutrophils contain intracellular
bacteria.
Figure 14.15 Imprint of a feline mammary carcinoma containing cystic areas. Note the
cholesterol crystais (topleft.These appear as large, rectangular clear crystals of varying
size,often with a notched corner.
anisocytosis. The cells, which may be single or arranged in sheets and irregular
clusters of variable size, demonstrate more than three nuclear criteria of malig.
nancy in a representative percentage of cells (Figure 14.16 and Figure 14.17).
Note, however, that different histological types often have similar cytological
features. A characteristic feature of adenocarcinomas is the tendency for the
242
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 14.16 Mammary adenocarcinoma (cat). This imprint depicts a large cluster
of extremely pleomorphic epithelial cells.
Figure 14.17 Same case as in Figure 14.16. Note the cellular pleomorphism and nuclear
criteria of malignancy anisokaryosis, macrokaryosis, and prominent, large nucleoli
cells to form acinar arrangements which can sometimes be observed especially
in imprint specimens (Figure 14.18).
 Epithelial cells are typically round or polygonal with distinct cell borders. They
have a round to oval, eccentrically located nucleus and a moderate amount of baso-
philic cytoplasm which may be vacuolated. The vacuoles may be clear or may contain
basophilic secretory product. Some cells may contain one large cytoplasmic vacuole
which displaces the nucleus peripherally (these are referred to as 'signet ring' cells).
Cytology of Mammary Gland Lesions
243
Figure 14.18 Acinar structure in an aspirate of a canine mammary adenocarcinoma.
A mitotic figure can be seen in the upper left corner.
Figure 14.19 Fine-needle aspirate of the inguinal lymph node of a dog. Lymph node
metastases of an anaplastic mammary carcinoma.
Nuclear criteria of malignancy are usually marked and include moderate to
marked variation in nuclear size, macrokaryosis, high nuclear to cytoplasm ratio,
nuclear moulding, binucleation and multinucleation, multiple prominent nucleoli,
macronucleoli and nucleoli which vary in shape. Increased mitotic activity and
abnormal mitotic figures may be present (Figure 14.18). Detection of metastases
within local lymph nodes and distant metastases helps to confirm the biological
behaviour of the tumour (Figure 14.19).
244
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Figure 14.20 Inflammatory mammary carcinoma. Aspirate shows a cluster of highly
pleomorphic epithelial cells and a large number of non-degenerate neutrophils.
Ductular carcinomas express similar cytomorphologic criteria as adenocarcino-
mas without the acinar structures, secretory product and cytoplasmic vacuolation;
instead papillary and trabecular arrangements may be observed.
Anaplastic carcinomas have a poor prognosis. The neoplastic cells may exfoliate
individually or in small clusters. They are extremely pleomorphic, have a high
nuclear to cytoplasm ratio and marked anisokaryosis is evident. Bizarre nuclear
 and nucleolar forms, frequent multinucleated cells and abnormal mitotic figures
are common. In contrast to adenocarcinomas, the hyperchromatic cytoplasm does
 not contain intracytoplasmic vacuoles (Figure 14.19).
Inflammatory carcinoma ('mastitis carcinomatosa') is an aggressive form of
mammary carcinoma characterised by the presence of a large number of non-
degenerate neutrophils, a smaller number of macrophages, and large, pleomorphic
anaplastic epithelial cells exhibiting numerous criteria of malignancy (Figure 14.20).
Although tumour cells are usually present in adequate numbers, aspirates from
multiple sites are advisable in order to maximise the likelihood of obtaining an
adequate number of cells which are indisputably malignant. History, signalment
 and detection of metastases may also be helpful in this respect.
The cytological appearance of squamous cell carcinomas, which often adhere to
the overlying dermis and may be ulcerated, resembles those detected in other organs
(see Figure 4.13).
Mammary sarcomas
 Primary mesenchymal tumours of the mammary gland (osteosarcomas, fibrosarco-
 mas and liposarcomas) are rare. The cytological appearance of these tumours is
similar to those located at other sites (Figures 2.19, 4.17 and 4.20).
Cytology of Mammary Gland Lesions
245
Malignant mixed mammary tumours
Malignant mixed mammary tumours are uncommon tumours in dogs. Cytological
specimens contain epithelial and mesenchymal spindle-shaped cell populations, of
which at least one or both (carcinosarcomas) demonstrate cellular and nuclear
 characteristics of malignancy. The heterogenous distribution of the cells may result
in a predominance of one cell type in a particular area; therefore, examination of
aspirates from multiple sites may be helpful.
15
Cytology of Selected
Infectious Organisms
Harold Tvedten
Faculty ofVeterinary Medicine and AnimalSciences,Department
of Clinical Sciences, Suwedish University of Agricultural Sciences,
Uppsala, Sweden
Introduction
The goal of this chapter is to describe general guidelines for the cytological
diagnosis of selected infectious diseases and illustrate representative examples of
 different classes of organisms. Types of infectious agents include common bacteria,
higher bacteria, yeasts, fungal hyphae, protozoa, parasites and viruses. Descriptions
of specific infectious agents will be limited. Readers are referred to specialised
textbooks, literature articles or the Internet for more complete descriptions of
diagnosis, biology, pathogenesis and treatment of various infectious diseases.
The photographs were taken by the author from his clinical cases and from cases
 in annual slide sets obtained from the American Society of Clinical Pathology
Annual Meeting Case Presentation Sessions from 1975 to 2010.
Very important in cytological diagnosis is the collection, preparation and staining
of samples, and for those aspects the reviewer is referred to Chapters 1 and 2 (see
also Further Reading). Most organisms and certainly the inflammatory cells
responding to them stain well and are best illustrated with Romanowsky-type
stains including Wright's, Giemsa and the ^quick' stains that mimic the blue-red
colours of those classic stains.
Identification of infectious organisms is based on their size and shape ( Table 15.1).
Erythrocytes and neutrophils are often present in samples and may be used to
estimate the size of any organism (Figure 15.1).
Bacterial infections
 Infections caused by Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., Proteus spp. and
E. coli are commonly encountered infections in clinical practice. Cytology may be
used to identify the presence of bacteria in a lesion and characterise the bacteria
into various patterns. The pattern most suggestive of a primary infection is when
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytotogy of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
248
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
Table 15.1
Summary of sizes, forms and location of various infectious agents
 Organism
Size
Form
Location
Staphylococcus
0.4-0.8 μm
Cocci
In neutrophils and
spp.
background
Streptococcus spp. 0.5-1.2 μm
Cocci in chains
In neutrophils and
 background 
 Bacilli in general
0.5-1 × 1-4 μm
Rods
 In neutrophils and
background
E. cofi
1-1.5 × 2-6 μm
Rods
In neutrophils and
background
Bartonelfa spp.
0.5 × 1
Rods, may be slightly
Difficult to identify
curved
by morphology
B. bronchiseptica
0.3 ×0.5-2μm
Rods
Attached to cilia of
cells
Helicobacter spp.
 2-15 μm
Thick rigid spirals
Gastric crypts and
(spirillum)
background
 Spirochaetes
0.4 × 3-500 μm
 Thin flexible spiral
Mouth, faeces,
urine (Leptospira
spp.)
Simonsiella spp.
8-12 μm
Oval, flat 'trichome' of
On surface of
12-20 rods
epithelial cells
Mycopiasma spp.
0.3-1 μm
 Pleomorphic 'cocci'
On surface of
(no cell wall)
epithelial cells
Actinomyces spp.
0.8 × 5-20 μm
Filamentous,branching
 Find colonies in
plus rods
 pus and smears
Aspergillus spp.
5-7 μm wide
Uniformly wide,
Look for colonies,
septate hyphae
use 4x lens
B. dermatitidis
5-20μm
Round broad-based
Free in exudate
budding yeast
 and debris
H.capsulatum
1-4 μm
Round to oval, budding
In macrophages
 and neutrophils
Cryptococcus spp.
8-40 μm
Yeast with variably
Yeast without
thick, clear capsule
 capsule 4-8 μm
Coccidioides
10-100 μm
Thick walled, dark
Free in exudate
immitis
spherules
C.immitis
2-5 μm
Endospores
Inside spherules
S. schenckii
2-7 μm
 Pleomorphic 'cigar'-
Lung, in
shaped
macrophages or
background
Pneumocystis
5-10 μm
Round cysts with 4-6
Lung, free in
carinii
internal bodies
background
P. carinii
2-7 μm
Pleomorphic
Lung, in
tophozoites
macrophages or
background
Cytology of Selected Infectious Organisms
249
Table 15.1
(Cont'd)
Organism
Size
Fom
Location
M. pachydermatis
3-5μm
Oval yeast with
 On epithelial cells
unipolar budding
C. albicans
2-10 μm
Round to oval, may
On epithelial cells
have pseudohyphae
!puob1!
1-4 μm
Crescent 'banana'-
In macrophages or
shaped
background
N.caninum
1-5 μm
Crescent 'banana'-
In macrophages
shaped
and neutrophils 
O. (Filaroides)
232-266 μm
Larvae in a coil
Free in BAL fluid;
osleri
use 4x lens
Filaroides hirthi
240-290 μm
Looks like O. osleri
Free in BAL fluid;
use 4x lens
C. vuipis
4-16mm
Males have a
Free in BAL fluid;
copulatory organ
use naked eye
Dirofifaria immitis
290-330 μm
Microfilaria in blood
In bloody
background
Paragonimus
100 × 50 μm
Yellow oval ova (1
Lung (cat/dog),
kellicotti
operculum)
free in
background; use
4x lens
A.pseudofelineus
25-35 × 12-15
Operculated fluke ova
Liver, pancreas,
μm
faeces (cat/dog)
Eucoleus
70 × 35 μm
Bipolar operculum egg
BAL, sputum,
aerophilus
(Capillaria)
faeces; use 4x
sual
Aelurostrongyius
80 × 70 μm
Brown oval ova
BAL fluid (cats),
free in
background; use
4xlens
Erythrocytes
5-7 μm
Round
Background
 Neutrophils
11-17 μm
Round
Background
See with naked
> 0.1mm
1mm=0.001m;
eye
1 μm =a millionth
of a meter
Note: BAL, bronchoalveolar lavage. For full Genus species name of organisms, see text.
only one type of bacterial organism (e.g. small cocci in chains) is found
(Figure 15.2A). Secondary infections more likely have a mixed population of
bacteria (e.g. different sized rods and cocci) (Figure 15.2B). Bacteria which appear
 to be normal flora are recognised by their presence on the surface of epithelial cells
 and a lack of inflammatory response. Normal flora includes rods, spirochaetes and
250
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
11,17um
Figure 15.1
Cell sizes. Erythrocytes and neutrophils may be used to judge the size of
infectious organisms and other cells in the smear. The diameter of cells will vary due to
variation in thickness of the smear, so this is an approximate but practical method. Cells lay
flatter and have a wider diameter in thinner areas of the smear. Erythrocytes are about 4-7 μm
probably because they were located in a thicker area of the smear. The erythrocyte is 4.6 μm,
T. gondii organisms). The size of erythrocytes is affected less by the thickness of a smear
than neutrophils and is thus recommended as the cell to use for estimating the size of
infectious agents. Wright's-type stain about 1000 x.
The cytological description of the number and types of bacteria and pattern of
bacteria seen in a sample is important for interpretation of bacterial culture results.
s these bacteria are secondary
invaders and that culture
Sh
similarly
 a mixed population. Most
bacteria cannot be specifically
identifiedb
e and size, but the finding of one
neutrophils allows a fairly
confident cytological
infection
rganism is an anaerobe which does not
grow on routine culture 1
medla
other bacteriostatic substances or if the stain has
s been contaminated with organ-
isms. Consider also human error and the sensitivity of the methods (culture usually
detects smaller numbers of bacteria in a sample than cytology).
Gram staining is not recommended for routine examination of cytological
samples. Gram-negative bacteria (red) are difficult to see in a red background of
 protein and neutrophils. Bacteria are often present in small numbers and may only
be identified in occasional fields of view. The intensity and consistency of Gram
ing should be restricted to bacteriology laboratories looking daily at uniformly
thick smears from colonies on blood agar plates.
Cytology of Selected Infectious Organisms
251
Some bacteria are sufficiently unique to recognise on cytological smears. These
include Streptococcus spp., Actinomyces spp., Clostridium spp., Mycobacterium
clear round spore in them (Figure 15.2C). Simonsiella spp. form large characteristic
multicellular units called trichomes (Figure 15.2D). Trichomes are large, oval and
flat in shape. Long, rod-shaped, bacterial cells bind together along their long sides
to form subunits of perhaps 12-20 rods
(A)
（B)
(C)
(D)
17.46 μm
Figure 15.2 Some bacteria have sufficiently unique morphology to allow identification
(A) Streptococcus is a coccoid bacterium typically found in chains (arrows). (B) A mixed
bacterial population is more suggestive of secondary infection. Seven chains of streptococci
are present in a neutrophil (arrow). Different sized rods can also be seen free and within
neutrophils. The rods cannot be speciated. (C) Hepatic aspirate from a dog with a neutrophil
containing clostridial type rods. Ciostridium spp. are large spore-forming bacteria. The clear
wide. (D) Simonsieffa is a huge bacterium in which 15-20 rod-shaped bacterial cells fasten to
each other's long axis to form characteristic multicellular subunits called trichomes. These
two trichomes on an epithelial cell from a dog's mouth are 17.46 μm long. (Continued)
252
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(E)
（F)
(G)
(H)
Figure 15.2
(Continued)
(E) Mycobacteria are rod-shaped bacteria characterised by a lack of staining (negative
staining). Note the white rods in the proteinaceous background and in the macrophage.
Mycobacteria have a waxy coat that prevents penetration of the stain. Mycobacterium spp.
 are intracellular organisms which proliferate in large numbers in macrophages. Note also that
an eosinophilic response is evident here. (F) Actinomyces is a higher bacterium that is thin and
branches. This filamentous bacterium (arrows) may be differentiated from branching fungal
hyphae which have two distinct cell walls on each side of the organism. Actinomyces is much
thinner. Staining along the filament is uneven and described as *beaded'. The neutrophils in this
 smear are very degenerate. (G) Some bacteria attach to a surface such as B. bronchiseptica
which are thin short blue rods (arrows) attached to ciliated respiratory epithelial cells in this BAL
of a dog. (H) Mycoplasma spp. are bacteria which lack a cell wall and thus are very
attach to the surface of cells such as this epithelial cell from the conjunctiva. (Continued)
Cytology of Selected Infectious Organisms
253
(1)
(J)
(K)
Figure 15.2  (Continued)
(l) Helicobacter is a spiral-shaped, 7-10 μm bacterium (arrows) commonly identified in gastric
samples from dogs. (J) Tyzzer's disease is caused by C. piiforme, a long filamentous organism.
Several parallel organisms can be seen within a necrotic equine hepatocyte (arrows).
(K) C. felis is seen in this ocular swab of a cat in the middle epithelial cell as several reticulate
bodies (arrows) containing several initial bodies (0.5-1.5μm dots). Chlamydophila organisms
to the edge of the epithelial cells.
Mycobacteria are unique in that they do not take up stain so they appear as
clear rods, which are negatively stained by darker material around them
(Figure 15.2E).
 Pleomorphic bacteria include Actinomyces spp. (Figure 15.2F). Actinomyces is a
branching filamentous organism but it also has diphtheroidal forms. These smaller
254
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
forms are short, straight to curved rods that may have clubbed ends. Thus, a pure
infection of Actinomyces may look like a mixed infection of filamentous and
smaller rod-shaped or coccobacillary bacteria.
Confidence in the conclusion that the bacteria seen are causing a problem in the
animal is greatly strengthened by finding them inside neutrophils (Figure 15.2B and C).
Bacteria are more easily identified in the clear cytoplasm of neutrophils than in
a background which may contain granular debris or in macrophages with
phagocytised particulate material. This suggests the neutrophils were attracted to
the bacteria and ingested them and the bacteria are less likely to be contaminants.
Bacteria are usually phagocytised by neutrophils and not macrophages, although
some intracellular types of bacteria, e.g. Mycobacterium spp., can survive and even
multiply in macrophages (Figure 15.2E).
Some bacteria such as Bordetella bronchiseptica (Figure 15.2G) and
Mycoplasma (Figure 15.2H) are found on the surface of epithelial cells.
(Figure 15.2l). Tyzzer's disease is caused by Clostridium piliforme is uniquely
found within hepatocytes of foals (Figure 15.2 J). Chlamydophila felis infection
in feline conjunctivitis
  is often  suggested by cytological examination
(Figure 1.5.2 K).
Fungal infections
The most common fungal infections detected by cytology are overgrowth of
yeasts such as Malassezia on warm moist surfaces in the ear or between the toes
(Figure 15.3A). Candida albicans also can grow on the skin (e.g. between folds of skin)
S ss   s  e    s  e 
form with a bud and cell wall (Figure 15.3A and B). C. albicans uniquely forms
Microsporum spp. and Trichophyton spp. are also common. These organisms form
hyphae that break into arthrospores (Figure 15.3C). As with bacteria, culture is
required to obtain a more specific classification. Dermatophyte test medium is
useful for identifying ringworm-type infections.
Systemic fungal infections usually involve yeast forms of fungi, and the inci-
dence of these infections varies greatly with the geographic region. Major sys-
temic yeast infections include blastomycosis, histoplasmosis and cryptococcosis
(Figure 15.3D-F). These infections are caused by budding yeasts which can
be identified by the size of the yeast, size of the base of the bud and other mor-
phological characteristics; for example, Cryptococcus neoformans has a clear
capsule and Histoplasma capsulatum is present within phagocytes. Sporothrix
schenckii is found inside macrophages and is very pleomorphic (Figure 15.3G).
Organisms which are round or spherical in shape include Prototheca,
 Rhinosporidium and Coccidioides. Prototheca is an alga that resembles a fungus
(Figure 15.3H).
Aspergillus spp. most commonly cause infections in the respiratory track.
Aspergillus is likely when septate hyphae with uniform width are identified
Cytology of Selected Infectious Organisms
255
(Figure 15.3I). Note also that many 'soil (saprophytic) or atypical fungi can cause
opportunist infections often secondary to penetrating wounds on the feet. These
organisms are classified as pigmented and non-pigmented fungi, and they vary in
      n   n   g
differ). Pneumocystis is now classified as a yeast-like fungus found in the lungs
often in dachshunds and Cavalier King Charles spaniels (Figure 15.3 J). Alternaria
is a common mould that is found as a contaminant in many cytological samples
(Figure 15.3K)
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 15.3
Fungal agents. (A) Malassezia pachydermatis infection in the ears of dogs with
chronic otitis. Maiassezia is a small oval-shaped budding yeast. Malassezia in cats may be
smaller and even be mistaken for large Staphyfococcus organisms. A typical pattern is
shown here (arrow) with large numbers of yeast on thin squames without neutrophil
exudation. (B) C. aibicans can form pseudohyphae (arrow) or look like budding yeast (inset).
This sample is a corneal scrape from a dog with keratitis. (C) Dermatophyte infection of a
dog's skin. There are many septate hyphae growing on some squames. The hyphae are
developing into chains of rectangular arthrospores (arrows). This was not cultured but could
be Trichophyton mentagrophytes or Microsporum canis. (Continued)
256
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(D)
（E
(F)
Figure 15.3 (Continued)
(D) Pulmonary aspirate from a dog. Blastomycosis (Blastomyces dermatitidis) is a systemic
yeast infection. Note the thick cell wall and broad-based bud (arrow). Neutrophils in the
background are out of focus but smaller than each of the two daughter yeasts. Each
neutrophil in this canine blood smear. The organism is about 1-4 μm in diameter.
(F) Aspirate from a throat abscess in a cat. Cryptococcosis (C. neoformans) is a systemic
yeast infection. Note at least three budding yeasts with a narrow-based bud. Cryptococcus
organisms have a moderately thick, clear capsule around the yeast. (Continued)
Cytology of Selected Infectious Organisms
257
(H)
(G)
Figure 15.3 (Continued)
(G) S. schencki is a pleomorphic yeast and is classically cigar-shaped. Small budding
forms are in the cytoplasm of this macrophage. This was pus from an infected declaw
operation site in a cat. (H) Prototheca spp. are spherical organisms with a cell wallthat
look like yeasts but are algae. Six Prototheca organisms from a rectal lesion in a dog can
be seen here. They are about 1.5-2 times the diameter of an erythrocyte and have a
granular internal texture. (l) Aspergillosis is the most common infection involving a hyphal
form of fungus. It most frequently causes infection in the respiratory tract. Aspergilfus
spp. have septate hyphae of fairly uniform thickness. The younger, actively growing parts
at the ends of the hyphae are thicker, have rounded ends and take up stain better. Many
bacteria are also visible in the background.(Continued)
258
Manual of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat
(J)
(K)
Figure 15.3 (Continued)
(J) Pneumocystis spp. in this BAL has free trophozoites (2-7 μm, short arrows) and cysts
(long arrow) with four to eight internal bodies. (K) Atermaria is a mould with thick golden-
coloured hyphae and characteristic club-shaped macroconidia. This photo illustrates several
macroconidia. Aitermaria is a common contaminant of cytological specimens.
Protozoal infections
Protozoa are usually seen in cytological samples as single oval- to crescent-shaped
organisms with a thin cell wall and nucleus. Other stages of their life cycle are
caninum and Toxoplasma gondii (Figure 15.4A and B), so final diagnosis requires
 ancillary testing such as PCR and serology. The geographic area in which the ani-
mal lives often aids the diagnosis. For example, Leishmania spp. have a characteristic
rod-shaped kinetoplast (Figure 15.4C), and infection is well recognised in dogs
from Spain and Israel, whereas Trypanosoma cruzi (Figure 15.4D) looks quite sim-
ilar but is more likely in a dog from Mexico or Texas. Protozoa are often found in
macrophages, but morphological detail is often superior in free protozoa that have
been released from ruptured macrophages.
Parasitic infections
 Parasites may be suspected because of the presenting clinical or radiographic signs or
if an eosinophilic inflammatory response (e.g. in a bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) is
evident. If a parasitic infection is suspected, it is important to screen all slides with 4x
and 10x lenses for ova or larvae (Figure 15.5A and B). Fluid samples collected from
the animal should be examined with the naked eye for the presence of adult parasites
Cytology of Selected Infectious Organisms
259
(A)
(B)
(D)
(C)
Figure 15.4 Protozoal infections. (A) N. caninum is a pointed oval *banana-shaped'
protozoan found in phagocytes in this aspirate from the canine lung. The upper left neutrophil
contains two organisms. Morphology does not distinguish N. caninum from T gondi.
(B) 7. gondii in the abdominal fluid of a cat appear as pointed oval-shaped protozoa with a
nucleus within these neutrophils. Free organisms are also present. (C) Leishmaniasis is
common in Southern Europe around the Mediterranean basin and is a common cause of
ymphadenopathy in that region. This bone marrow macrophage contains about ten protozoa
with a thin cell membrane, round nucleus and a rod-shaped kinetoplast. (D) T. cruzi is a
protozoan which also has a nucleus and rod-shaped kinetoplast. It looks similar to
Leishmania but is rounder in shape with a larger, rounder kinetoplast.
such as Crenosoma vulpis (Figure 15.5C). Parasites are large, may be infrequent and
are easily missed if the examination is performed mainly under higher magnification
(45x or 100x lenses) of stained smears. Intact adult parasites may not be seen on a
smear, but crushed pieces of nematodes, flukes, tapeworm cysts or mites, etc. may be
identified. The remains of crushed adults and immature forms can appear as confusing
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
Figure 15.5 Parasitic infections. (A) Larval parasite likely Oslerus osleri from a BAL of a dog
30 eosinophils long). O. osleri is often seen in a coil, but this specimen is open, and the
internal detail of the parasite can be seen. Note the abundance of eosinophils around the
parasite. (B) Operculated (arrows) fluke-type ova of Amphimerus pseudofelineus in an
aspirate of a cat's liver. Ova are 25-35 x 12-15μm. (C) C. vuipis (unstained specimen) in a
BAL from a dog. The photograph shows the genital complex of a male adult. The golden-
coloured structure is the copulatory organ (gubernaculum). Adult males are 3.5-8 mm long
and about 0.3mm wide. Females are 12-16 mm long and 0.3-0.5mm wide. (D) Crushed
remains of Mesocestoides spp. in the abdominal fluid of a dog appear as a sheet of cells,
and many calcareous corpuscles(white mineralised bodies) suggest it is a cestode
(tapeworm). (E) Cysticercus is found in pericardial fluid of a dog. This has the head of a
Taenia tapeworm with crown of hooks. The parasite was later identified as Taenia crassiceps.
Cytology of Selected Infectious Organisms
261
Figure 15.6 Viral infections. Distemper inclusion bodies in canine neutrophils appear reddish.
They may appear grey and may be seen in erythrocytes. This was stained with Diff-Quick.
Inset: The inclusions in neutrophils of the same dog are very poorly stained with Wright's stain.
large aggregates of cells (Figure 15.5D). Eggs, oocysts and larvae are small enough to
identify intact on smears. Diagnosis is heavily based on in which organ of the body the
parasite was found, species of animal as well as the size and shape of the organism.
Cysticerci can sometimes be identified in body cavity effusions (Figure 15.5E). A dis-
section microscope with indirect lighting and low magnification is very helpful for the
initial classification of the parasite (e.g. nematode, fluke, mite). Note the 10x ocular
objective of the microscope may be used as a magnifying glass by removing it from the
microscope, inverting the lens so as to look in the opposite direction and examining
closely the structure (like a jeweller looking at a diamond).
Viral infections
Cytological diagnosis of viral infections in dogs and cats is rare in regions with
good vaccination procedures. Distemper inclusion bodies may be seen in leuko-
cytes and erythrocytes during the viremic phase in dogs. Figure 15.6 shows the
variation in appearance of intracellular inclusions due to type of staining.
Further Reading
General
Baker, R. and Lumsden, J.H. (2000) Color Atlas of Cytology of the Dog and Cat, Mosby
Inc., St. Louis, MO.
Cowell, R.L., Tyler, R.D., Meinkoth, J.H. et al. (2008) Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and
Cat, 3rd edn, Mosby Inc., St. Louis, MO.
Raskin R.E. and Meyer D.J. (2010) Canine and Feline Cytology, 2nd edn, Saunders Elsevier
Inc., St. Louis, MO.
Sink, C.A. and Weinstein, N.W. (2012) Practical Urinalysis, Wiley-Blackwell, Ames, IA.
Villiers, E. and Blackwood, L. (2005) Manual of Small Animal Clinical Pathology, 2nd edn,
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham.
Collection Techniques and Principles of Interpretation
Dunn, J. and Villiers, E. (1998a) General principles of cytological interpretation. In Practice,
20 (8), 429-437.
peritoneal effusions. In Practice, 20 (9), 501-505.
Villiers, E. and Dunn, J. (1998) Collection and preparation of smears for cytological exami-
nation. In Practice, 20 (7), 370-377.
Respiratory Tract Cytology
Dunn, J. (2010) Cytological examination of the lower respiratory tract in dogs and cats. In
Practice,32 (4), 150-155.
Gastrointestinal Tract Cytology
Bjorneby, J.M. and Kari, S. (2002) Cytology of the pancreas. Veterinary Clinics of North
America: Small Animal Practice, 32 (6), 1293-1312.
Weiss, D.J. and Moritz, A. (2002) Liver cytology. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small
Animal Practice, 32 (6), 1267-1291.
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytotogy of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
264
Further Reading
Endocrine Cytology
Bailey, D.B. and Page, R.L. (2007) Tumors of the endocrine system, in Withrow ( MacEwen's
Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 4th edn {eds S.J. Withrow and D.M. Vail), Saunders
Elsevier, St. Louis, MO, pp. 583-609.
Capen, C.C. {2002) Tumors of the endocrine glands, in Tumors of Domestic Animals, 4th
edn {ed. D.J. Meuten), Iowa State Press, Ames, IA, pp. 607-696.
Kisseberth, W.C. (2007) Neoplasia of the heart, in Withrow  MacEwen's Small Anima!
Clinical Oncology, 4th edn (eds S.J. Withrow and D.M. Vail), Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis,
MO, pp. 809-814.
Maddux, JM. and Shull, R.M. (1989) Subcutaneous glandular tissue: mammary, salivary,
thyroid and parathyroid, in Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat (eds R.L. Cowell and
R.D. Tyler), American Veterinary Publications, Goleta, CA, pp. 83-92.
Cytology of the Lymphoid System
Atwater, S.W., Powers, B.E., Park, R.D. et al. (1994) Thymoma in dogs: 23 cases (1980-
1991). American Veterinary Medical Association, 205, 1007-1013.
Bernard, A., Boumsell, L., Bayle, C. et al. (1978) Hand-mirror cells in T-cell lymphoma.
Lancet,2 (8093), 785-786.
Christopher, M.M. (2003) Cytology of the spleen. Veterinary Clinics of North America:
Small Animal Practice, 33, 135-152.
Cowell, R.L., Dorsey, K.E. and Meinkoth, J.H. (2003) Lymph node cytology. Veterinary
Clinics of North America:Small Animal Practice,33,47-67.
Day, M.J. (1997) Review of thymic pathology in 30 cats and 36 dogs. Journal of Small
Animal Practice, 38, 393-403.
diagnostic methods. Thesis, Uitg Rodophi, Amsterdam.
Lennert, K. and Mohri, N. (1 978) Histopathology and diagnosis of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas,
in Malignant Lymphomas Other than Hodgkin's Disease,Springer-Verlag, New York,
pp. 111469.
Mills, JN. (1989) Lymph node cytology. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal
Practice, 19, 697-717.
Teske, E. and van Heerde, P. (1996) Diagnostic value and reproducibility of fine-needle aspi-
ration cytology in canine malignant lymphoma. Veterinary Quarterly, 18, 112-115.
notyping of canine non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Unexpected high frequency of T-cell
Lymphomas with B-cell morphology. Experimental Hematology, 22, 1179-1187.
Thrall, M.A. (1987) Cytology of lymphoid tissue. Compendium on Continuing Education
for the Practising Veterinarian, 9, 104111.
Zinkl, J.G. and Keeton, K.S. (1979) Lymph node cytology - I. California Veterinarian, 33 (1),
9-11.
Zinkl, J.G. and Keeton, K.S. (1979) Lymph node cytology - Il. California Veterinarian, 33
{4),20-23
Zinkl, JG. and Keeton, K.S. (1981) Lymph node cytology - IIl, Neoplasia. Californid
Veterinarian,35 {5), 20-23.
Cerebrospinal Fluid
Vernau, W., Vernau, K.A.and Bailey, C.S. (2008) Cerebrospinal fluid, in Biochemistry of Domestic
Animais, 6th edn (eds J.J. Kaneko, J.W. Harvey and M.L. Bruss), Elsevier Inc, Ames, IA.
Further Reading
265
Genital Tract Cytology
Dahlbom, M., Makinen, A. and Suominen, J. (1997) Testicular fine needle aspiration cytol-
Ogy as a diagnostic tool in dog infertility. Journal of Small Animal Practice, 38, 506-512.
Hiemstra, M., Schaefers-Okkens, A.C., Teske, E. et al. (2001) The reliability of vaginal cytol-
Ogy in determining the optimal mating time in the bitch. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd, 126,
685-689.
Kraft, M., Brown, H.M. and LeRoy, B.E. (2008) Cytology of the canine prostate. Irish
Veterinary Journal, 61, 320-324.
Moxon, R., Copley, D. and England, G.C.W. (2010) Quality assurance of canine vaginal
cytology: a preliminary study. Theriogenology, 74, 479-485.
Powe, R., Canfield, PJ. and Martin, PA. (2004) Evaluation of the cytologic diagnosis of
canine prostatic disorders. Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 33, 150-154.
Santos, M., Marcos, R. and Caniatti, M. (2010) Cytologic study of normal canine testis.
Theriogenology,73, 208-214.
Note: Page numbers in italics refer to Figures; those in bold to Tables
abscess
bacterial infections
anal sac, 58, 60
Actinomryces spp., 251, 252, 253
cutaneous, 58, 60
Bordetella bronchiseptica,252,254
prostatitis and prostatic, 218-19, 219
Chlamydopbila felis,253,254
retrobulbar, 160
Clostridium spp., 251, 253, 254
adenocarcinomas, 65, 65-6, 240, 241,
Escherichia coli, 247, 249
242
gram staining, 250
 adrenal glands
Helicobacter spp., 253
adrenocortical tumours, 204, 206
identification, 254
C-cell carcinomas, 204
Mycobacterium spp., 252, 252
clinical findings, 204
Mycoplasma spp., 251, 252, 254
hyperadrenocorticism, 204, 205
Proteus spp., 247, 249
neuroendocrine cells, 203-4
Simonsiella spp., 249, 251
pheochromocytoma, 204, 205, 206
Stapbylococcus spp., 247, 249, 251
tumour classification, 204
Streptococcus spp., 247, 249, 251
anaplastic carcinomas, 243, 244
balanitis and posthitis, 221
anaplastic giant cell (soft tissue)
basal cell tumours, 62, 63
sarcomas, 69, 69
basophils, 24, 25
anisocytosis, 22, 23
benign prostatic hyperplasia, 217, 218
anterior chamber
biliary neoplasms, 183, 184
collection techniques, 154, 155
bilious effusions, 98, 102, 103
indications, 155
blepharitis, causes, 140-143
inflammation, 155-6, 156-7
blood smear technique, 4, 5
neoplasia, 156
body cavity effusions (see effusions)
normal cell types, 155
breeding management (see vagina,
uveitis, 154, 154
breeding management)
antinuclear antibodies, 118
bronchoalveolar lavage, 76-7, 85, 86
anucleated keratinised squames, 57, 58
brushings, 7, 8
 apocrine gland adenocarcinomas, anal
sac,65,65-6
Candida albicans pseudohyphae, 254, 255
arthritis, 118-22
cellular pleomorphism, 240, 241, 242
aspiration technique, 2 (see also
centroblastic lymphoma, 45-6, 46
fine-needle aspirates)
centrocytic lymphoma, 44, 45
Manuat of Diagnostic Cytology of the Dog and Cat, First Edition. Edited by John Dunn.
@ 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
268
Index
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis
 cutaneous and subcutaneous lesions
 antibody/antigen tests/PCR testing, 138
neoplastic lesions
contraindications
cutaneous lymphoma, 72-3, 73
cell counts, 131-2, 132,133
epithelial tumours, 62-3, 63-5,
collection sites and technique, 127,
65-6
128-30, 129, 130
mast cell tumours, 70-72, 71-2
CSF cytology, 132, 133
mesenchymal tumours, 66, 67-9,
CSF protein concentration, 131
68-9
gross appearance, 131
round cell tumours, 70, 70
processing, 131
non-neoplastic lesions
eosinophilic pleocytosis, 137, 138
cutaneous abscesses, 58, 60
haemorrhage, 133, 134
eosinophilic granuloma complex,
mononuclear pleocytosis, 135, 136,
58,60
137, 137
epidermal/follicular inclusion cysts,
myelin, 137, 138
58,61
neutrophilic pleocytosis, 135, 136
foreign body reactions, 61, 62
non-inflammatory cells, 134, 135
haematomas, 58, 59
ceruminous gland carcinomas, 66, 66
hygromas, 61, 61
chemoreceptor tumours
pemphigus foliaceus, 62, 62
heart-base tumour, 209, 209
sialocoeles, 58,59
liver nodule, 211, 211
normal cell types, 57, 58
thoracic ra diographs, 209, 210
 cutaneous lymphoma
cholesterol crystals, 240, 241
mycosis fungoides, 72
chylous effusions, 95-6, 99
Cysts
conjunctiva and cornea
epidermal/follicular inclusion, 58, 61
collection techniques
mammary gland
 conjunctival snip biopsies, 150, 152
cholesterol crystals, 240, 241
exfoliative cytology, 149, 151
inflammation, bacterial infection, 240,
swabs, 148
241
eosinophilic keratitis, 151, 153
lipid vacuoles and pigment, 240,
indications, 148, 149
240
infectious agents
prostatic and paraprostatic, 218, 218
Chlamydopbila felis, 149, 153
cytological interpretation
fungal keratitis, 150, 153
cell populations, 26, 27
Mycoplasma spp., 153
cystic structures, 30-31, 31
inflammation, 153, 153
discrete round cells, 28, 29-30
neoplasia, 154
epithelial cells, 26, 27
normal cell types
mesenchymal cells, 27, 28
contamination, 150
criteria for malignancy, 22, 23, 24, 24,
 goblet cells and columnar epithelial
25,25
cells, 150, 152
dysplasia, 25-6,26
nucleated squamous epithelial cells,
inflammatory response
150, 152
eosinophilic inflammation, 20, 21
pannus, 153,153
lymphocytic/plasmacytic
contamination
inflammation, 20, 22
Alternaria, 255,258
macrophage-rich/granulomatous
blood, 124, 125
inflammation, 20, 20
oropharyngeal, 82, 83
mixed inflammation, 21
ultrasound gel, 13, 13, 14
neutrophilic inflammation, 18, 19
unstained sediment, 165, 166
neoplasia, 21,22
crushing artefacts, 12, 12
normal/hyperplastic tissue, 21, 22
Index
269
degenerative joint disease, 122, 123-4
adenocarcinomas, 240, 241, 242
dermatopathic lymphadenopathy, 36, 38
anaplastic carcinomas, 243, 244
dermatophytosis, 141, 148
ductular carcinomas, 244
discrete round cells, 28, 29-30
inflammatory carcinoma, 244, 244
distemper inclusion bodies, 261, 261
inguinal lymph node, 243, 243
drying artefacts, 15, 15
metastases detection, 243, 243
ductular carcinomas, 244
signet ring cells, 242
dysplasia, 25-6, 26
squamous cell carcinomas, 240, 244
dysplastic epithelial cells, 87
epithelial-lymphocytic thymomas, 55, 55
erosive arthropathies, 121-2
effusions
erythrophagocytosis, 50, 51
aetiological classification
Escherichia coli, 236, 236
bilious effusions, 98, 102, 103
exocrine pancreas (see pancreas)
chylous effusions, 95-6, 99
extramedullary erythropoiesis, 50, 51
eosinophilic effusions, 102, 104, 104
extramedullary haemopoiesis, 179, 179
exudates, 92-4, 95, 96,97-8
exudates, 92-4, 95, 96,97-8
feline infectious peritonitis, 99, 101,
eye and adnexal structures
103
anterior chamber, 154-6
haemorrhagic effusions, 95-6, 99
conjunctiva and cornea, 148-54
neoplastic effusions, 104, 105-7
eyelids, 139-48
transudates, 91, 92-4, 94
orbit, 159-60
urinary tract rupture, 98
vitreous humor, 158-9
artefacts, 106-7, 108
eyelids
neoplastic effusions, 104, 105-7
biopsy, 144, 145
sample collection and processing, 89
blepharitis, 140-143
 traditional classification system, 89-90,
collection techniques, 139, 143, 144,
90
145
endocrine glands
eyelid skin scrape, 139, 143
adrenal glands, 203-6
hair pluck, 139
chemoreceptor tumours, 209-11
immune-mediated lesions, 147
pancreas (see pancreas)
indications, 139
thyroid gland, 195-203
infectious agents
eosinophils, 20,21,83-5,84-6
dermatophytosis, 141,148
eosinophilic granuloma complex, 58, 60
Leishmania amastigotes, 141, 148
eosinophilic keratitis, 151, 153
viral inclusions, 140, 147-8
eosinophilic plaques, 58, 60
inflammation, 146-7, 147
eosinophilic pleocytosis, 137, 138
meibomian gland squeeze, 144, 144
epididymitis, 214
neoplasia, 148
epithelial cells, 26, 27
normal cell types
epithelial tumours
columnar epithelial cells, 144, 146
cutaneous and subcutaneous neoplastic
keratinised squames, 144, 145
lesions
sebaceous epithelial cells, 144
apocrine gland adenocarcinomas, anal
skeletal muscle fibres, 146, 146
sac, 65, 65-6
basal cell tumours, 62-3, 63
feline infectious peritonitis, 99, 101, 103
 ceruminous gland carcinomas, 66, 66
feline malignant lymphoma, 47-8, 48, 49
perianal adenomas, 65, 65
feline mammary fibroadenomatous
sebaceous adenomas, 63, 64
hyperplasia, 236, 238
squamous cell carcinomas, 63, 64
female genital tract
mammary gland
 breeding management
acinar structure, 241, 242,243
breeding timing, 223
270
Index
female genital tract (cont'd)
inflammation/infection, 190
early luteal phase, 227, 229
lymphoma, 190, 193
early oestrus, 227,227
neoplasia, 190, 192
exfoliative vaginal cytology, 226-7
normal findings, 189-91
fertilisation period, 227, 228
smooth muscle neoplasms, 191,
oestrus,227,228
193
Ovarian remnant syndrome, 227-9
granulomatous lymphadenitis, 35, 36,37
pro-0estrus, 226, 226
infectious and inflammatory disorders,
haemangiopericytoma, 66, 67
224-5, 225
haemangiosarcoma, 52, 66, 68, 94, 104,
neoplastic disorders, 222, 225
182
specimen collection, 224
haemarthrosis, 124, 125
vaginal discharge, 224
haematoma, 58, 59
fibromas, 68, 68
haematopoiesis, 50, 51
fibrosarcomas, 68, 68
haemocytometer,131-2, 132, 133
fibrosis, 179,180
haemophagocytic syndrome, 52, 52
fine-needle aspirates
haemorrhage
aspiration technique, 2
CSF analysis, 133, 134
equipment, 1-2, 2
effusions, 95-6, 99
non-aspiration technique
intrapulmonary, 86-8, 87, 88
 needle syringe with air, 4, 4
haemosiderophages, 86-7, 87
needle-alone technique, 2, 3, 3
haemospermia, 217
transthoracic, 77
hair pluck, 139
Zyto-Gun, 3
heart-base tumour, 209, 209
foreign body reactions, 61, 62
hepatic carcinoids, 183
fungal infections
hepatic lipidosis, 179, 180
Alternaria,255,258
hepatocellular neoplasms, 182-3, 183
Aspergillus spp., 254-5, 257
histiocytic sarcoma, 48, 49, 185, 186
blastomycosis, 254, 256
hygromas, 61, 61
Candida albicans, 254, 255
hyperadrenocorticism, 204, 205
Coccidioides,254,257
cryptococcosis, 254, 256
immunoblastic lymphoma, 47, 47
dermatophyte infection, 254, 255
impression smears, 4, 6
histoplasmosis, 254, 256
infectious arthritis, 118, 120, 120
keratitis, 150, 153
infectious orchitis, 214
Malassezia,254, 255
infectious organisms
Pneumocystis, 255, 258
bacterial infections, 247-54
Prototheca,254,257
conjunctiva and cornea
Rhinosporidium,254,257
Chlamydophila felis, 149, 153
Sporothrix schenckii,254,257
fungal keratitis, 150, 153
systemic,254
Mycoplasma spp., 153
distemper inclusion bodies, 261, 261
 gastrointestinal tract
erythrocytes size vs., 247, 250
intestines
fungal infections, 2548
inflammation/infection, 191, 192
location, 247, 248-9
lymphoma, 192-4
neutrophils size vs., 247, 250
neoplasia, 192
parasitic infections, 258-61
normal findings, 191, 192
protozoal infections, 258, 259
stomach
sizes, 247,248-9,250
carcinoma, 190, 192
viral infections, 261, 261
Index
271
inflammation
immunoblastic lymphoma, 47, 47
bacterial infection, 240, 241
lymphoblastic lymphoma, 46, 46-7
conjunctiva and cornea, 153, 153
lymphocytic lymphoma, 42
eosinophilic, 20,21, 83-5, 84-6
lymphoplasmacytoid/immunocytic
eyelids, 146-7,147
lymphoma, 42, 43, 44
hepatobiliary, 177-8, 178
multilobated lymphomas, 47, 48
intestines, 191, 192
plasmacytic lymphoma, 42, 44
lymphocytic/plasmacytic, 20, 22, 178-9
macrophage-rich/gra nulomatous, 20, 20
lick granulomas, 58, 60
mixed, 21, 177-8, 178
lipomas, 66, 67
mycobacterial infections, 83, 84
liposarcomas, 66, 67
nasal cavity, 78, 79
liver
neutrophilic inflammation, 18, 19, 83, 84
ana plastic carcinomas and hepatobiliary
orbit, 160
carcinoids, 183
inflammatory arthropathies
extramedullary haemopoiesis, 179,
erosive,121-2
179
infectious arthritis, 118, 120, 120
filbrosis, 179, 180
non-erosive, 121,121
hepatic lipidosis, 179, 180
non-infectious arthritis, 120
histiocytic sarcoma, 185, 186
inflammatory carcinoma, 244, 244
inflammation, 177-9, 178,179
interstitial cell tumours, 214, 215, 216
lymphoma,183-5
intestines
mast cell tumour, 18s, 185
inflammation/infection, 191, 192
neoplasia, 182-3
lymphoma, 192-4
nodular regenerative hyperplasia,
neoplasia, 192
177-82
normal fndings, 191, 192
normal findings, 176, 176, 177
intrapulmonary haemorrhage
pigment accumulation, 181-2, 182
dysplastic epithelial cells, 87
steroid-induced hepatopathy, 180, 181
haemosiderophages, 86-7, 87
lymphoid tissues, 183-5, 184, 192, 193
neoplasia, 87-8,88
benign changes, 50, 50-52, 52
squamous metaplasia, 87
canine lymphomas, Kiel classification
centroblastic lymphoma, 45-6, 46
joint disease classification, 119
 centroblastic/centrocytic lymphoma,
degenerative joint disease, 122, 123-4
44-5, 45
inflammatory arthropathies
centrocytic lymphoma, 44, 45
erosive,121-2
feline malignant lymphoma, 47-8,
infectious arthritis, 118, 120, 120
48,49
non-erosive, 121, 121
immunoblastic lymphoma, 47, 47
non-infectious arthritis, 120
lymphoblastic lymphoma, 46,
46-7
karyolysis, 18
lymphocytic lymphoma, 42
karyorrhexis, 18
lymphoplasmacytoid/immunocytic
kidneys, 162 (see also urinary tract)
lymphoma, 42, 43,44
Kiel classification, canine lymphomas
multilobated lymphomas, 47, 48
centroblastic lymphoma, 45-6, 46
plasmacytic lymphoma, 42, 44
 centroblastic/centrocytic lymphoma,
function and morphology, canine and
44-5, 45
feline, 33
centrocytic lymphoma, 44, 45
histiocytic sarcoma, 48, 49
feline malignant lymphoma, 47-8,
lymphadenitis, 35-6, 35-8
48,49
neoplasia, 52,53-4,54
272
Index
lymphoid tissues (cont'd)
malignant mixed mammary tumours,
lymphoid malignancies, 40, 40, 41,
245
41-2
mammary sarcomas, 244
metastatic malignancies, 38, 39
ma stitis
 normal cytological appearance and
bacterial infection, 236, 236
benign changes, 33-4, 34
epithelial cells, dysplastic changes,
reactive hyperplasia, 34-5, 35
236,237
spleen, 49-50
foamy macrophages, 236, 237
thymus, 545, 55
non-degenerate neutrophils, 236, 237
thymomas,55,55
normal cell types
foam cells, 232,234,234,235
male genital tract
myoepithelial cells, 232, 234
penis and prepuce
pigment-laden macrophages, 232, 235
balanitis and posthitis, 221
sample collection techniques
penile and preputial neoplasia, 221-2,
nipple secretions, 232
222
solid and cystic lesions, 232
semen quality, 222-3
solid benign lesions, 238-9
prostate
mammary sarcomas, 244
 benign prostatic hyperplasia, 217-18
mast cell tumour
normal cell types, 216-17
azurophilic cytoplasmic granules, 70, 71
prostatic and paraprostatic cysts, 218,
cutaneous, 70-72,71-2
218
hepatic, 185, 185
prostatic neoplasia, 219-21
histiocytic-type, 71-2
prostatitis and prostatic abscess,
ma stitis
218-19, 219
bacterial infection, 236, 236
squamous metaplasia, 221, 221
epithelial cells, dysplastic changes, 236,
specimen collection, 213-14
237
testicle and scrotum
foamy macrophages, 236, 237
infectious orchitis and epididymitis,
non-degenerate neutrophils, 236, 237
214
meibomian gland squeeze, 144, 144
testicular tumours, 214, 215-16
melanoma, 68-9,69
mammary gland lesions
mesenchymal cells, 27, 28
adenoma,238,238-9
mesenchymal tumours
benign mixed and complex mammary
anaplastic giant cell (soft tissue)
tumours, 239,239
sarcomas, 69, 69
cysts
cutaneous haemangiomas, 66-8, 68
cholesterol crystals, 240, 241
fibromas, 68, 68
inflammation, bacterial infection, 240,
fibrosarcomas, 68, 68
241
haemangiopericytoma, 66, 67
lipid vacuoles and pigment, 240, 240
lipomas, 66, 67
feline mammary fibroadenomatous
liposarcomas, 66, 67
hyperplasia, 236, 238
melanoma, 68-9,69
malignant epithelial neoplasms
 microscopic examination, cytological
acinar structure, 241, 242, 243
specimens
adenocarcinomas, 240, 241, 242
lens, 12, 12
anaplastic carcinomas, 243, 244
smears, 10, 11, 12, 12
ductular carcinomas, 244
staining characteristics, 12, 12
inflammatory carcinoma, 244, 244
mitotic figures, 24, 24
metastases, 243,243
mononuclear pleocytosis, 135, 136, 137,
signet ring cells, 242
137
squamous cell carcinomas, 240, 244
mucus, 81-2, 82
Index
273
multilobated lymphomas, 47, 48
orbit
multinucleation, 22, 23
collection techniques, 159, 159
mycosis fungoides, 72
indications, 159
myelin, 137,138
inflammation, 160
neoplasia, 160
nasal ca vity
normal cell types, 159
inflammation/infection, 78, 79
osteosarcoma, 29
neoplasia, 79,79-80
ovarian remnant syndrome, 227-9
normal cell types, 78, 78
nasal flush, 75-6
pancreas
neoplasms
endocrine pancreas
anterior chamber, 156
immunohistochemistry, 206-7, 207
biliary, 183, 184
islet cell tumour, 207, 208
conjunctiva and cornea, 154
exocrine pancreas
 cutaneous and subcutaneous lesions,
histiocytic sarcoma, 186
62-73
neoplasia, 188, 188-9
effusions, 104, 105-7
non-neoplastic disorders, 186-8, 187
eyelids,148
normal fndings, 186-8, 187
female genital tract, 222, 225
parasitic infections
hepatocellular, 182-3, 183
Amphimerus pseudofelineus, 258, 260
intestines, 192
Crenosoma vulpis, 259,260
lymphoid tissues, 40, 40, 41, 41-2, 52,
cysticercus, 260, 261
53-4, 54
identification, 261
 metastatic malignancies, 38, 39
Oslerus osleri, 258, 260
nasal cavity, 79,79-80
Taenia crassiceps, 258, 260
orbit, 160
pemphigus foliaceus, 62, 62
prostatic, 219-21
penis and prepuce
stomach, 190, 192
balanitis and posthitis, 221
synovial fluid, 125, 125
penile and preputial neoplasia, 221-2,
urinary tract, 167
222
 neuroendocrine cells
semen quality, 222-3
adrenal glands, 203-4
perianal adenomas, 65, 65
calcitonin-secreting, 195
pericardial effusions, 105, 108
 neutrophils
pheochromocytoma, 204, 205, 206
inflammatory response, 18, 19, 83, 84
plasmacytic lymphoma, 42, 44
size vs. infectious organisms, 247, 250
pollen grains, skin scraping, 13, 15
nipple secretions, smear, 232
polyarthritis, 120-2, 121
non-erosive arthropathies, 121, 121
prostate
non-infectious arthritis, 120
abscess, 218-19, 219
non-neoplastic lesions, cutaneous and
benign prostatic hyperplasia, 217, 217-18
subcutaneous
cysts, 218, 218
cutaneous abscesses, 58, 60
neoplasia, 219, 220, 221
tosinophilic granuloma complex, 58, 60
normal cell types, 216-17
epidermal/follicular inclusion cysts,
squamous metaplasia, 221
58, 61
protozoal infections
foreign body reactions, 61, 62
Leishmania spp., 258, 259
haematomas, 58, 59
Neospora caninum,258,259
hygromas, 61, 61
Toxoplasma gondi, 258, 259
pemphigus foliaceus, 62, 62
Trypanosoma cruzi, 258,259
sialocoeles, 58, 59
purulent lymphadenitis, 35, 36
nuclear moulding, 22, 24
pyknosis,18
274
Index
reactive hyperplasia, 34-5, 35, 50, 50
sellotape imprint, 4, 6
renal disorders (see also urinary tract)
swab smears, 6, 7
carcinomas, 172, 172
sebaceous adenomas, 63, 64
inflammation, 170
semen
lymphoma, 171,171
collection, 222
mesenchymal tumours, 173
disorders of
neoplasms, 171
azoospermia, 222-3
nephroblastoma, 173
multiple sperm defects, 223, 223
respiratory tract
teratozoospermia, 223, 223
collection techniques
testicular degeneration, 223, 223
bronchoalveolar lavage, 76-7
evaluation, 222
cytological evaluation, 77
quality, 222
nasal flush, 75-6
Sertoli cell tumours, 214, 215
tracheal wash, 76
sialocoeles, 58, 59
transthoracic fine-needle aspiration,
signet ring cells, 24, 25, 105, 168, 242
77
spleen, 49-50
inflammation
splenitis, 50, 51, 52
eosinophilic inflammation, 83-5,
squamous cell carcinomas, 63, 64,240,
84-6
244
mycobacterial infections, 83, 84
squamous metaplasia, 87
neutrophilic inflammatory res ponse,
squash preparation technique, 4, 5
83,84
staining techniques
intrapulmonary haemorrhage, 86-8, 87,
Diff-Quik stain, 9, 10
88
equipment and stains, 9, 10
nasal cavity
May-Grinwald-Giemsa stain, 9, 10
inflammation/infection, 78, 79
method, 10
neoplasia, 79,79-80
new methylene blue (NMB) stain,
normal cell types, 78, 78
9,10
trachea and bronchial tree
 Romanowsky stains, 9, 10
mucus, 81-2, 82
and stains, 9, 10
normal cell types, 80, 80-81
staining characteristics, 9, 11
oropharyngeal contamination, 82, 83
Wright's stain, 9, 10
retrobulbar abscess, 160
steroid-induced hepatopathy, 180, 181
rheumatoid factor (RF), 118
stomach
rodent ulcers, 58, 60
carcinoma,190, 192
round cell tumours, 28, 29-30, 70, 70
inflammation/infection, 190
lymphoma, 190, 193
sample aging, 13,13
neoplasia, 190, 192
 sampling techniques
normal findings, 189-91
brushings, 7, 8
smooth muscle neoplasms, 191, 193
fine-needle aspiration, 1-4
swab smears, 6, 7
fluid samples, collection and handling
 synovial fluid
abdominocentesis, 7
 ancillary diagnostic tests, 118
body cavity fluids, 8
 collection, 111
hypocellular fluids, 8, 8
culture, 117-18
in-house sediment smear, 8
cytology, 115, 116-17
line concentration technique, 9
haemarthrosis, 124, 125
sample aging, 7
joint disease classification
thoracocentesis, 7
 degenerative joint disease, 122-4
impression smears, 4, 6
inflammatory arthropathies, 118-22
scrapings, 4, 6
neoplasia, 125,125
Index
275
properties
transmissible venereal tumour, 72-3, 73
colour and turbidity, 114, 114
transudates, 91, 92-4, 94
mucin quality, 11415
viscosity, 114
urinary tract
volume, 113
collection techniques
restraint, 112
bladder and urethra, 161
sample handling, 113
kidneys, 162
total nucleated cell count, 115
sample preparation, 162
total protein, 115
urine, 161
cytological evaluation
testicular tumours
neoplasia, 167
interstitial cell tumours, 214, 215, 216
urinary tract infection, 165, 166-7
seminoma, 214, 216
urine sediments, 163, 164-5
Sertoli cell tumours, 214, 215
rupture, 98
thoracocentesis, 7
uveitis causes, 154, 154
thymus, 54-5, 55
thyroid gland
vagina
calcitonin-secreting neuroendocrine cells,
breeding management
195
early luteal phase, 227, 229
carcinoma, 199, 202
early 0estrus, 227,227
colloid, 195
exfoliative vaginal cytology, 226-7
tosinophilic amorphous material, 197
fertilisation period, 227, 228
infltrating cervical mass, 199, 199
oestrus, 227,228
nodule, 196, 196, 197, 199
 Ovarian remnant syndrome, 227-9
 nuclear pseudo-inclusion bodies,
pro-oestrus, 226, 226
202,203
discharge, 224
tumours, 197
viral infections, 261, 261
trachea
vitreous humour
mucus, 81-2, 82
collection techniques, 158, 158
normal cell types, 80, 80-81
indications, 158
 oropharyngeal contamination, 82, 83
 normal cell types, 159
tracheal wash, 76
transitional cell carcinoma,219,220,221
Zyto-Gun,3