SECOND EDIMON
Handbookof
VETERINARYPAIN
MANAGEMENT
JamesS.Gaynor
WilliamW.Muir
MOSBY
LSEVIER
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
11830 Westline Industrial Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63146
HANDBOOK OF VETERINARY PAIN MANAGEMENT,
ISBN: 978-0-323-04679-4
SECOND EDITION
Copyright @ 2002, 2009, Mosby, Inc., an affliate of Elsevier Int.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or
any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher. Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health Sciences Rights
Department in Philadelphia, PA, USA: phone: (+1) 215 238 7869; fax: (+1) 215 238 2239;
e-mail: healthpermissions@eisevier.com. You may also complete your request online via the
Elsevier Sciencehome page (http:/www.elsevier.com), by selecting “Customer Support and
then ‘Obtaining Permissions.
NOTICE
Veterinary medicine is an ever-changing field. Standard safety precautions must be followed,
but as new research and clinical experience broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment
and drug therapy will become necessary. Readers are advised to check the most current
product information provided by the manufacturer of each drug in order to verify the
recommended dose, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications.
It is the responsibility of the licensed veterinarian, relying on experience and knowledge
of the patient, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient.
Neither the publisher nor the editor assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage to
gnd sy uoy surse auadod ro suos.ad
ISBN: 978-0-323-04679-4
Vice President and Publisher: Linda Duncan
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Anthony Winkel
Developmental Editor: Maureen Slaten
Publishing Services Marnager: Patricia Tannian
Senior Project Manager: John Casey
Designer: Andrea Lutes
Printed in China
Last digitis print number:987 65 4 32 1
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.elsevier.com|www.bookaid.org |www.sabre.org
ELSEVIER
BOOK AIN
Sabre Foundation
Int ermatiunal
CONTRIBUTORS
Steven C. Budsberg, DvM, MS, DACvS
Professor
Department of Small Animal Medlicine and Surgery
College of Veterinary Medicine
The University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia
NonsteroidalAntinflammatoryDrugs
James S. Gaynor, DVM, MS, DACVA, DAAPM, CVA (IVAS)
Director, Animal Anesthesia &Pain Management Center
Colorado Springs, Colorado
Definitions of Terms Descnibing Pain
Pain Behaviors
Other Drugs Used to Treat Pain
Local and Regional Anesthetic Techniques for the Alleviation of Penioperative Pain
Acute Pain Management: A Case-Based Approach
Chronic Pain Management: A Case-Based Approach
Cancer Pain Management
Peter W. Hellyer, DVM, MS, DACVA
 Assistant Dean for the Professional Veterinary Medical Program
Professor of Anesthesiology
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado
Objective, Categonic Methods for Assessing Pain and Anaigesia
Sandra L. Hudson, BS, MBA, CCRP
Owner and Rehabilitation Practitioner
Canine Rehabilitation and Condlitioning Center of Texas
Round Rock, Texas
Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat
Matthew S. Johnston, VMD, DABVP (Avian)
Assistant Professor of Zoological Medicine
James L. Voss Veterinary Teaching Hospital
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado
Clinical Approach to Analgesia inFerrets and Rabbits
Leigh A. Lamont, DvM, MS, DACVA
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology
Department of Companion Animals
Atlantic Veterinary College
Y
vi
CONTRIBUTORS
University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, Prince Edward lsland, Canada
α2-Agonists
Phillip Lerche, BVSc, DACVA
Assistant Professor— Clinical
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio
Pain Management in Horses and Cattle
Khursheed R. Mama, BVSc, DVM, DACVA
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado
Local Anesthetics
Patrice M. Mich, DVM, DABVP (Canine/Feline)
Resident in Anesthesiology
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado
Objective, Categonic Methods for Assessing Pain and Anaigesia
Darryl L. Millis, MS, DVM, DACVS, CRP
Professor of Orthopedlic Surgery
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
 College of Veterinary Medicine
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, Tennessee
Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation in Dogs
Craig Mosley, DVM, MSc, DACvA
Assistant Professor, Anesthesiology
College of Veterinary Medicine
Cregon State University
Corvallis, Oregon
Clinical Approaches to Anaigesia in Repties
William W. Muir Ill, DVM, PhD, DACVA, DACVECC
Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio
Physiology and Pathophysioiogy of Pain
Pain and Stress
CONTRIBUTORS
vli
Pain Behaviors
Phammacoiogic Principles and Pain: Phammacokinetics and Phammacooynamics
Drugs Used to Treat Pain
Selecting Anaigesic Drugs and Routes of Drug Administration
Acute Pain Managerment: A Case-Based Approach
Chronic Pain Management: A Case-Based Approach
Drug Antagonism and Antagonists
Pain Management in Horses and Cattle
Andrea M. Nolan, MVB, PhD, DVA, DECVA, DECVPT, MRCVS
Professor
Veterinary Cell Sciences
Institute of Comparative Medicine
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, Scotland
Quality of Life Issues
Joanne Paul-Murphy, BS, DVM, DACZM
Clinical Associate Professor
 School of Veterinary Medicine
University of WVisconsin-Madison
Madison, Wisconsin
Pain Managerment for the Pet Bird
Jacqueline A. Reid, BVMS, PhD, DVA, DECVA, MRCvS
Honorary Senior Research Fellow
Companion Animal Sciences
Institute of Comparative Medicine
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
 University of Glasgow
Glasgow, Scotland
Quality of Life fssues
Sheilah A. Robertson, BVMS, PhD, DACVA
Professor
Anesthesiology & Pain Management Section
Large Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida
Pain Management in the Cat
Narda G. Robinson, DO, DVM, MS, DABMA, FAAMA
Assistant Professor of Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado
Complermentary and Altemative Medicine (CAM) forPain Management
in Veteninary Patients
vili
CONTRIBUTORS
Bernard E. Rollin, PhD
UniversityDistinguished Professor
Professor of Philosophy, Biomedlical Sciences and Animal Sciences
 Department of Philosophy
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado
The Ethics of Pain Management
Richard A. Sams, PhD
Professor
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida
Phammacologic Principles and Pain: Phammacokinetics and Phammacooynamics
E. Marian Scott, BSc, PhD, CStat
Professor
Department of Statistics
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, Scotland 
Quality of Life fssues
Tami Shearer, DVM
VCA Sawmill Animal Hospital
Columbus, Ohio
Hospice and Palliative Care
Mary O. Smith, BVM&S, PhD, MRCVS, DACVIM (Neurology)
 Affliated Veterinary Specialists
Maitland, Florida
Glucocorticoids
Ann E. Wagner, DVM, MS, DACvP (Clinical Pathology), DACVA
Professor
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado
Opioids
M. Lesley Wiseman-Orr, BSc, PhD
Honorary Research Assistant
Companion Animal Sciences
Institute of Comparative Medlicine
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, Scotland
Quality of Life fssues
who have devoted their efforts to the alleviation of animal pain.
ACOMPANION'SPAIN
Labored into the world
Vibrant life ripped from flesh
Flung towards days of wagging ease.
Comfort razed in an instant
A shroudedattack within
Writhe, recoit
Stifled whimper
Not too close! Trust growls distant
Flee, retreat, chrl up close
Wrapped tight while hope trermors.
Pleading glance;lightswane and ebb
The tearless eye reveals nature's sting
Or stoic sonis,
Bearing it wisely
Grasping on instinct
Eased by the graciousness of man
Or Mercy.
-Kristine J.McComis
PREFACE
The second edition of this handbook was developed after considering the
suggestions and ideas of many veterinarians and veterinary students who
had used the first edition. The second edition contains updated drugs,
doses, and protocols and incorporates a complete revision and expansion
in a number of areas. New chapters cover pain relief, specifically targeting
cats, birds, horses, cows, reptiles, ferrets, and rabbits. We have also
included dedicated chapters to physical rehabilitation in dogs and cats,
quality of life issues, and hospice care. This expansion has allowed us
to provide more complete information for the alleviation of pain and
suffering of many common species.
This edition of the handbook is designed for both busy practitioners
and students who need and desire accurate and clinically useful
information in a timely manner. We have worked very hard to provide
the most recent information and dosing.
As stated in our previous edition, the science of pain and its therapy
has garnered everyone's attention and interest during the past several
decades due in no small part to the literal exponential growth of
 n s    s
and the ever-increasing number of therapeutic modalities. Although
all veterinarians take an oath to use their scientific knowledge and skills
for “the relief of animal suffering," the treatment and prevention of
pain has only recently become a singular objective. Excellent textbooks
describing the neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, pathophysiology, and
treatment of pain have been published only since the early 1980s. These
textbooks, particularly The Textbook of Pain, edited by Patrick D. Wall
and Ronald Melzack, serve as the foundation of current understanding
and practice. The goal of this handbook is not to replace these textbooks
but to supplement them by providing a species oriented, rapid, clinically
applicable resource for use by all who witness and treat animal pain.
The handbook serves as a quick reference for pertinent physiologic
and pharmacologic information, including drugs and complementary
therapeutic modalities used to treat pain. Uniquely, this handbook also
provides an extensive array ofacute and chronic case examples that can be
veterinarians, professional students, interns, residents, and veterinary
technical support staff that are responsible for the day-to-day evaluation
xi
xii
PREFACE
and care of patients. Significantly and somewhat unfortunately, some
information has been extrapolated from the human experience. Ideally,
future basic and clinical investigations conducted in animals will remedy
this shortcoming, since most if not all therapies are tested in animals
before they are applied to humans.
We would like to thank all of the contributors for the time and effort
they have dedicated to making this handbook a reality. We also greatly
appreciate the talented efforts of Tim Vojt and Dr. Michelle Murray,
whose artwork has made written concepts visually understandable.
Finally we would like to thank all those who have contributed their time,
energy, and efforts toward improving the quality of life for all animals.
JamesS.Gaynor
William W. Muir III
VETERINARIAN'S OATH
Being admitted to the profession of veterinary medicine,
the conservation of livestock resources, the promotion of public health, and
the advancement of medical knowledge.
I will practice my profession conscientiously, with dignity. and in keeping
with the principles of veterinary medical ethics.
knowledge and competence
MED7
AS
Adopted by the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) House
of Delegates, July 1969
THE ETHICS OF
PAINMANAGEMENT
BERNARD E.ROLLIN
HISTORY OF ETHICS OF ANIMAL TREATMENT
For most of human history, civilized society has expressed a social ethic
consensus regarding animal treatment, albeit a minimalistic one. This
ethic, found even in the Bible, forbids cruelty toward animals, where
cruelty is defined as deliberate, purposeless, willful, sadistic, deviant,
unnecessary infliction of pain and suffering, such as muzzling an ox
when it is being used to thresh grain. Historically, the concept of cruelty
has been used in part to protect the animals but in equal measure to
identify sadists and psychopaths who, common sense and recent science
tell us, begin by torturing animals and graduate to harming people.
pain and suffering have been invisible to the anticruelty laws and ethic
they instantiate. Thus, practices such as steel-jawed trapping, hot iron
branding, castration without anesthesia, training of animals with severe
necessities of man"—do not fall under the purview of cruelty.
During the past 30 years, however, society has considerably
expanded the old ethic. For a variety of reasons, the public, at least in
North America, Western Europe, and Australia and New Zealand, has
grown increasingly concerned about a wide array of animal suffering,
well beyond what arises out of cruelty. Most evident, perhaps, are the
laws and policies that have been adopted to protect the interests of
research animals in Great Britain, the United States, the Netherlands,
Sweden, Australia, New Zealand, Switzerland, and Germany—all
aimed at minimizing the pain and suffering of animals used in science.
Laws and bills relevant to control of animal pain and suffering in all
areas of human use have proliferated all over the world, ranging from
2
CHAPTER 1 + The Ethics of Pain Management
the abolition or severe curtailment of confinement agriculture to
protection of dolphins from tuna nets.
All of this marks a major departure from traditional social concern
with cruelty alone. For example, in the 1890s, a judge refused to stop
a service club-sponsored tame pigeon shooting competition under the
anticruelty laws on the grounds that the persons participating were
upstanding citizens who were working for charity and who were no
threat to the community. In today's world, in most urban and suburban
jurisdictions, such an activity, if not stopped by the judge, would be
eliminated by public pressure or a city council mandate merely because
of the unnecessary suffering and pain incurred by the animals.
Today's social ethic is thus concerned first of all with eliminating
anticruelty ethic. As society has become more urbanized, more sensitive, and
less tolerant of animal suffering, the bar for what counts as cruelty has natu-
rally been lowered. Since 1986, some 40 states have elevated animal cruelty
rom a misdemeanor to a felony offense, and what counts as cruelty hias been
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) to bolster dairy prices by
buying a large number of dairy cows, the agency did not trust the farmers not
to rebuy the cattle and return them to their herds. In an attempt to forestall
such undercutting of the program, the USDA mandated face branding of all
purchased milk cows with a USDA identification mark. Dairy farmers (who
generally do not brand any part of the cow) and Humane Society members
    n    a s   
New York State on charges of cruelty. The judge ruled that the agency was
guilty of cruelty, for it had failed to examine or use alternative, less invasive
methods of identification. In earlier eras, although society always defined
 s s    ss,  s 
which was inconvenient, too expensive, or not customary to allviate. Today
that definition has changed radically, and increasingly, when someone says
that “unnecessary suffering" is unacceptable, he or she means suffering that
is possible, if inconvenient, to alleviate. Necessary suffering, then, is suffering
that is impossible to alleviate. In another era, it might have been considered
acceptable to train a horse by using considerable negative reinforcement.
Today, because our sensitivities and expertise in training have increased, we
are aware that positive reinforcement can accomplish more than negative
reinforcement. Thus someone who beats a horse severely in the process of
training is likely to be seen as cruel by society in general, even if some of his
or her peers endorse such training methods.
Today, society is far less willing to tolerate animal pain and suffering in
any area of animal use, regardless of whether such use is seen as frivolous
4
PART ONE·Principles of PainManagement
(and hence possible to eliminate) or as essential to human well-being, as
in the case of research and agriculture (and hence not seen as possible
to eliminate), but traditionally exempt from the purview of anticruelty
laws. These latter uses have elicited new ethical principles in the form
of legislation (ethics “written large,” as Plato said) aimed at minimizing
animal pain and suffering attendant on these activities.
For example, consider the 1985 federal laboratory animal laws. On
one hand, society realized that researchers are not cruel and yet also saw
that some pain, suffering, and death must inevitably and necessarily
accompany the study of disease, toxicity, new surgical procedures, and
stress. On the other hand, society was unwilling to forsake the benefits
of biomedicine, despite the inevitability of some animal suffering, and
thus would not forbid animal experimentation. However, society also
   sq a   s n  u 
animals used in research. This belief was evident when it was discovered,
for example, that analgesics were rarely used, social animals such as
chimpanzees were housed in tiny individual cages, and atrocities were
documented. Society acted to “write large" in law its moral commitment
to the best possible treatment of animals consonant with biomedical use
by mandating pain control, eliminating multiple use, preventing the
administration of paralytic agents without anesthetics, and providing
enrichedenvironments.
The key moral concept encoded in the 1985 amendments to the Animal
Welfare Act and in the National Institutes of Health Reauthorization
Act—the latter putting the National Institutes of Health Guidelines
for Laboratory Animal Care and Use into law—is the need to control
laboratory animal pain not directly required by the nature of the research
(for example, pain research). In some countries, such as Great Britain,
the research must be terminated if the animal experiences intractable
pain. In the United States, such a move depends on the discretion of
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, which may move to
stop research under conditions of uncontrollable pain but need not do
so. However the laws are written, it is manifest that society wants to see
federal law, the highest law ofthe land, it therefore becomes the standard
of practice for veterinary medicine. The ethic embodied in the laboratory
animal laws has or will have ramifications for all veterinary practice.
The same point about minimizing pain and suffering holds true for
but as the 1965 British Brambell Commission stated, they also wish
to see animals live decent lives, such as those provided by husbandry
agriculture. Industrialized agriculture grew without people explicitly
CHAPTER 1 + The Ethics of Pain Management
realizing what it entailed. As soon as people did (e.g-, in Great Britain
and Sweden), laws were passed that underscored public commitment
to decent lives for animals; abolished sow stalls, veal crates, and battery
cages; and required pain control for management procedures.
Research is seen by society as essential to human life, and animal
 a sosd sso s o an m sa s s si a
prepared to be vegetarians). Thus society uses the new ethic to shape
these activities. Horse tripping, tame pigeon shoots, and dog fighting are
not seen as essential or desirable by most citizens but are seen to cause
animal suffering; therefore, society has moved to abolish them.
ROLE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE
IN PAIN CONTROL
This ethic suggests that a fundamental role for veterinary medicine in
society is finding modalities to control pain and suffering in the use of
animals because such control seems to be the main point of the new ethic
and the laws it has engendered. The track record of veterinary medicine
in this area is not good, however. The reasons for this neglect are worth
detailing because few veterinarians have actively thought them through.
First, in the twentieth century, human and veterinary medicine became
increasingly science-based,essentiallyperceived as applied biologic science,
with physics and chemistry serving as the exemplar of ideal science. In this
light, emphasis on the individual and idiosyncratic aspects of a disease
universal captured in medical science. Second, in keeping with an ideologic
emphasis on science dealing only with what is testable and observable,
talk of subjective states, such as pain and suffering, tended to disappear as
unscientific. Even psychology became the science of observable behavior.
Third, physicians and veterinarians measured success by prolonging life
or function, focusing on quantity of life rather than quality of life and
emphasizing cure rather than care because quality is difficult to measure
and impossible to quantify. Pain became more of a concern to the patient
than to the clinician. Several articles by Frank McMillan',2 have eloquently
documented the untoward effects of this attitude in veterinary medicine.
Thus, in essence, control of pain became increasingly irrelevant in scientific
medicine, a tendency that unfortunately continues to this day.
The most dramatic and egregious example ofthe supposed irrelevance of
pain in the history of human medicine is the failure to control pain in 80% of
human patients with cancer, even though 90% of such pain is controllable
Equally horrifying is the fact that until the late 1980s, neonatal surgeons
regularly performed open heart surgery on newborns after administration of
PART ONE·Principles of PainManagement
paralytic drugs and still perform a variety of procedures from colonoscopy
       n   s p
nonanesthetic, nonanalgesic amnesiacs such as short-acting benzodiazepines
(diazepam [Valium] and midazolam [Versed, Dormicum]).
If human medicine was cavalier in dealing with pain and suffering
in its patients during most of the twentieth century (the term suffering
does not even appear in medical dictionaries), this is even more true of
veterinary medicine because for most of the twentieth century, society
placed little moral value on control of animal pain.
Until the late 1960s, veterinary medicine was overwhelmingly ancillary
to agriculture, and the veterinarian's task was strictly dictated by the econo-
mic value of the animal; the control of pain was not of concern to producers
and thus not expected of veterinary medicine. This attitude is epitomized
in Merillat's 1905 veterinary surgery textbook? in which he laments the
almost total disregard of anesthesia in veterinary practice, with the episodic
exception of the canine practitioner, whose clients presumably valued their
animals enough in noneconomic terms to demand anesthesia
persistence of the Cartesian belief that possession of language is a
precondition for the ability to feel pain, a notion that until recently (2001)
existed in the 'definition of pain of the International Pain Society.
The denial of the experience of pain by animalsin veterinary medicine
was so powerful that when the first textbooks of veterinary anesthesia
(by Lumb,4 and Lumb and Jones5) were published in the United States
in 1964 and 1972, they did not list the control of felt pain as a reason for
using anesthesia and had no discussion of analgesia. When I went before
Congress in 1982 to defend the laboratory animal laws we had drafted, I
was asked by Congress to prove that there was a need for such legislation.
I did so by doing a literature search on laboratory animal analgesia in
that said that there ought to be papers on this subject, and the other one
summarizing in one page the scanty knowledge available.
Many veterinarians who are more than 40 or 50 years of age still use the
phrase chemical restraint as synonymous with anesthesia; some were trained
in the 1960s to castrate horses using curariform (paralytic) drugs such as
succinylcholine, which not only do not mask or diminish pain but probably
intensify it by the fear they create. Others erroneously speak of anesthesia as
sedation, although most sedatives neither mask nor diminish pain. For too
many years, ketamine alone was used in cat spays, despite the fact that it is
not analgesic for visceral pain. And though we know anecdotally that some
dosed with ketamine, this is not yet a concern in veterinary circles.
CHAPTER 1·TheEthics ofPain Management
7
Of equal concern are the ideologic rationalizations still invoked by
some (particularly older) veterinarians to justify withholding postsurgical
or posttraumatic analgesia from animals. These rationalizations
include the belief that anesthesia is more stressful than the surgical
procedure performed without anesthesia. Other beliefs are the following:
Postsurgical analgesics are not needed because animals supposedly will eat
immediately after surgery. Analgesics are not to be used because without
the pain, the animal will inexorably reinjure the damaged body part. Post-
surgical howling and whining are not signs of pain; they are aftereffects
of anesthesia. Anatomic differences, such as the presence of an anatomic
  n      s o n 
watch them behave normally after surgery. Young animals feel less pain
than older ones and thus do not need surgical anesthesia for procedures
such as tail docking or castration, which are performed with "bruticaine."
Analgesia deadens the coping ability of predators and thus is more
discomfiting to an animal than the pain is. Liver biopsies do not hurt.
Although adequate, even definitive, responses to this spurious
reasoning exist, they persist as barriers to pain management. One drug
company executive has even told me that, by the company's reckoning,
approximately one third of veterinarians do not use analgesia. This is
buttressed by a statement made by the executive director of one large
state veterinary association who expressed amazement that so many
veterinarians fail to supply pain control, even though it is easy to achieve,
lucrative, and causes remarkable changes in the animal's demeanor.
          
management. In a 1996 study, Dohoo and Dohoo° showed that
veterinarians' knowledge is limited and that what practitioners do know
is typically not acquired in veterinary school, although I suspect that
this is rapidly changing as society increases its demand for pain control
in animals. A variety of factors provide strong arguments in favor of
the idea that pain control is one of the chief issues facing veterinary
medicine.
THE CHANGING SOCIAL ETHICSAND SOCIAL ROLE
OFANIMALS
As previously discussed, society has become increasingly concerned
about animal welfare. Central to the new ethic is the realization that
uncontrolled pain and suffering probably represent the greatest harm
that can be visited upon animals and thus that control of pain and
suffering in all areas of animal use is a major moral imperative.
8
PART ONE ● Principles of Pain Management
In particular, the new role that companion animals play in persons?
lives militates in favor of client concern for their pain and suffering.
We live, particularly in urban areas, in a society that has become more
and more of what German sociologists call Gesellschaft (a mixture,
a haphazard, unconnected assemblage of persons) rather than
Gemeinschaft (a compound, an organic unity). One can be lonelier in
New York City than in rural Wyoming; where the distance separating
persons in Wyoming is merely physical, in New York it is psychological.
We have lonely divorced persons, lonely elderly persons, and lonely
children. In such a world, companion animals become bonded to us
 o   n    n o e d  
More than anything else, Hurricane Katrina demonstrated this new
relationship, when individuals refused to be evacuated without their
animals, thereby risking their lives. In such a world, animal owners
are sensitive to pain and suffering on the part of their animals to an
unprecedented extent.
NEW PHILOSOPHICAL REFLECTIONS ON ANIMAL
EXPERIENCE
Better philosophy than we have had in the past strongly argues in favor
of the view that animals have thoughts, mental states, and feelings.
 d s  n  ss  s s n n 
like ours, since animal thoughts and feelings are not mediated by
language, does not obviate the need for serious concern about their
pain, fear, and distress. Possibly, animal pain is worse than human
pain because, lacking language and sophisticated reasoning skills and
temporal concepts, animals cannot understand the reasons for and
causes of pain and thus lack the ability to hope for and anticipate its
cessation.
LAWS
as the major moral concern about animal treatment. The essence of the
1985 U.S. laboratory animal laws, originally the first laws in America
articulating the new ethic for animals, embody the control of pain and
distress as their major edict. Unfortunately, before the advent of these
laws, virtually no literature on animal pain control existed. Thus the
but also for animals in all other areas of human use, including farm
CHAPTER 1 + The Ethics of Pain Management
9
and companion animals. Countries such as Sweden have articulated
the need for pain control in farm animals. Treatment of companion
animals may be the only area in which concern for pain in animals is
not trumped, diluted, or submerged by economic considerations and
can be wholly realized. In the 20 years since the U.S. laboratory animal
laws went into effect, the literature on animal analgesia and its use has
now enjoy a literature that, according to my colleagues in anesthesiology,
numbers between 5000 and 10,000 papers. And the use of analgesia is
axiomatic to today's young graduate.
The laws are also helping to drive another revolution. The original
focused on pain, wisely realizing that overcoming ideology was of
necessity incremental. Now that pain control is well established, USDA
      s s,  n 
for the variety of other noxious experiences animals can suffer: for
example, fear, loneliness, boredom, stimulational deprivation, and
restricted movement. Ironically but predictably, many scientists to
whom pain is axiomatic express doubts about these other modalities-
so much so that when I addressed a conference on animal distress in
2004, I felt compelled to remind the attendees that I encountered the
same sort of agnosticism about pain 25 years earlier at a conference
that I was now experiencing regarding distress, and that 25 years hence,
the same degree of acceptance of these now alien concepts would be
found.
PREVENTION OFSUFFERING
If we keep these animals to give and receive love, as members of our
families, we have an insurmountable obligation not to let them suffer.
Equally important, it is now definitively known that uncontrolled pain is
not only morally problematic when allowed to persist in human beings
or animals, it is biologically deleterious. Unmitigated pain is a major
biologic stressor and affects numerous aspects of physical health, from
wound healing to resistance to infectious disease. One remarkable study
showed that when pain in rats with cancer was controlled with analgesia
versus not controlled, the rats given analgesia had 80% fewer metastatic
lesions. The conclusion is inescapable: uncontrolled pain dama ges health
and well-being and can even, if pain is severe enough, engender death.
Ironically, the new edition of Lumb and Jones's veterinary textbook?
stresses this dimension of pain management, a major salubrious change
since the publication of the 1970s edition.
10
PARTONE·PrinciplesofPainManagement
One of the unexpected consequences of ignoring pain and suffering in
human and animal medicine in the twentieth century has been the fueling
of the development of alternative, non-evidence-based, nonscientific
"therapies." To put it crudely, patients and animal owners have reasoned.
that if doctors do not worry about human or animal suffering, they will find
others who will. Also, many alternative practitioners approach human and
animal patients with empathy and understanding of the full significance of
pain and suffering. Unfortunately, however, compassion is not cure and is
only part of care. Recognition that a being is suffering is not alleviation of
that suffering, although it is surely a necessary condition for such alleviation.
If veterinary clients are drawn to alternative unproven therapies that may be
fueled by compassion but do not work to control pain, the animal may be
cheated of a proven modality for pain control, creating an intolerable moral
situation for the animal owner and a loss of credibility for veterinarians
because clients may not be able to judge when pain is (or is not) alleviated.
If veterinarians will not manage pain, they also risk a grave loss of credibility
among the public, who may then seek to remove the special status of
forces of the free market, at an incalculable cost in animal suffering-
MEETINGONE'SPROFESSIONALOBLIGATIONS
It does not appear that animals fear death, lacking after all the concepts
to understand, in Heidegger's masterful phrase, “the possibility of the
impossibility of their being." Yet they clearly fear pain. We urge death in
to believe that human beings also fear pain more than death, and it is often
of our medical armamentarium and with no absurd fears that they will
become addicted, patients would not seek euthianasia as much as they do
and would die with far more dignity, as the hospice movement has shown.)
It is thus reasonable to say of animals that letting them live in unalleviated
pain is the worst thing we can do to them. Ifthe veterinarian's raison d'etre
is, as is so often remarked, the health and well-being of the animals in his or
her care, then the assiduous pursuit of eliminating or at least managing pain
should be his or her top priority. The fact that it has not been so in the past
only makes it all the more imperative to make it so in the future. Further,
there is now a vast literature showing that uncontrolled pain is a major
stressor, retarding healing and increasing the likelihood of infection.
CHAPTER 1 + The Ethics of Pain Management
11
Sources of Information Regarding Regulations Governing
Animal Welfare
Animal Welfare Act and Regulations
Animal Welfare Information Center
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Agricultural Research Service
National Agricultural Library
www.naf.usda.gov/awic/legistat/usdafeg1.htm
AVMA Guidelines on Euthanasia (American Veterinary Medical Association, June 2007)
www.avma.org/isstes/animaf_weffare/euthanasia.pdf
U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Animal Care Policy
Manual
www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_weffare/poficy
Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare
http://grants.nih.gov/grants/olaw/olaw.htm
http://oacu.od.nih.gov/ARAC/tabiesbyspecies.pdf
PROLIFERATIONOFTREATMENTMODALITIES
During the past 2 decades, more and more treatment modalities that
were developed in human medicine have been exported to veterinary
medicine. These modalities include an exponential growth in oncology,
transplantation, and dialysis, with clients willing to spend essentially
unlimited amounts on their animals. This is good for veterinary
medicine and good for animals but raises new ethical challenges;
for example, managing the animals' pain and suffering under heroic
medical conditions, including pressing euthanasia on clients when
the suffering cannot be alleviated. The recently developed concept of
“pawspice"-hospice for animals—-is a double-edged sword, promising
state-of-the-art management of suffering but also presenting the real
risk of affluent clients’ extending treatment too long. Whereas once
veterinarians were primarily advocates to forestall clients? euthanizing
animals too early, they now must additionally advocate for animal
euthanasia in the face of clients’ wishing to continue treatment beyond
a reasonable endpoint.
REFERENCES
1. McMillan FD: Influence of mental states on somatic health in animals, JA VMA
214:1221-1223, 1999.
2. McMillan FD: Stress, distress and emotion: distinctions and implications for
animal well-being. In McMillan FD, editor: Mental health and well-being in
animals, Ames, Ia, 2005,Blackwell.
3. Merillat LA: Principles of veterinary surgery, Chicago, 1906, Alexander Eger.
12
PART ONE ·Pinciples of Pain Management
4. Lumb WV: Smmall animal anesthesia, Philadelphia, 1963, Lea & Febiger.
5. Lumb WV, Jones EW: Veterinary anesthesia, Philadelphia, 1973、 Lea &
Febiger.
6. Dohoo SE, Dohoo IR: Factors influencing the postoperative use of analgesics in
dogs and cats by Canadian veterinarians, Can Vet J 37(9):552-556, 1996.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Dohoo SE, Dohoo IR: Postoperative use of analgesics in dogs and cats by
Canadian veterinarians, Can Vet f 37(9):546-551, 1996.
Ferrel BR, Rhiner M: High-tech comfort: ethical issues in cancer pain manage-
ment for the 1990s, fClin Ethics 2:108-115, 1991.
Humane Society of Rochester v. Ling, 633f. Supp. 480, U.S.District Court, WDNY,
NY 1986.
Kitchell R, Guinan M: The nature of pain in animals. In Rollin B, Kesel M,
editors: The experimental animal in biomedical research,vol 1,Boca Raton,
Fla,1989,CRC Press.
McMillan F: Comfort as the primary goal in veterinary medical practice, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 212(9):1370-1374, 1998.
McMillan F: Effects of human contact on animal well-being, J Amm Vet Med Assoc
215(11):1592-1598, 1999.
McMillan F: Influence of mental states on somatic health in animals, f Am Vet
Med Assoc 214(8):1221-1225, 1999.
McMillan F: Quality of life in animals, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 216(12):1904-1910,
2000.
 Page GG, Ben-Eliyahu J, Yirmiyah R et al: Morphine attenuates surgery-induced
enhancement of metastatic colonization in rats, Pain 54:21-28, 1993.
Rollin BE: Animal rights and human morality,ed 2, Buffalo,1992,Prometheus
Books.
Rollin BE: Pain and ideology in human and veterinary medicine, Semin Vet Med
Surg (Small Anim) 12(2):56-60, 1997.
Rollin BE: The unheeded cry: animal consciousness, animal pain, and science, ed 2,
Ames, 1998, Iowa State University Press.
Rollin BE.: Some conceptual and ethical concerns about current views of pain,
Pain Forum 8(2):78-83, 1999.
 Rollin BE: Equine welfare and emerging social ethics, JArm Vet Med Assoc 216(8):
1234-1237,2000.
Rollin BE: The ethics of pain control in companion animals. In Hellebrekers L,
editor: Animal pain: a practice-oriented approach to an effective pain control in
anirmais, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2ooo, Van Der Wels.
Rollin BE: Science and ethics, New York, 2006, Cambridge University Press.
Rollin BE:An introduction to veterinary medical ethics: theory and cases, ed 2,
Ames, Iowa, 2006, Blackwell Publishing Professional.
PHYSIOLOGY AND
2
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
OF PAIN
WILLIAMW.MUIRIL
associated with nerve or tissue damage. The study of pain en-
compasses all the individual biologic basic sciences, especially
anatomy,physiology,pharmacology,and pathology. A functional
appreciation of each of these areas as they pertain to the generation,
transmission, and recognition of painful stimuli is fundamental to
understanding pain and pain processes. The following discussion is
meant to provide an overview of the important aspects of the nervous
system, sensory pathways, and pain processing. As in all areas of
biologic science, jargon is used, such as afferent (toward the central
nervous system [CNS]) and efferent (away from the CNS). Terms
are defined when first mentioned.Pain itself is usually described
in terms of a noxious stimulus, meaning a damaging or potentially
tissue-damaging stimulus. Another term frequently encountered
in descriptions of pain is neuroplasticity. This term implies that the
nervous system can be changed (shaped or molded), depending
on the environment (outside) and biologic processes (inside) that
are responsible for painful sensations. The neuroplasticity of the
nervous system should be kept in mind during attempts to assess
the severity of pain, especially severe acute or chronic pain, and in
the design of treatment protocols. Another term that arises during
discussions of pain management in animals is anthropomorphize,
which means to attribute a human form or personality to an animal.
Human nature is to project personal experiences and feelings onto
our animal patients because they cannot verbally describe to us how
they feel; however, it is inappropriate to attribute human feelings
to something not human. Alternatively, it is morally and ethically
appropriate to adopt and use an anthropocentric viewpoint when
assessing and treating pain in animals.
13
14
PART ONE + Principles of Pain Management
Perception
Cortex-
Thalamus
Projection
Modulation
Transmission
Transduction
Noxious stimulus:
Mechanical
Chemical
Thermal
(mechanical, chemical, thermal, electrical) are transduced (transduction) into
electrical signals that are transmitted (transmission) to the spinal cord, where
they are modulated (modulation) before being relayed (projection) to the brain
brain modulate sensory input, and outputs from the spinal cord regulate skeletal
muscle contraction.
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF SENSATION
Peripheral nerves can be thought of as an extension of the CNS, consisting
of sensory, motor, and autonomic nerve fibers. They are the electrical
cables over which sensory and motor information are transmitted. The
terminal ends of sensory nerve fibers recognize and transform (transduce)
that are carried (transmitted) to the dorsal horn of the CNS, where they
are immediately changed (modulated) and relayed (projected) to the
brainstem and brain. The signal is then integrated, recognized, identified
(perceived), and transformed (secondary modulation) into appropriate
remembered (Fig. 2-1).
TRANSDUCTION
The detection of innocuous and noxious information is accomplished
by specialized encapsulated and bare (free) nerve endings that transform
environmental stimuli into electrical signals called action potentials ( Table
2-1). These receptors vary in their sensitivity to mechanical, thermal,
15
TABLE 2-1
Important Receptors in Somatic Sensation
Receptor
Modality
NerveFiberType
CUTANEOUS AND
TOUCH
SUBCUTANEOUS
Pacini's
vibration
Ac,β
Ruffini's
 Skin stretch
Ac,β
Merkel's
Pressure
Ac,β
Meissner's
Stroking
Ac,β
MUSCLE AND SKELETAL
LIMB PROPRIOCEPTION
MECHANORECEPTORS
Muscle spindles
Muscle length and stretch
Ao,β
Golgi tendon
Muscle contraction
Ac.
Jbint capsule
Joint angle
Aβ
Stretch
Excessive stretch
A8
THERMAL
TEMPERATURE
Heat nociceptors
 Hot temperature
A8
Cold nociceptors
 Cold temperature
C
NOCICEPTORS
PAIN
Mechanical
Sharp, pricking 
A8
Thermal-mechanical
 Burning, freezing
A8, C
 Polymodal
Slow burning
C
and chemical stimuli (low- and high-threshold), providing a seamless
response to innocuous through noxious sensations.
The minimal stimulus required to elicit a transmittable electrical signal
(action potential) from a peripheral sensory receptor is considered to
be its threshold. The sensory receptors located on Aβ, A8, and C fbers
demonstrate a large degree of sensory overlap, providing for a continuum
of sensations. Once the threshold for a receptor is reached, stronger stimuli
stimulus, the longer the train of electrical signals produced (Fig. 2-2).
SpecializedNenveEndings
(e.g, Meissner's, Merkel's, Pacini's, and Ruffini's) in the skin, muscles,
are primarily concerned with touch, vibration, pressure, movement, and
proprioception. The information transduced by these nerve receptors
is conveyed to the CNS by Aβ nerve fibers. The nerve terminals of Aβ
fibers are normally responsible for transducing innocuous sensory
information.
16
PART ONE ● Principles of Pain Management
100
80-
bonse
60
Resp
40
20-
Threshold
2345678910
Stimulus intensity
FlG. 2-2. The pain threshold is the point at which stimulus intensity is just
The A8 and C nerve fibers terminate as free nerve endings in the
skin, subcutaneous tissue, periosteum, joints, muscles, and viscera. Free
nerve ending pain receptors (nociceptors) respond to low-intensity
(nonpainful) and high-intensity (painful) mechanical, thermal, and
chemical stimuli. The terminals of A8 and C nerve fbers are essential
for detection of all pain sensations. Approximately 75% of the A8-fiber
and 10% to 15% of the C-fiber nociceptors respond to low-intensity
stimuli. The remainder respond only to high-intensity tissue-threatening
or tissue-damaging stimuli. Some nociceptors respond only to intense
mechanical stimulation and are referred to as high-threshold mechanica!
nociceptors, whereas others respond to noxious mechanothermal
stimulation, and still others respond to noxious mechanical, thermal,
and chemical stimuli (polymodal nociceptors).
A8 Nociceptors.The A8 nerve terminals can be nociceptive or
nonnociceptive and are composed of low-threshold (<75%) and high-
threshold (>25%) mechanoreceptors and mechanothermal receptors.
The latter are referred to as A8 heat nociceptors. High-threshold A&
nociceptors respond only to tissue-threatening or tissue-damaging
stimulation. Many of the A8 nociceptors respond only to specific stimuli,
whereas others are polymodal and respond to mechanical, chemical, and
thermal stimulation. The A8-fiber nociceptors discharge at higher rates
than C fber nociceptors, providing more discriminative information
to the CNS, and are responsible for the pricking and sharp qualities
17
associated with the initiation of pain (“first pain"). Activation of A8-fiber
and C-fber nociceptors occurs during the generation of acute pain.
C-Fiber Nociceptors.Almost all C-fiber nociceptors are high-
threshold and polymodal. The C-fiber nociceptors are found in large
numbers in the skin, skeletal muscle, and joints. Although they are
abundant, fewer C-fber nociceptors are found in visceral tissues
C-fiber activation is responsible for second (slow-onset) pain and occurs
after the initial insult. Second pain is characterized by a burning, aching
quality and signals tissue damage and inflammation. The pain produced
by tissue damage and inflammation initiates self-preservation behaviors
(avoidance, guarding) and disuse. Tissue damage and inflammation
also intensify the sensation of pain (activate and sensitize nociceptors),
producing hyperalgesia.
Silent or Sleeping Nociceptors. The A8 fibers and C fibers
contain “silent" or “sleeping” nociceptors that can be activated by tissue-
damaging events.
TRANSMISSION
Sensory and motor electrical impulses (action potentials) to and from
the spinal cord, respectively, are transmitted by peripheral nerves.
Peripheral nerves are categorized according to their anatomy, size, and
mean conduction velocity (Table 2-2). Peripheral nerves contain afferent
(sensory) and efferent (motor) nerve fibers. The peripheral processes of
sensory nerves diverge to form multiple branches, ending in specialized
Nerve Endings"). The afferent fibers of peripheral nerves form the dorsal
root near the spinal cord. The efferent fiber from the spinal cord forms the
ventral root (Fig. 2-3). The area of the skin innervated by the dorsal root
is called a dermatome. Adjacent dermatomes overlap, minimizing sensory
deficits that may occur as a result of dorsal root injuries.
Once a peripheral afferent nerve is activated and the stimulus is
transduced into an action potential, it is transmitted tothe dorsal horn ofthe
spinal cord. Under normal circumstances, nonnoxious sensory information
is transmitted by myelinated Aβ nerve fibers, whereas nonnoxious and some
noxious information is transmitted by minimally myelinated A8 nerve fibers.
Noxious information is transmitted by unmyelinated C fibers.
Receptive Fields
The receptive field defines the area innervated by a sensory nerve fiber.
The receptive fields of high-threshold nociceptors consist of collections
of 2 to 20 spots, each with an area of less than 1 mm2. Receptive fields
18
PART ONE ● Principles of Pain Management
TABLE 2-2
Classification of Nerve Fibers
Group
Innervation
Myelination
Velocity (m/s)
Ac.
Motor to skeletal muscle
Myelinated
70-120
AB
Sensory: touch, vibration,
 Myelinated
30-70
pressure, proprioception 
Motor to muscle spindles
Myelinated
15-30
A8
Mechanoreceptors, thermo-
Thinly myelinated
12-30
receptors, nociceptors
B
 Sympathetic
Unmyelinated
3-15
 Preganglionic
C
Mechanoreceptors, thermo-
Unmyelinated
0.5-3
receptors
Sympathetic postganglionic
Nociceptors
are small on the face and head (1 to 2 mm?), are larger on the body
surface, and provide discriminatory capability. The receptive fields of
C-fiber nociceptors are generally much smaller than those of A8-fiber
nociceptors, and considerable overlap exists between A8-fiber and C-fiber
nociceptive fields. Nociceptive afferent nerve fibers from the thoracic
and abdominal viscera are sparse compared with cutaneous fibers and
constitute less than 10% of the sensory nervous input to the spinal cord.
Furthermore, the smaller number of visceral afferent fibers innervates a
 m a e ns s  e r 
explain the diffuse nature of visceral pain sensations.
DorsalRoot and Cranial Nerve Ganglia
The cell bodies of sensory afferent peripheral nerve fibers are located in
the dorsal root ganglia of the spinal nerves and sensory ganglia of cranial
nerves (V, VII, IX, and X). The nerve branches divide as they leave the
 p is a on a  q a qm og 
the other branch traveling through the formed peripheral nerve and its
divisions to reach the sensory nerve endings in the skin, subcutaneous
tissues, muscles, bones, and joints. These branches are called somatic
sensory fibers. Some of the sensory processes of sensory afferent nerves
accompany the sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves to innervate
the viscera and are called visceral sensory nerve fibers (Fig. 2-3). The
sa go  e sd u po is  jo soq 
and neurotransmitters that are important in signal transmission and
nerve cell viability. Among the more prevalent neurochemicals are
substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), cholecystokinin,
19
Spinal cord
Graymatter
Dorsal root
Aβ, A8, C
White matter
Dorsalrootganglion
From
brain
Sympathetic
ganglion
Projecting
Vertralroot
Sensory and
to brain
Aα
motor nerve
Visceral sensory
nerve,A8,C-0
Somatosensory
Motor nerve
nerves, Aβ, A8, C
Sympathetic
Reflexes,
Pressure
nerves
coordinated
Touch
movements
Proprioception
Muscle
Colon
Skin
Pain
toma
Joint
Bladder
Viscera
FlG. 2-3. A simplified illustration of sensory (visceral and somatic) nerve fibers
(Aβ, Ao, C) as they travel to the dorsal root ganglia and then via the dorsal root
fibers innervating the viscera travel with the sympathetic nerves, passing through
the sympathetic ganglia before reaching the dorsal root ganglia.
somatostatin (SOM), vasoactive intestinal peptide, bombesin, galanin
(GAL), dynorphin (DYN), endorphin (END), enkephalin (ENK), and
corticotropin-releasing factor (Box 2-1).
MODULATION
    u s 
suppressed) in the spinal cord. The spinal cord is divided into white
matter (axons of nerve fibers) and gray matter (nerve cells). The gray
matter is divided into three distinct regions: the dorsal horn, the
 intermediate zone, and the ventral horn. The gray matter of the dorsal
horn contains interneurons (interconnecting nerves) and ascending
neurons that receive, transmit, and project sensory information to the
brain. The ventral horn contains interneurons and motor neurons that
control skeletal muscle function. The gray matter of the intermediate
zone contains autonomic preganglionic neurons that mediate visceral
control and transmit information to higher centers.Primary sensory
afferent nerve fibers enter the spinal cord through the dorsal nerve
root and synapse with neurons in the dorsal horn of the gray matter.
20
PART ONE · Principles of Pain Management
BOX 2-1
Prevalent Neurochemicals that are Important in Signal
Transmission and Nerve Cell Viability
Bombesin
 Enkephalin
Calcitonin gene-related peptide
Galanin
Cholecystokinin
Somatostatin
Corticotropin-releasing factor
Substance P
Dynorphin
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
Endorphin
Many of the sensory afferent nerve fibers bifurcate, sending branches that
ascend and descend several spinal cord segments (Lissauer's tract) before
entering and synapsing in the dorsal horn. Sensory nerve fibers can synapse
directly with projection neurons in the gray matter, which relay incoming
sensory information to the brain, or indirectly with local excitatory and
inhibitory interneurons that regulate and modify sensory information
GrayMatter
The gray matter of the spinal cord has been subdivided into 10 laminae
function. Gray matter sensory neurons are basically of two types: (1)
have small receptive fields that are organized somatotopically and (2)
those that process low- and high-threshold information ( wide-dynamic-
range neurons), are nociceptive-nonspecific, and have large receptive
fields. Information from the various peripheral sensory nerve fiber types
(Aβ, A8, C) is transmitted to the various laminae, where amino acids
(e.g-, glutamate) and peptides (e.g-, substance P) activate a variety of
postsynapticreceptors.
● The gray matter of the dorsal horn contains projection neurons,
propriospinal neurons, and interneurons that relay sensory infor-
mation to the brain and activate descending control systems,
which control the sensitivity of dorsal horn neurons to excitatory
and inhibitory impulses. Propriospinal neurons transfer sensory
information from one segment of the spinal cord to the next and
ultimately to the brain, and local interneurons modulate (excite and
inhibit) and transmit sensory information for a short distance within
the spinal cord.
● The gray matter of the ventral horn contains interneurons and motor
neurons that control skeletal muscle activity.
● The gray matter of the intermediate zone contains preganglionic
neurons of the autonomic nervous system that control visceral
functions and transmit afferent information to the brain.
WhiteMatter
The white matter contains the axons of the spinal cord and has been
anatomically divided into three bilaterally paired spinal columns that
relay information to and from the brain:
● Dorsal columns: The dorsal columns are medial to the dorsal horn
and relay somatic sensory information to the medulla.
● Lateral columns: The lateral columns are lateral to the gray matter,
relay somatic sensory information to the brain, and contain nerve
fibers from sensory, motor, and autonomic control centers in the
brain.
● Ventral columns: The ventral columns are medial to the ventral horns
and are primarily composed of neurons descending from the brain
that control skeletal muscle.
Spina! Cord Laminae
Laminae I to VI compose the dorsal horn, lamina VlI composes the
intermediate zone, and laminae VIHI to IX compose the ventral horn (Fig-
2-4). These laminae extend the entire length of the spinal cord and fuse
cranially in the medulla. Lamina X surrounds the central canal ofthe spinal
cord The laminar anatomy refers to the location of specific cell bodies:
● Lamina I: The most superficial lamina, or marginal layer, of the
dorsal horn serves as an important sensory relay junction for pain and
temperature. Lamina I contains nociceptive-specific neurons, wide-
dynamic-range neurons, and projection neurons. This lamina receives
the majority of its input from sympathetic A8 and C fbers originating
in the skin, skeletal muscle, joints, viscera, and trigeminal structures.
Lamina HI (substantia gelatinosa): Lamina H is divided into outer (Hlo)
and inner (lli) layers, which receive afferent sensory information
predominantly from small nonmyelinated C fibers and thinly myelinated
A8 fibers that project to lamina I. Lamina II contains a large number of
second-order multireceptive or wide-dynamic-range neurons, almost all
of which are interneurons; this suggests the importance of lamina II as
a site for the modulation of synaptic transmission. Few visceral afferent
nerves terminate in lamina II.
● Laminae II to VI (nucleus proprius): Lamina III integrates sensory input
with information descending from the brain and contains neurons that
         
information from large-diameter Aβ fibers from the skin, which synapse
22
PART ONE ● Principles of Pain Management
Lamina
Name
Function
Marginal zone
Small (A8 and C) sensory Inputs:
Substantia
Sensory relay for pain and temperature.
gelatinosa
Lamina Il integrates information with Lamina I.
IV
Large (Aβ) sensory Inputs:
Nucleus proprius Integrates sensory input with information
that descends from the brain.
VI
VII
Clarke's nucleus
Thoracic and upper lumbar segments only;
or cell column
relays information about limmb position
and movement
Motor outputs:
Regulate skeletal muscle contraction.
X
Contain rmotor neurons innervating
skeletal muscles.
Input similar to laminae I and Il.
FlG. 2-4. The gray matter of the spinal cord is divided into functionally distinct
nerve cells (Rexed's laminae). The dorsal horn of the gray matter receives sensory
input from Aβ, A8, and C nerve fibers. The ventral horn of the spinal cord contains
motor nerves that innervate and regulate skeletal muscle contraction. The white
nerves. The dorsal column relays somatic sensory information to the brain.
The intermediate column contains sensory motor and autonomic nerve fibers
  n o  s os     
skeletal muscle contraction.
with low-threshold mechanoreceptors responding to innocuous tactile
and thermal stimuli. Lamina IV also receives some input from small-
diameter A& and C fibers in the skin, muscle, and viscera. Lamina V
predominantly contains wide-dynamic-range neurons, which receive
sensory information from Aβ fibers and sympathetic A8 and C fibers,
which synapse with neurons that project to the brain.
● Laminae VII to IX: Laminae VII, VIHI, and IX contain interneurons
that are important in regulating skeletal muscle contraction and limb
movement.
Laminae X: Lamina X surrounds the central canal and receives sensory
information similar to that received by laminae I and II.
Spina! Cord Neurotransmitters and Receptors
As stated previously, the dorsal horn of the spinal cord receives and
processes sensory information and relays this information to the brain.
A multitude of neurotransmittersincluding peptides (substance P,
CGRP,SOM, neuropeptide Y,GAL),excitatory(glutamate, aspartate) and
inhibitory (Y-aminobutyric acid [GABA], glycine) amino acids, nitric
oxide (NO), prostaglandins, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), endogenous
for transmitting peripheral information to spinal cord neurons. These
neurotransmitters act on excitatory (a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-
4-isoxazole propionic acid [AMPA], kainate [KA1], N-methyl-D-aspartate
[NMDA]) and inhibitory (GABA, glycine) receptors on neurons that
relay sensory information to the brain.
● AMPA, KAI, and neurokinin receptors: Most transmissions between
the periphery and dorsal horn of the spinal cord occur as a result
of glutamate acting on postsynaptically located AMPA and KAI
ionotropic receptors. Activation of AMPA and KAI receptors is
responsible for tactile sensations and, with neurokinin (NK) receptors,
the acute response to brief and tonic noxious (painful) sensations. The
activation of AMPA and NK receptors is believed to be responsible for
signaling the location, intensity, and duration of peripheral stimuli.
● NMDA receptors: The activation of ionotropic glutamate NMDA
receptors, caused by substantial and prolonged afferent input from A8
and C fibers, is responsible for the development of slower-onset and
longer-lasting pain states. NMDA receptors are involved in long-term
potentiation and central (spinal cord) sensitization. Their activation
is facilitated by the simultaneous stimulation of substance P-sensitive
AMPA and NK receptors, and the removal of magnesium from the
NMDA receptor channel.
● Metabotropic receptors: Activation of metabotropic glutamate
second messengers (inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate, DAG, NO), which
increase intracellular calcium levels, leading to increases in cellular
metabolism, potentiation in synaptic transmission, and alterations
and mGluR is believed to be responsible for integrating spatial and
temporal pain-related events.
· GABA and glycine receptors: Activation of GABA and glycine
receptors modulates and reduces (inhibits) the effects of excitatory
sensory input to the spinal cord.
Spinal Cord Modulation of Sensory Input
The complexityof neural inputs (peripheral, local, ascending, descending)
and networks (parallel, converging, diverging) within the spinal cord
suggests that sensory homeostasis is maintained by a balance of activity
tory influences from the brain. Although this description may seem overly
simplistic, the selective stimulation of peripheral afferent nerve input,
the release of local endogenous modulators of synaptic transmission, and
the activation of descending inhibitory pathways modify sensory input
and the response to a painful stimulus (Table 2-3).
24
PART ONE ● Principles of Pain Management
Modulators of Excitatory and Inhibitory
TABLE 2-3
SynapticTransmission
Modulator
Effect
EXCITATORY
 y-Aminobutyric acid
Inhibition
Opioid
Inhibition
 Serotonin:
5-hydroxytryptamine1
Inhibition
 5-hydroxytryptamine2
Facilitation
Norepinephrine
Inhibition
Adenosine triphosphate
Facilitation
Tachykinin:
Substance P
Facilitation
Neurokinin A
Facilitation 
Prostanoids
Facilitation 
 Brain-derived neurotrophic factor
Facilitation 
Kainate
Inhibition 
INHIBITORY
 Serotonin 
Facilitation
Norepinephrine
Facilitation 
Acetylcholine
Facilitation
Adenosine
Inhibition 
● Gate control theory (Fig. 2-5): The idea ofa gating mechanism for the
transfer of nervous system information was first proposed by Melzack
and Wall and suggested that low-threshold Aβ fibers and high-
threshold C fbers modulate the activity of inhibitory interneurons
located in the spine. Inhibitory interneurons normally reduce the
outputofspontaneouslyactiveprojection neurons, which relaysensory
information to the brain. Activation of the low-threshold Aβ fibers,
which normally transmit nonpainful stimuli, increases inhibitory
interneuron effects on projection neurons, thereby reducing the
transmission of painful stimuli to the brain.
 Endogenous opioids: Painful stimuli can initiate the release of
endogenous opioids (e.g-, ENK, END, and DYN). These chemicals
act at a variety of opioid receptors (μ, 8, k) to suppress nociceptive
responses in the periphery, spinal cord, and brain. One of the
effects of these chemicals is to inhibit the release of local excitatory
neurotransmitters, including glutamate and substance P.
● Modulators of excitatory and inhibitory spinal cord transmission:
Excitatory and inhibitory synaptic transmission are modulated in the
spinal cord by various neuromodulators. GABA, opioids, serotonin,
and norepinephrine inhibit excitatory synaptic transmission, whereas
25
Descending
inhibitory
control
C-fib
Inhibitory
Projection
To
Linterneuron
neuron
brain
Aβ-fiber
FlG. 2-5. The gate control theory is a simplified view of pain modulation in
fibers, which normally transmit innocuous sensory information (touch), activate
(+) inhibitory interneurons in the spinal cord, inhibiting projection neurons to the
brain. Note that the activation of A8 and C sensory nerve fibers, which carry
noxious inputs, inhibits (-) the inhibitory interneurons.
ATP, substance P, and prostanoids are facilitative. Conversely,
serotonin, norepinephrine, and acetylcholine facilitate inhibitory
synaptic transmission, and ATP is inhibitory (Table 2-3).
Supraspina! Modulation of Sensory input
Descending axons of serotoninergic and noradrenergic neurons from
the brain synapse with opioid-containing inhibitory interneurons. Once
activated by a stressful event (e.g, pain, fear, or hypoxia), opioid-like
analgesic effects are produced. Activation of these pathways is thought to
be responsible for “stress-induced analgesia." Interestingly and somewhat
 paradoxically, activation of these same pathways suppresses the release of the
inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA from inhibitory interneurons, leading to
latter effect is believed to be more important in chronic pain states.
PROJECTION
Nociceptive information is conveyed to the brain by bundles of neurons
(nerve tracts) that originate in the laminae of the dorsal horn. Some
controversy exists regarding the relative importance of the various
importance are mentioned.
ascending nociceptive pathway and originates from laminae I and IV to
26
PART ONE · Principles of Pain Management
VII of the spinal cord. This tract contains axons of nociceptive-specific
and wide-dynamic-range neurons, which terminate in the thalamus.
● Spinoreticular tract: Spinoreticular tract axons originate at locations
similar to those of the spinothalamic tract neurons but terminate in
the reticular formation (RF) and the thalamus.
●Spinomesencephalic tract: Axons of
the
spinomesencephalic
tract originate in laminae I and V and terminate in the midbrain
(periaqueductal gray region, limbic system, hypothalamus).
Spinohypothalamic tract: Axons originating from neurons in laminae
IHI and IV project information to the hypothalamus and ventral
forebrain.
PERCEPTION
The integration, processing, and recognition of sensory information
(perception) occurs in multiple specific areas of the brain, which
communicate via interneurons to produce an integrated response that
reflects the coordinated contributions of arousal, somatosensory input,
and autonomic and motor output (Fig. 2-6). Somatosensory modalities
take specific routes to the brain: the dorsal column-medial lemniscal
system and the anterolateral system. The use of several neural pathways
(redundancy) to convey information from a specific body part is called
parallel processing and helps to ensure adequate input to the CNS.
Neurons in the dorsal column-medial lemniscal system originate from
laminae II, IV, and V; ascend to synapse with neurons in the caudal
including touch, vibration, and limb proprioception.
●The reticular activating system (RAS), located in the brainstem, is
a critical center for the integration of these sensory experiences and
the subsequent affective and motivational aspects of pain through
projections to the medial thalamus and limbic system. The RAS
also mediates motor, autonomic, and endocrine responses. The
anterolateral system originates from neurons in laminae I and V,
which synapse in the RF of the pons and medulla, the midbrain
(periaqueductal gray matter [PAG]), and the thalamus. The PAG
and thalamus serve as relay points for sensory information transfer:
the former transfers information to the thalamus and hypothalamus,
and the latter transfers information to the cerebral cortex. The three
major pathways of the anterolateral system are the spinothalamic,
spinoreticular, and spinomesencephalic tracts (see “Projection"),
which are primarily involved in relaying painful and temperature-
related sensations.
27
Thalamus
 Cingulate gyrus
(lIntegration)
(Behavior, emotion)
Cortex
(Perception)
Cerebellum
Periaqueductal
gray
(Modulation)
Amygdala
Medulla
(Fear, anxiety)
Locus ceruleus
(Arousal, vigilance)
Hypothalamus 
HippocampusReticular form ation
(Autonomic)
(Memory)
(Antinociception)
FlG. 2-6. Regions of the brain that are linked to various functions and responses.
The thalamus serves as the central integrating and transmission point for pain
perception and subsequent responses.
· The thalamus relays information to the somatosensory cortex, which
in turn projects the information to adjacent cortical association
areas, including the limbic system. The limbic system includes the
cingulate gyrus (behavior, emotion), amygdala (conditioned fear,
anxiety), hippocampus
(memory), hypothalamus (sympathetic
autonomic activity),
and
locus
ceruleus
(arousal, vigilance,
behavior; Fig. 2-6). The caudal extension of the limbic system, the
PAG, receives descending information from the cortex, amygdala,
and hypothalamus and ascending projections from the medulla, RF
(including the locus ceruleus), and spinal cord.
● The PAG is considered to be an important relay for descending
facilitative and inhibitory (endogenous (
opioid) modulation of
nociceptive input. The PAG connects with the rostral ventromedial
medulla (RVM) and medullary RF, from which adrenergic and
serotoninergic fibers descend to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord,
inducing inhibitory or analgesic effects. Descending facilitation from
the RVM is thought to be a critical component of many chronic pain
states.
 Collectively, these centers process sensory information that elicits fear,
anxiety, and aggression and activate efferent pathways that mediate
autonomic, neuroendocrine, and
motor
(skeletal and visceral)
responses. Furthermore, all of these areas can be conditioned by
visual, olfactory, auditory, and somatic or visceral stimuli that prepare
the CNS for fearful or stressful (painful) events. The physiologic,
biochemical, cellular, and molecular changes that occur in response
28
PART ONE ● Principles of Pain Management
to stressful or noxious events emphasize the tremendous plasticity
of the CNS and highlight the importance of chronic stress in the
development of pathologic pain.
MEMORY
The memory of pain is shaped by several factors, including the animal's
behavior pattern, the environment, the expectation of pain, and the
intensity of painful events. The peak intensity of pain is the single most
to the ability of the nervous system to change or adapt its biochemical
and physiologic functions in response to internal and external stimuli
{including chronic drug use): the implication is that multiple minor
sensory events or a single major sensory event can change the stimulus-
response characteristics of the nervous system. Patients who have an
P           
to treat, and those patients in whom pain has been allowed to persist
for periods of more than 12 to 24 hours are less responsive to analgesic
therapy.
PAIN
Pain has been and remains difficult to define, both in scope and
consequence (see Chapter 4). The complexity ofits ubiquity is highlighted
by the myriad of neurochemical, peripheral, and central neuroanatomic
and biochemical events involved in pain production (Table 2-4). Pain is
but is the conscious experience of nociception, which is only partly
determined by the stimulus-induced (mechanical, thermal, chemical,
electrical) activation of afferent neural pathways. Pain encompasses
nociception—the perception of pain, suffering, and pain-related
behaviorsand is defined by the International Association for the Study
of Pain as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated
with actual or potential tissue damage, or described in terms of such
damage." The inability to communicate (verbally or because of altered
consciousness) does not negate the fact that pain may exist. Pain can
occur in the absence of input from peripheral nociceptors (e.g-, phantom
limb pain and CNS-induced pain) and depends on but is not limited
to somatic and visceral sensory input, conditioned environmental cues,
memory, and activity. In other words, pain is a homeostatic mechanism
that is not homogenous but represents a continuum of varied physiologic
and behavioral responses that are unique to each animal.
CHAPTER 2 ● Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain
29
Activation and Sensitization of Nociceptors
TABLE 2-4
("Sensitizing Soup")
Substance
Origin
Effect
Hydrogen ion
Damaged cells
Activation
Potassium ion
Damaged cells
Activation
Prostaglandins (E2)
Damaged cells
Sensitization
Leukotrienes
 Damaged cells
Sensitization
 Bradykinin
 Plasma
Activation
 Serotonin 
 Platelets, mast cells
Activation
Histamine
Mast cells
Activation
Substance P
 Sensory nerve endings
 Sensitization
Nerve growth factor
Sensory nerve endings
 Sensitization
TAXONOMY
Pain has been categorized based on disease (arthritis, pancreatitis, cancer),
anatomy (bladder,
pancreatic, back, orthopedic), general location
(superficial, visceral, deep), duration (transient, acute, chronic), intensity
(mild, moderate, severe), and response to manipulation (palpation,
response to commands, algesiometers). Each category attempts to
suggest potential causes for pain, its severity, and by association, the
most appropriate therapy. Although these categorizations are descriptive,
none of these methods identifies the mechanism(s) responsible for
pain and therefore provides minimal therapeutic insight. Ultimately,
pain should be categorized based on the mechanism(s) responsible for
its production. Current conceptual mechanisms include alterations in
nociceptive transduction, peripheral sensitization, altered excitability,
central sensitization, phenotypic modulation, synaptic reorganization,
and disinhibition. As these mechanisms are studied and become better
understood, rational pain therapy will follow. Until that time, the best
approach to categorizing pain is to understand its evolution from purely
physiologic and protective to pathologic and harmful:
because it depends on the activation of high-threshold peripheral pain
receptors (nociceptors) by excessive pressure, heat, cold, chemical, or
electrical irritants. This is the type of pain an animal feels when it is
pinched, poked, or aggressively palpated or when it briefly comes in
contact with a potentially harmful entity. Physiologic or nociceptive
pain is highly localized, often transient, serving to warn the body of
to reflex withdrawal responses. All other types of pain can be
OQE
PART ONE ·Principles of Pain Management
considered pathologic or clinical, arising for the most part from tissue
● Pathologic pain: Pathologic pain occurs in the presence or absence of a
stimulus or in response to innocuous stimuli (allodynia), often producing
an exaggerated (hyperalgesia) and prolonged (hyperpathia) response. The
acute form of pathologic pain, like physiologic pain, serves a protective
function leading to disuse, rest and recuperation, guarding, and avoidance,
thereby minimizing further injury and promoting repair processes (Fig.
2-7). Exaggerated (extensive trauma) or prolonged (chronic) pain has
significant impact on an animal's quality of life far exceeding any pro-
and considerable suffering and producing abnormal and unexpected
behaviors that may contribute to the clinical decision to euthanize an
animal (Table 2-5). Abnormal (reluctance to move, lack of interaction)
or unexpected behaviors (aggression) are common in spite of or because
of the administration of analgesic drugs, emphasizing the need for careful
evaluation before selection of the appropriate analgesic therapy.
       q    
Aq panpu aq uo pue sieo pue sop un sionaeuaq rouqe uoon
pain and many drugs used to produce analgesia and sedation (release
and cats when they are frightened and experiencing pain and during
the postoperative period. During this time the clinician or veterinary
technician must be particularly astute in identifying abnormal behavior
and determining whether it is pain-related, thereby facilitating
appropriate therapy and avoiding unnecessary drug administration.
PAINFVLSENSATIONS
Although truly rational therapeutic approaches cannot be developed until
          
and pathologic pain are known, the use of simple yet detailed pain scoring
thereby suggesting potential treatments or the benefits of treatment (see
Chapter 6). Pain scoring systems, however, are of little value in suggesting
therapy until the evaluator has a general understanding of the physiologic
and pathophysiologic processes involved in the production of pain (Box 2-2).
An understanding of these processes implies an understanding of the reasons
for tissue hypersensitivity, peripheral sensitization, primary and secondary
hyperalgesia, central sensitization, allodynia, spontaneous and referred
pain, and the differences between somatic and visceral pain. All of these
changes modify the gain of the system and can lead to CNS modification and
LE
Central processing
Depression or
 changes
 aggression
Anxiety
Demoralization
Immobilization
Fear
Sleep deprivation,
Inflammatory meciators
anorexia
..dnos buz!sues,
Altered locomotion,
 guarding, licking.
Hyperalgesia.
 self-mutilation
 allodynia
Increased
wound
sensitivity
Inflammation, tissue injury,
 Consequences of pain.
I sensitization,
Venous stasis
and CNS)
Vasoconstriction,
Diminished pulmonary
CNS
function, atelectasis
nerve damage
 Neuroplasticity
transmission
blood flow
"facilitated" (
T
(spinal cord
Central
Thromboembolism
Tissue edema and ischemi
aggregation
2-7.
Renin,
release
Platelet
Sympathoadrenal
Respiratory
compromise
FIG.
activation
hypertension,
Salt and
water
 retention
Tachycardia,
tachypnea
Hypoxia
consumption
Increased
oxygen
Immunosuppression,
increased risk of
Neuroendocrine
catecholamines,
impaired wound
Infection and
changes
Increased
catabolism
infection
cortisol,
healing
32
PART ONE + Principles of Pain Management
TABLE2-5
Pathophysiologic Consequences of Pain
Source of Pain
Symptoms
 Cardiovascular
Tachycardia, hypertension, vasoconstriction, increased
cardiac work and oxygen consumption
Pulmonary
Hypoxia, hypercarbia, atelectasis; decreased cough;
ventilation/perfusion mismatch, predisposition to
pulmonary infection 
Gastrointestinal
Nausea, vomiting, ileus 
Renal
Oliguria, urine retention
 Extremities
 Skeletal muscle pain, limited mobility, thromboembolism
Endocrine
Vagal inhibition; increased adrenergic activity, increased
metabolism, increased oxygen consumption
Central nervous system
Anxiety,fear, sedation, fatigue
mmunologic
Impairment 
BOX 2-2
Mechanisms Responsible for Prolonged
and Exaggerated Pain
●Peripheral sensitization (inflammatory soup)
●“"Windup" (temporal summation of sensory inputs)
● Central sensitization
● Increased sympathetic innervation and excitation of dorsal root ganglion
●Disinhibition of inhibitory modulation of sensory inputs
●Redistribution of Aβ inputs from laminae Ill and IV to lamina Il
● Abnormal patterns of spinal cord interneuronal communication
● Altered phenotype of damaged sensory nerve fibers
● Abnormal patterns of peripheral nerve regeneration after trauma
phenotypic (physical characteristics) changes. To rephrase an often-quoted
saying, “No gain, no pain."
C nerve terminal nociceptors, which transduce noxious stimuli
dependent on distinct thermal, mechanical, chemical, and electrical
thresholds. The free nerve endings of these afferent pain-processing
fibers encode noxious stimuli, depending on the modality, intensity,
duration, and location of the stimulus.
● The intensity of the stimulus that produces pain is considerably greater
than that required to elicit innocuous sensations and is the most
important factor in determining the severity of pain. Intensity can be
quantitatively defined by a stimulus intensity-response relationship
similar to that of other somatosensations (Fig. 2-2).
Dorsa!
roorganglion
ABLo
A& Hgh a nd low 1hres hold (pres
Peripherar
nerve
Noc ceptors (hgh)
Hgh 
UIed) pous
Nocceptors
Peripheral sensory
nerveterminal
C fiber
Peripheral
Thermal
aXOn
AMPAKAI
Electrlcal
Mechanlca
slgnals
Chemlcal
Transient
protective
Minima!
“Ouch"
tlssue
orno
pain
damage
FIG. 2-8. Physiologic pain: Non-tissue-damaging stimuli activate peripheral
pain receptors (nociceptors; R), which produce electrical signals that are
transmitted by A& and C sensory nerve fibers to the spinal cord and brain.
Glutamate is the primary neurotransmitter released at the nerve terminal in the
spinal cord (central terminals). Glutamate primarily activates α-amino-3-hydroxy-
("ouch") pain.
● In the absence of tissue damage, nociceptor-mediated pain is considered
to be physiologic, warning the animal of potentially harmful stimuli (Fig.
 2-8). Most pathologic pain occurs after tissue or nerve damage and, as stated
Pathologic pain is caused by tissue damage or alterations in the physiology
or anatomy of the sensory nervous system. The temporal aspects of
pathologic  pain  continuously
change (dynamic plasticity) and are
characterized by a reduction in the intensity of the stimulus required to
initiate pain (hypersensitivity) and a leftward shift in the stimulus-response
curve (Fig. 2-9). The development of tissue hypersensitivity (nociceptive
sensitization) is responsible for allodynia, hyperalgesia, and hyperpathia.
PERIPHERALSENSITIZATION
Peripheral sensitization is produced by neurochemical alterations caused by
tissue damage and inflammation at the site of injury and in the immediately
surrounding tissues, resulting in hyperalgesia at the site of injury (primary
hyperalgesia). The release and activation of intracellular components
from damaged cells, inflammatory cells (lymphocytes, neutrophils, mast
34
PART ONE ● Principles of Pain Management
100%！
B
Pain response
Hyp
Analgesia
②Innocuous
snoIxON 
Stimulus intensity
FIG. 2-9. The normal stimulus intensity-pain response curve is shown
(A). Increased responsiveness to a given stimulus that shifts the curve to the
left is termed hyperaigesia. A decrease in the response to a given stimulus that
shifts the curve to the right or flattens the curve is termed anaigesia or anesthesia.
A large left shift in the curve such that innocuous stimuli begin to elicit a painful
response (B) is termed alfodynia.
cells, macrophages), postganglionic sympathetic efferent nerve terminals,
and the primary nerve fiber itself excite and increase the sensitivity of
peripheral nociceptors (Table 2-5). Direct tissue damage results in the local
release and spread of ATP, ions (H+, K+), prostaglandins, bradykinin, and
nerve growth factors. Lymphocytes, neutrophils, and macrophages release
cytokines (interleukin-1 [IL-1], IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor c). Mast
(serotonin) and histamine. Sympathetic nerve fibers release substances
(catecholamines, neuropeptide Y) that potentiate inflammatory mediators
that amplify the local inflammatory response. Primary afferent sensory nerve
fibers release neuropeptides (substance P, CGRP) that cause degranulation of
mast cells, local vasodilation, and plasma extravasation, resulting in a further
to surrounding tissues (secondary hyperalgesia). Together these substances
C s  s  s , e 
(10% to 40% of the total nociceptor population) found in joints and visceral
and cutaneous tissues, amplifying the pain response ( Fig. 2-10).
CENTRALSENSITIZATION
Central sensitization is produced by a change in the excitability of
neurons in the spinal cord and/or activation of spinal cord glial cells and
Penphera!
Spinafcoro
Dorsaf root ganglion
nenve
Dorsa
roOr
Peripheral nerve terminal sensitization
nnatior
COX2
Zoneof
primary
Cfiber
Prostaglandins (PGE
hyperalgesia
Peripheral
BDEwEp EnsS!
axon
H*Histamine
PMIN aukocytas
vacrophiages
Allodynia
K Serotonin (5-HT)
Vast calls
↑ Signaling molecules
H
K
H* Bradykinin
[Proteases
Cytokines (TNF-α.
Nerve growthfactor
FlG. 2-1o. Peripheral sensitization: Inflammation and tissue damage produce a
variety of nociceptor-sensitizing substances, including prostaglandins, histamine,
growth factor. This“sensitizing soup" lowers the nociceptor threshold to painful
and allodynia.
hyperalgesia, extraterritorial pain). Mild, infrequent, noxious stimuli
generate fast excitatory potentials within the CNS (spinal cord, brainstem,
and brain) that indicate the onset, duration, intensity, and location of the
painful stimulus ( Box 2-2). This fast excitatory transmission is transmitted
by A8 and C fibers and is mediated by glutamate acting on AMPA and KAI
ligand-gated ion channels within the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. The
that co-release glycine and GABA, two CNS inhibitory neurotransmitters.
     s  ) 
neuroexcitatory substances (substance P, neurokinin A, CGRP) including
glutamate, which activates NMDA (removes the magnesium block),
neurokinin, and mGluR receptors. The temporal and spatial summation
("windup") of neuroexcitatory input from noxious stimuli produces a
horn of the spinal cord. Sensitization of dorsal horn neurons can last for
properties (spatial, threshold, temporal, modality), secondary hyperalgesia,
36
PART ONE ●Principles of Pain Management
and allodynia (Fig. 2-11). Decreases in phasic and tonic inhibition from
higher CNS centers and a loss of segmental inhibitory interneurons in the
dorsal horn can also contribute to dorsal horn hyperexcitability, resulting
in the perception of pain from otherwise innocuous stimuli carried by Aβ
nerve fibers (receptive field plasticity). Nerve cell injury can also stimulate
the growth of the central terminals of low-threshold mechanoreceptors
(Aβ fibers), which normally terminate in lamina IV. Their infiltration
into lamina II, the location of C-fiber terminals, produces an anatomic
substrate for tactile pain hypersensitivity and spontaneous pain.
· Central sensitization is fundamentally different from peripheral
sensitization in that it enables low-intensity stimuli and low-threshold
Aβ sensory fibers to produce pain as a result of changes in sensory
processing in the spinal cord.
● Central sensitization, phenotypic switches, and disinhibition are
to sensory input (allodynia), receptive field plasticity, continued pain
even after amputation (phantom limb pain), and the discomfort and
 sd e sd  is aa pdxa 
chronic diseases.
●Windup, central sensitization, and the development of a structurally
reorganized hyperactive CNS represent a continuum of the pain
process, which exists as a consequence of continuous, unrelenting,
and untreated pain.
● The development of central sensitization within the CNS and, more
  sd   n q    
least the modification of memory. Continued noxious stimuli lasting
longer than several hours result in the up-regulation of immediate-
early genes (c-fos, c-jun), which are regulated by the cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response element-binding protein and are responsible
for activity-dependent plasticity and long-term structural changes
(neuroplastic) within the CNS.
VISCERALPAIN
Nociceptive-specific fibers do not appear to be present in the viscera.
Visceral afferent painful stimuli originating from visceral organs (e.g-, gut,
liver, spleen, kidney, and bladder) are transmitted by A8 and C fibers that
travel along sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways. Parasympathetic,
principally vagal, and splanchnic afferent nerve fibers are also responsible
colon (rectum) and bladder. This difference (transmission by sympathetic
and parasympathetic pathways) means that most inputs coming from
37
Peripheral
Spinal cord
Dorsalrootganglion
nerve
Dorsal
roor
Aβ input induces pain
Severetissue
Depressed inhibition
damage
Dorsal
horn
TrkE
Primary
neuron
C fiber
hyperalgesia
NMDA
BDNF
Central
Allodynia
Mg2
axn
Secondary
hyperalgesia
Gene expression
CNS plasticity
Sub P
FlG. 2-11. Central sensitization: Severe (high-intensity) or chronic painful stimuli
activate C fibers, causing the release of glutamate, substance P (Sub P), and
in the activation of α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid/
kainate, N-methyl-p-aspartate, neurokinin, and Trk B receptors, producing acute
and long-lasting dull, aching, burning pain sensations. Collectively, the activation
nervous system to subsequent input. Chronic painful stimulation may result in
produce pain.
viscera may not be perceived. Local clamping, burning (cautery), and
cutting generally produce no pain when applied to visceral structures.
Generalized or diffuse inflammation, ischemia, and mesenteric stretching
or dilation (e.g-, gastric dilatation-volvulus), however, produce severe
unrelenting pain associated with a significant sympathetic component
(tachycardia, tachypnea). Inflammation and tissue damage are also known
which produce mechanosensitivity in response to otherwise innocuous
smooth muscle contractile activity.
?
Visceral nociception is much more responsive to K-opioid receptor
agonists. The systemic and local administration of the K-opioid
receptor agonist butorphanol may be more effective in treating
visceral (colonic, urinary bladder) pain (milligram/milligram basis)
than morphine, a classic μ-opioid agonist.
38
PART ONE ·Principles of Pain Management
· Visceral afferent nerve fibers are important in modulating the enteric
nervous system, including the gastroesophageal, duodenogastric,
colonogastric, rectocolonic, peritoneogastrointestinal, and voiding
reflex loops.
● Reflex regulation of visceral structures also includes motor-secretory
and motor-vascular reflexes triggered by extrinsic innervation and
axon reflexes, extraspinal and spinal pathways, and splanchnovagal
and vagovagal pathways.
●Vagal afferent fibers terminate in the brainstem. The nucleus tractus
solitarius is the major projection site for vagal and splanchnic afferent
inputs, and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve also plays a
role in the integration of sensory information passing to the PAG and
thalamus.
REFERREDPAIN
As the name implies, referred pain is pain (tenderness, allodynia, and
hyperalgesia) that is felt in uninjured, intact tissues remote from the
presumed causative lesion. Referred pain develops slowly, is generally
triggered by deep somatic and visceral rather than superficial injury, and
conforms to the “dermatomal rule," whereby pain is often referred to
regions derived from the same dermatome. The best examples of referred
pain are those associated with stimulation of the visceral afferent nerve
fibers and the referral of pain to muscles, tendons, and joints in the same
dermatome. Potential explanations for referred pain include (1) the
 s        
deep tissues or the branching of primary sensory nerve fibers to an injured
and uninjured area, (2) the activation of primary sensory nerve fibers that
project to both (left and right) dorsal horns of the spinal cord, and (3) the
on the same population of dorsal horn neurons. The latter explanations
emphasize a potential central mechanism as a cause for referred pain and
the potentiation of reflexes from remote tissue regions.
MEMORY OF PAIN
with the peak intensity of pain but, interestingly, not with its duration.
subserves only nociception." Furthermore, pain is more likely to occur
and be more severe in patients who have a history of injury, sugges-
ting that injury produces CNS neurochemical changes that influence
nociceptive behavior. The same types of biologic processes and genetic
stimuli. Furthermore, if painful stimuli establish the memory of pain,
then therapies that prevent central sensitization and the neuroplastic
   n   s   
normal pain sensitivity. This argument is the basis for preventing pain
from being perceived and the practice of“preemptive”analgesia, in which
e         
Once hyperexcitability (central sensitization) is established, large doses
of analgesic agents are required to treat pain or the therapy becomes
ineffective. In other words, all pain should be treated as early as possible
and preemptively when possible.
CONCLUSION
The mechanisms responsible for the production and maintenance of
s su   s  s i n n 
transduce and transmit sensations to the brain. Alternative mechanisms
regarding pain perception, however, are emerging and suggest that pain
can be elicited by the production of inflammatory molecules that travel to
the brain through the bloodstream ("humoral" signaling). These molecules
increase the concentration of inflammatory signaling molecules in the
brain (IL-1β), leading to the enhanced expression of cyclooxygenase-2
and prostaglandin E synthase (two prominent pain inducers) in the
The blood-borne inflammatory molecules remain unknown but provide
fertile ground for the continued exploration of mechanisms that initiate
and transmit painful events and suggest new avenues for the development
of pain therapies. Understanding the mechanisms responsible for pain is
the basis for rational and effective pain therapies.
REFERENCE
1. Melzack R, Wall PD: Pain mechanisms: a new theory, Science 150:971-979,
1965.
SUGGESTEDKEADINGS
Byers MR, Bonica JI: Peripheral pain mechanisms and nociceptor plasticity. In
Loeser JD, Butler SH, Chapman CR et al, editors: Bonica's maragement of
pain, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2001, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Craig AD: Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the body,
Curr Opin Neurobiol 13:500-505,2003.
40
PART ONE·Principles of Pain Management
Dray A: Inflammatory mediators of pain, Br ∫ Araesth 75:125-131, 1995.
Fields HL、 Basbaum AI: Central nervous system mechanisms of pain modula-
tion. In Wall PD, Melzack R,editors: Textbook of pain,ed 4,Edinburgh, 1999,
Churchill Livingstone.
Fields HL, Heinricher MM, Mason P: Neurotransmitters in nociceptive modula-
tory circuits,Annu Rev Neurosci 14:219-245, 1991.
Kandel ER: Nerve cells and behavior. In Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessel TM,
editors: Principles of neuraf science, ed 3, Norwalk, Conn, 1991,Appleton &
Lange.
dns ud oidaou auyo a al u suas ues a  nquazi
6:S93-S102,1999.
Levine JD, Reichling DB: Peripheral mechanisms of inflammatory pain. In Wall
PD, Melzack R, editors: Textbook of pain, ed 4, Edinburgh, 1999, Churchill
Livingstone.
Maier SF, Watkins LR: Cytokines for psychologists: implications of bidirectional
immune-to-brain communication for understanding behavior, mood, and
cognition, Psychol Rev 105:83-107, 1998.
Melzack R, Wall PD: Pain mechanisms: a new theory, Science 150:971-979,
1965.
Milan MJ: The induction of pain: an integrative review, Prog Neurobiol
57:1-164, 1999.
Muir WW 3rd , Woolf CJ: Mechanisms of pain and their therapeutic implica-
tions, fAm Vet Med Assoc 219:1346-1356, 2001.
Raja SN, Meyer RA, Ringkamp M et al: Peripheral neural mechanisms of
nociceptor. In Wall PD, Melzack R,editors: Textbook of pain, ed 4,Edinburgh,
1999, Churchill Livingstone.
Rexed B: The cytoarchitectonic organization ofthe spinal cord in the cat, J Comp
Neurol 96:415-466,1952.
Ru-Rong I, Woolf CJ: Neuronal plasticity and signal transduction in nociceptive
neurons: implications for the initiation and maintenance of pathological
pain, Neurobiol Dis 8:1-10, 2001.
Sandkuhler J: The organization and function of endogenous antinociceptive
systems, Prog Neurobiol 50:49-81, 1996.
Snider WD, McMahon SB: Tackling pain at the source: new ideas about
nociceptors, Neuron 20:629-632, 1998.
Watkins LR, Milligan ED, Maier SF: Glial activation: a driving force for
pathological pain, Trends Neurosci 24:450-455, 2001.
Willert RP, Woolf CJ, Hobson AR et al: The development and maintenance
D-aspartate, Gastroenterology 126:683-692, 2004.
Willis WD, Coggeshall RE: Sensory mechanisms of the spinal cord, New York,
1991, Plenum Press.
Willis AD, Westlund KN: Neuroanatomy ofthe pain system and of the pathways
that modulate pain, f Clin Neurophysiol 14:2-31, 1997.
- sn  ds  o d 1 
pharmacologic management, Arn Intern Med 140:441-451,2004.
CHAPTER 2·Physiology and Pathophysiology ofPain
  aa  i  i   
preventing the establishment of central sensitization, Anesth Anaig 77:
362-379,1993.
       
and the generation of inflammatory pain, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:
7723-7730,1999.
Woolf CJ, Salter MW: Neuronal plasticity: increasing the gain in pain, Science
288:1765-1768,2000.
drugs with mechanistically defined models、 Trends Pharmacol Sci 20:
329-337,1999.
3
PAIN AND STRESS
WTLLIAMW.MUIRIII
nimal well-being should include the “five freedoms": freedom
from hunger and malnutrition, freedom from discomfort,
Lfreedom from disease, freedom from injury, and freedom from
pain (Box 3-1). Stress is the biologic response that an animal exhibits
when homeostasis is threatened. Stress occurs when animals perceive
a threat. Conscious (e.g- physical restraint or pain) and unconscious
(e.g-, pain caused by surgery) stressors can elicit stress. Historically,
most authors have concerned themselves with the response of the body
to injury and surgical trauma. The role of the central nervous system
(CNS) in modifying the response of the body to various stressors (e.g--
pain, surgery, restraint, and confinement) varies among and within
      q   ss
the CNS, eliciting systemic responses identical to those produced by
tissue trauma. This input can modify the animal's memory, evoking
predictable behavioral changes characterized by startle, fear, an attempt
to escape, aggression (fight or flight), or submission. Dogs and cats,
like all animals, respond to stressors by exhibiting one or more biologic
defense mechanisms targeted toward avoiding injury and maintaining
homeostasis. Stress then serves a protective role of diverting the
biologic resources of the body to cope with the stressor. Normally,
bodily homeostatic mechanisms function to maintain a continual
internal state of well-being. Ineffective responses to stress, particularly
stress caused by trauma, results in dysfunction, disability, disease
(systemic inflammatory response), distress, and suffering, collectively
   s e s s, e 
Whether animals perceive pain and suffer in the same way that
human beings do is uncertain because of differences in their ability
to comprehend pain and the potential for impending doom. Most
42
CHAPTER3·PainandStress
43
BOX 3-1
The Five Freedoms
Freedom from thirst, hunger, and malnutrition
● Access to fresh water and a healthful diet
Freedom from discomfort
● Suitable environment, shelter, and a resting place
Freedom from pain, injury, and disease
● Prevention of cruelty and illness by care and rapid treatment
Freedom to express normal behavior
●Provision of space, facilities, and company of the animal's own kind
Freedom from fear and distress
● Assurance of conditions that avoid stress and mental suffering
animals are aware of the present with little or no regard for the
past or future; they live in “the now." Animals do not comprehend
death. The animal's health and interaction with its environment and
ongoing external events determine its well-being. These processes
incorporate feling, perceiving, and awareness and are the simplest
of the cognitive processes. In other words, if an animal perceives an
event as threatening, its responses will be the same, whether the event
is threatening or not. Everyone at some time has probably witnessed
the “fight or flight" response in a dog or cat put in a new environment,
whether the environment was threatening or not. Therefore, it is
ethical and humane to minimize animal stress because all animals
Pain normally serves a protective function by warning the animal
of real or impending tissue damage. Acute and chronic pain are
capable of producing stress, and when severe, can be responsible for
dramatic increases in neuroendocrine activity, temporary periods of
“stress-induced analgesia," and profound behavioral changes. Even
without a painful stimulus, environmental factors (e.g-, environment,
loud noise, restraint, and predators) can produce a state of anxiety
or fear that sensitizes and amplifies the stress response to a painful
stimulus. Distress, an exaggerated form of stress, is present when the
the animal's well-being. Therefore, pain should be thought of in terms
of the magnitude of the stress response that it produces, its potential
to produce distress, and the degree of animal suffering incurred.
In practical terms, the severity and duration of pain determine the
consequences of the patient's pain on the continuum of stress and
suffering-
44
PART ONE ·Principles of Pain Management
for producing pain stimulates the thalamus, locus ceruleus (LC), and amygdala, which induce fear, anxiety, and rage in animals, resulting
Pain
Transmission
Transduction
Mechanical
 Chemical
Thermal
Projection
Immobilization
Perception
coeruleus
LoCus
Cerebralcortex
Adrenals
Pituitary)
Neuroendocrine activation
Corticotropin-
reteasingfactor
+
· Increased cortisol
Amygdala
Hyperglycemia
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
Hypothalamo-
adrenal axis
pituitary-
uissaood snin
Somesthetic
Olfactory
Behavioral changes
Facialexpressions
Autonomic nervous
* Parasympathetic
Pupil dilation
Bradycardia
Gastric ulcers
* Fight or flight
Tachypnea
Urination
learning patterns and memory.
元
CHAPTER 3 +Pain and Stress
45
DEFINING TERMS
PAIN
associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms
changes that are exhibited as mild behavioral discomfort or distress to
acute, often unbearable, agony. Pain may be diffuse or localized and
usually produces a desire to avoid, escape, or destroy (autonomy) the
factors responsible for its production. Untreated or prolonged pain
neuroendocrine dysregulation, fatigue, dysphoria, myalgia, abnormal
behavior, and altered physical performance.
STRESS
Stress is the animal's biologic response to factors that disrupt or threaten
homeostasis. A stressor is a physical, chemical, or emotional facton
(e.g-, trauma or fear) to which the animal fails to make a satisfactory
adaptation and that causes physiologic tensions that can contribute to
causes of disease.
DISTRESS
Distress is the state produced when the biologic cost of stress negatively
affects biologic functions critical to the animal's well-being. Distress also
means to cause pain or suffering or to make miserable.
SUFFERING
Suffering is defined as a perception or feeling of impending destruction
or harm; the endurance of or submission to physical or mental stress,
pain, or loss.
BIOLOGICCOMPONENTSOFTHESTRESS
RESPONSE
The stress response is an adaptive pattern of behavioral, neural, endocrine,
immune, hematologic, and metabolic changes directed toward the
restoration of homeostasis (Box 3-2).
Most stress is short-lived because of the removal of or short duration
of exposure to the stressor. The nature, magnitude, and duration of the
46
PART ONE ● Principles of Pain Management
BOX 3-2
Biologic Stress Response
Behavioral
●Autonomic nervous system
·Neuroendocrine
● Immunologic
●Hematologic 
●Metabolic
●Morphologic
specific stimulus are important factors in determining the magnitude and
extent of the adaptive responses elicited in the animal. Manipulation of a
dog's hip joint or physical restraint of a cat, for example, generally elicits
only a brief stress response. During more threatening circumstances,
the stress response prepares the animal for emergency situations and
fosters survival in threatening circumstances (fight or flight). Acute
cats. Pain induced by surgical or accidental trauma evokes responses
characterized by activation of the sympathetic nervous system, secretion
of glucocorticoids (primarily cortisol), hypermetabolism, sodium and
water retention, and altered carbohydrate and protein metabolism
(Box 3-3). When stress is severe or allowed to continue for an extended
time, it becomes maladaptive, producing
distress and triggering
self-sustaining neural and endocrine cascades that upset homeostasis.
Severe pain produces behavioral, autonomic, neuroendocrine, and
immunologic responses that are responsible for self-mutilation, immune
Prior experience (memory) and current physical status (health, pain
state) play an important role in determining the animal's adaptive and
behavioral responses.
BEHAVIORAL INDICATORS OF STRESS
AND PAIN
Pain is a stressor and is responsible for changes in brain chemistry (neural
plasticity) resulting in behavioral modifications, the level of alertness,
learning performance, and memory (Box 3-4). Intense stimulation of
sensory (somatosensory, visual, acoustic) inputs to the brain activates the
locus ceruleus (LC), limbic regions (e.g-, hypothalamus, hippocampus,
and amygdala), and cerebral cortex, which together are involved in
CHAPTER3·PainandStress
47
B0X 3-3
Systemic Effects of the Stress Response
●Activation of central nervous system
Hypothalamus, amygdala, locus ceruleus
Increases in central nervous system sympathetic output
Catecholamines
·Endocrine “stress"response
Pituitary hormone secretion
Adrenal hormone secretion
Glucosemia
●Insulin resistance
●Cytokine production
● Acute-phase reaction
●Neutrophil leukocytosis
●Immunologic and hematologic changes
BOX 3-4
Behavioral Indicators of Stress and Pain
+Activity
●Facial expression
●Aggression
●Locomotion
●Appearance
●Posture
·Appetite
● Response to handling
● Attitude
●Vocalization
adaptive responses to stress. Stress as mild as a cat being confronted
Sea iaoe ou adi o aanop uo ‘aldxa ng op e Aq
 an   s, e o   s
Pain-induced increases in the concentration of corticotropin-releasing
factor (CRF) in the hypothalamus, amygdala, and LC, for example,
result in an increased startle response, anxiety, fear, and in some animals,
rage. Therefore, CRF serves as an excitatory neurotransmitter in the
LC, resulting in the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH),
cortical norepinephrine, dopamine, and 5-hydroxytryptamine and
hyperresponsiveness, hyperarousal, vigilance, and agitation. Prolonged
stress impairs the animal's ability to learn and can change the animal's
behavior.
Pain in dogs and cats is frequently indicated by changes in behavior
(see Chapter 5). Lameness, for example, is an obvious indicator of acute
pain or chronic injury. Observation ofchanges in a dog's or cat's behavior
48
PART ONE ●Principles of Pain Management
may be the most noninvasive and promising method for determining the
severity of an animal's pain and associated stress.
AUTONOMICNERVOUS SYSTEM
Activation of the sympathetic nervous system is one of the principal
effects initiated by stress. Sensory activation of the hypothalamus results
in graded increases in CNS sympathetic output, resulting in increases
in heart rate and arterial blood pressure, sweating, piloerection,
and pupil dilation. The secretion of cortisol by the adrenal cortex
and catecholamines from the adrenal medulla and the spillover of
norepinephrine from postganglionic sympathetic nerve terminals
augment central effects.
NEUROENDOCRINE AXS
The neuroendocrine axis can be defined as the biologic interface for
afferent sensory input and humoral communication between the CNS
and the peripheral glands or organs that are responsible for mobilizing
the stress response (Fig. 3-2). Auditory, visual, and somatosensory
afferent sensory information is transmitted to the thalamus or directly
to the amygdala, activating the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocorticol
(HPA) system axis (Table 3-1). This afferent information stimulates
the secretion of CRF and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), which
in turn stimulates the pituitary gland to release ACTH, melanocortin,
prolactin, vasopressin, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and
growth hormone (GH). The metabolic consequences ofthese hormonal
changes are increased catabolism, the mobilization of substrates
to provide energy for tissue repair, and salt and water retention to
maintain fluid volume and cardiovascular homeostasis. CRF, ACTH,
and corticosterone are significant modulators of learning and memory
processes.
RELEASE OF CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING FACTOR
IN THEBRAIN
The release of CRF in the brain is one of the major components
of the stress response, if not the most important. CRF acts synergis-
tically with vasopressin to stimulate the production of ACTH and
β-endorphin, thereby enhancing cell survival and producing analgesic
effects, respectively. CRF also stimulates the adrenomedullary release
of ACTH and catecholamines. CRF is an excitatory neurotransmitter
CHAPTER 3 + Pain and Stress
49
Pain, Arousal, Anxiety, Fear
Stress
Pituitary
ACTH
^Anxlety
Sympathetic
ADH
efferent
GH
~Depresslon
Adrenal TSH
gland
↑Heart rate
Sensory
Epinephrine
↑Resplratlon
afferent
Norepinephrine
Cortisol
Aldosterone
↑Coagulabllty
Renin
↓ Metabollsm
↓Immune
Injury site
IL-1
functlon
$
IL-6
TNF-
AG. 3-2. Acute surgical stimulation initiates the release of cytokines (intereukin1,
interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor α) into the bloodstream and activation of the
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocorticol (HPA) system axis and sympathetic nervous
system. Activation of hypothalamus and pituitary releases adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH), vasopressin (or antidiuretic hormone [ADH], growth hormone
(GH), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Sympathetic nervous system
activation initiates the release of epinephrine, norepinephrine, cortisol, aldosterone,
and renin. Together these changes can alter hemodynamics, which elevates heart
rate; increase the coagulability of blood, predisposing to thrombosis; increase
function.
in the brain, producing increased cortical norepinephrine release and
excitation.
ADRENOCORTICOTROPIC HORMONE
ACTH release is stimulated by CRF, catecholamines, vasopressin, and
VIP. The primary function of ACTH is to stimulate the adrenal cortex to
secrete cortisol, corticosterone, aldosterone, and androgenic substances.
ACTH also stimulates the adrenomedullary secretion of catecholamines.
ACTH, cortisol, and epinephrine levels are increased during emergence
from anesthesia without surgery, suggesting that anesthesia alone can
induce a stress response in animals.
50
PART ONE ● Principles of Pain Management
TABLE 3-1
Neurohumoral Response to Stress
Endocrine Gland
Hormone
Change
Pituitary
Adrenocorti cotropic 
Increase
hormone
Growth hormone
Increase
Vasopressin
Increase
Thyroid-stimulating
Increase or decrease
hormone
Adrenal cortex
Cortisol
Increase
 Aldosterone
Increase
Catecholamines
Increase
Pancreas
Insulin
Often decreases
Glucagon
Increase
Thyroid 
Thyroxine
Decrease
CORTISOL
Serum cortisol concentration is an indicator of the severity of stress
in most species. The mortality rate is increased in animals that are not
able to increase serum cortisol concentrations. Etomidate, an injectable
hypnotic recommended for anesthesia in high-risk cases, is known to
increase the mortality rate in very il human patients because it suppresses
serum cortisol concentrations. Cortisol stimulates gluconeogenesis,
increases proteolysis and lipolysis, facilitates catecholamine effects, and
produces antinflammatory actions.
CATECHOLAMINES
Serum concentrations of norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine
are increased by CRF. Epinephrine causes glycogenolysis, gluco-
neogenesis, inhibition of insulin release, peripheral insulin resistance,
and lipolysis. The release of these catecholamines can be responsible
for elevations in heart rate, respiratory rate, arterial blood pressure,
animal for fight or flight.
GLUCAGON AND INSULIN
Endogenous endorphins, GH, epinephrine, and glucocorticoids are
capable of stimulating glucagon and insulin (β-adrenergic effect)
increase glucagon secretion and decrease (o, effect) insulin secretion,
CHAPTER 3 +Pain and Stress 51
leading to hepatic glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis from amino acids,
glucosemia, and glucosuria.
OTHERHORMONES
A variety of other hormones, including GH, TSH, and vasopressin, act
together to protect cellular function and restore homeostasis.
Growth Hormone
S       
promotes lipolysis, and produces antinsulin effects. GH spares glucose
for use by the nervous system.
Thyroid Hormones
Thyroxine and triodothyronine are secreted into the systemic circulation
from the thyroid gland during stimulation by TSH. Thyroid hormones
stimulate carbohydrate metabolism and heat production and increase
and sensitize β-adrenergic receptors in the heart, thereby sensitizing it to
the effects of circulating catecholamines.
Vasopressin
Vasopressin, also known as the antidiuretic hormone, promotes water
retention. Production and release of vasopressin into the systemic
circulation in conjunction with increased concentrations of renin
(sympathetic effect) increase the circulating blood volume, vascular
tone, and vascular responsiveness, thereby improving cardiovascular
homeostasis.
METABOLISM
The net effect of the majority of the neurohumoral changes produced
is an increase in the secretion of catabolic hormones, promoting the
production of food substrates from the breakdown of carbohydrates,
fats, and proteins.
CARBOHYDRATEMETABOLISM
Hyperglycemia is produced and may persist because of the production
of glucagon and relative lack of insulin, although insulin levels may
  s   q    
glucose, which is known to be associated with an increased incidence of
wound infection, morbidity, and mortality.
52
PART ONE · Principles of Pain Management
FATMETABOLISM
Lipolytic activity is stimulated by cortisol, catecholamines, and GH,
resulting in an increase in circulating glycerol and free fatty acids.
Glycerol in turn serves as a source for gluconeogenesis in the liver.
PROTEINMETABOLISM
Protein catabolism is a common occurrence and a major concern after
severe trauma or extensive surgical procedures. Cortisol increases
protein catabolism, resulting in the release of amino acids. These
amino acids can be used to form new proteins and to produce glucose
and other substrates. Protein supplementation (e.g-, glutamine and
arginine) during and after surgery results in fewer infections and shorter
Overall recovery time. Prostaglandins (PGs; e.g., PGE2) and cytokines
may promote protein catabolism indirectly by increasing the energy
expenditure of the body.
IMMUNE SYSTEM
Although the immune system is primarily thought of in relation to the
identification and destruction of foreign substances, it also functions as
a diffusely distributed sense organ that communicates injury-related
information to the brain. The immune system can be activated or
depressed by stress (Box 3-5). Thus pain, whether accidental or intentional
(e.g-, surgery), modulates the immune response. The key elements in
determining the immune response to pain are its intensity and duration
(Box 3-6). Chronic pain can produce sustained increases in circulating
concentrations of cortisol, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and glucagon,
suppressing the humoral and cellular immune responses. The systemic
release ofendogenous opioids (endorphin and enkephalin) may contribute
to immunosuppression. Mild to moderate pain associated with extensive
tissue trauma may activate the immune response ( Fig. 3-3). The messengers
of the immune system are cytokines (e.g-, interleukin 1 [IL-1], IL-6, and
tumor necrosis factor α [TNF-α]).
CYTOKINES
A variety of low-molecular-weight proteins and cytokines are produced
from activated leukocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells in response to
tissue injury. Their role is to protect the body by destroying and removing
foreign invaders. These proteins and cytokines are responsible for the
CHAPTER 3▪Pain and Stress
BOX 3-5
Immunologic and Hematologic Response
to Severe Stress
Cytokine production
●Acute-phase response
●Neutrophil leukocytosis
● Lymphopenia
● Immune system depression
BOX 3-6
Neurotransmitters, Neuropeptides, Neurohormones,
and Neuroendocrine Effector Molecules that are Affected
by Stress and can Modulate Immune System Function*
●Neurotransmitters
●Neurohormones
·Acetylcholine
●Corticosteroid
●Dopamine
●Corticotropin
●5-Hydroxytryptamine (serotonin)
●Corticotropin-releasing factor
●Norepinephrine
●Growth hormone
·Opiates
●Prolactin
●Neuropeptides
●Neuroendocrine effector molecules
●Arginine vasopressin
●Epinephrine
●Cholecystokinin
●Sex steroids
●Melatonin
●Thyroxine
●Oxytocin
● Substance P
●Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
*These categories are not mutually exclusive. For example, the neuropeptides oxytocin
and arginine vasopressin are also considered to be neurohormones
production of a local inflammatory response. When tissue trauma is
severe, the excessive production of cytokines can lead to a systemic effect
called the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Although
 n    r i n    s 
production of SIRS because it induces similar autonomic and endocrine
effects. The major cytokines produced during stress are TNF-α, IL-1,
and IL-6:
● IL-1 and IL-6 induce the release of acute-phase (inflammatory)
and IL-6 can stimulate the secretion of ACTH from the pituitary
gland and the subsequent release of cortisol.
PART ONE ● Principles of Pain Management
prostanoids
d
nen enss
 Stress
Trauma and 
B-Cells
 Decreased blood flow
Pain
Tissue hypoxia
Hemorrhage
Catecholamines
，
Glucocorticoids
1
Dysfunction
Adrenal
Syndrome
toTh2Profile
Multiple
Organ
]Multiple Organ Failure
IL-2,IFN-
Inflammatory
Responce 
Syndrome
Systemic
，
△
Hepatic dysfunction
organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS).
Pulmonary/Hepatic failure
or
Pulmonary insufficiency
other soluble mediators
endotoxin elaboration,
sequestration
s6un7
←
Hypotension
1ng
CHAPTER 3 + Pain and Stress 55
● TNF-α produces signs of shock, including hypotension, hemo-
concentration, hyperglycemia, hyperkalemia, nonrespiratory acidosis,
and activation of the complement cascade.
ACUTE-PHASERESPONSE
The acute-phase response can be triggered by severe stress from any cause.
The main feature of the acute-phase response is the release of proteins
from the liver, which act as inflammatory mediators and scavengers
biomarker of physiologic stress, infection, and morbidity. Excessive
production of these proteins can contribute to SIRS.
HEMATOLOGY
The peripheral blood white cell count generally reflects a stress
leukogram typified by an elevated number of mature and immature
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (left shift) and reduced numbers of
lymphocytes.
MORPHOLOGIC CHANGES
Morphologic changes associated with chronic stress or pain are typical of
long-term aversive stimuli and include failure to thrive, hair loss or poor
coat condition, weight loss, and acceleration of aging.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Carr DB, Goudes LC: Acute pain, Lancet 353:2051-2058, 1999.
Carstens E, Moberg GP: Recognizing pain and distress in laboratory animals,
ILARf41(2):62-71,2000.
Chapman CR, Garvin J: Suffering: the contributions of persistent pain, Lancet
353:2233-2237、1999.
Charney DS, Grillon C, Bremner JD: The neurobiological basis of anxiety and
fear: circuits, mechanisms, and neurochemical interactions (part I),
Neuroscientist 4:35-44, 1998.
Charney DS, Grillon C, Bremner JD: The neurobiological basis of anxiety
and fear: circuits, mechanisms, and neurochemical interactions (part II),
Neuroscientist 4:122-132,1998.
Clark JD, Rager DR, Calpin JP: Animal well-being. I. General considerations, Lab
Anim Sci 47(6):564-570, 1997.
Clark JD, Rager DR, Calpin JP: Animal well-being. II. Stress and distress, Lab
Anim Sci 47(6):571-585, 1997.
56
PART ONE · Principles of Pain Management
Curcio K, Bidwell LA, Bohart GV et al: Evaluation of signs of postoperative pain
and complications after forelimb onychectomyin catsreceiving buprenorphine
alone or with bupivacaine administered as a four-point regional nerve block,
fAm Vet MedAssoc 228(1):65-68,2006
Davis M: The role of the amygdala in fear-potentiated startle: implications for
animal models of anxiety, Trends Pharmacol Sci 13:35-41, 1992.
su f g ains pue 1 on asuodsa ssas a idl ynonosa
85(1):109-117, 2000.
Imbe H, Iwai-Liao Y, Senba E: Stress-induced hyperalgesia: animal models and
putative mechanisms,Front Biosci 11:2179-2192, 2006.
Khuseyinova N, Koenig W: Biomarkers of outcome from cardiovascular disease,
Curr Opin Crit Care 12(5):412-419, 2006.
Nasraway SA Jr: Hyperglycemia during critical illness, JPEN J Parenter Enteral
Nutr30(3):254-258,2006.
Weissman C: The metabolic response to stress: an overview and update,
Anesthesia 73:308-327,1999.
Yates AR, Dyke PC 2nd, Taeed R et al: Hyperglycemia is a marker for poor
outcome in the postoperative pediatric cardiac patient, Pediatr Crit Care Med
7(4):351-355,2006.
DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
DESCRIBING PAIN
JAMES S.GAYNOR
working understanding of the terminology surrounding pain
and analgesia is important to have. By knowing the terminology,
Lpractitioners can speak intelligently and accurately to one
another when discussing cases. The following are definitions, arranged
alphabetically, that are commonly used when discussing pain and may
be used throughout this handbook.
DEFINITIONS
Acupuncture—The practice of inserting needles at certain points in the
skin to achieve specific effects such as pain relief.
Acute pain—Pain that follows some bodily injury, disappears with heal-
ing, and tends to be self-limiting.
Allodynia—Pain caused by a stimulus that does not normally cause pain.
AnalgesiaThe loss of sensitivity to pain.
Anesthesia—Total or partial loss of sensation.
setting that can occur even when chronic pain is under control.
Cancer pain—Pain that can be acute, chronic, or intermittent and is
related to the disease itself or to the treatment.
Chronic pain—Pain that lasts several weeks to months and persists be-
yond the expected healing time when nonmalignant in origin.
Epidural space-The space above the dura mater. An injection into this
area is commonly referred to as an epidural.
Hyperalgesia-
a—An increased response to a stimulation that is normally
painful (a heightened sense of pain) at the site of injury or in sur-
rounding undamaged tissue. Stimulated nociceptors respond to nox
ious stimuli more vigorously and at a lower threshold.
Hyperesthesia——-Increased sensitivity to sensation.
57
58
PART ONE ·Principles of Pain Management
Hyperpathia—A painful syndrome characterized by an increased
reaction to a stimulus, especially if it is repetitive.
Hypoalgesia—Decreased sensitivity to pain.
Hypoesthesia—Decreased sensitivity to stimulation.
manage pain through an injection of a drug or implantation of a drug-
delivery device.
Local anesthesia—The temporary loss of sensation in a defined part of
the body without loss of consciousness.
Multimodal analgesia—The use of multiple drugs with different
actions, which may act at different levels of the nociceptive pathways,
to produce optimal analgesia.
    n      
tissues, stiffness, muscle spasm, and decreased range of motion.
Neuropathic pain—Pain that originates from injury or involvement of
the peripheral or central nervous system and is described as burning
or shooting, possibly associated with motor, sensory, or autonomic
deficits.
Nociception—The reception, conduction, and central nervous system
processing of nerve signals generated by the stimulation of nocicep-
tors; the physiologic process that leads to the perception of pain.
Opioid—A drug that is related naturally or synthetically to morphine
 sn a   s  
actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage.
Pain threshold—The least experience of pain that a patient can
recognize.
Pain tolerance levelThe greatest level of pain that a patient can tolerate
Pathologic painPain that has an exaggerated response much beyond
its protective usefulness. This is often associated with tissue injury
incurred at the time of surgery or trauma.
individuals to move away from the cause ofpotential tissue damage or
 to avoid movement or contact with external stimuli during a repara-
tive phase.
Preemptive analgesia—The administration of an analgesic drug before
stimulation to prevent sensitization of neurons and windup, thus im-
proving postoperative analgesia.
Regional anesthesia—The loss of sensation in part of the body by inter-
rupting the sensory nerves conducting impulses from that region of
the body.
cortex, in which the patient is drowsy but arousable.
CHAPTER 4 + Definitions of Terms Describing Pain
69
Somatic pain—Pain that originates from damage to bones, joints, mus-
cle, or skin and is described in human beings as localized, constant,
sharp, aching, and throbbing.
Subarachnoid space—The space above the pia mater and below the
arachnoid mater, in which cerebrospinal fluid can be found. A sub-
arachnoid injection is also referred to as a spinal.
Sympathetic mediated pain—A syndrome in which there is abnormal
is often associated with tenderness to a light touch.
Tolerance—A shortened duration and decreased intensity of the
analgesic, euphorigenic, sedative, and other central nervous system
depressant effects, as well as considerable increase in the average dose
required to achieve a given effect.
Tranquilization—-A state of calmness, meditated through the reticular
activating system, in which the patient is relaxed, a wake, unaware of
its surroundings, and potentially indifferent to minor pain.
Visceral pain—Pain that arises from stretching, distention, or inflam-
mation of the viscera, and is described as deep, cramping, aching, or
gnawing, without good localization.
WindupSensitization of nociceptors and peripheral and central pain
pathways in response to a barrage of afferent nociceptive impulses
resulting in expanded receptive fields and an increased rate of dis-
charge.
5
PAIN BEHAVIORS
WILLIAMW.MUIRIIANDAMESS.GAYNOR
● Every animal experiences and demonstrates pain in a unique way. Just
because a patient does not display a pain-related behavior, however,
does not mean that the patient is not in pain. Although it may be
difficult to quantify pain, there are characteristic body positions and
behaviorsthat become recognizable in anyanimalthat is experiencing
 pain (Box 5-1). Interactive and unprovoked (noninteractive) behavior
assessments are useful.
● One must remember that no behavior by itself is pathognomonic for
pain. Behavior at home may be considerably different from behavior
in a strange environment.
· The behavior displayed by an animal depends on many factors,
including species, age, breed, sex, personality, and the severity and
duration of pain (Box 5-2).
in the presence of human beings or other animals, especially potential
predators. This behavior may be an innate protective mechanism to
PAINBEHAVIORS
BODY POSTUREAND ACTIVITY
Dogs and cats assume characteristic postures or become reluctant
    d n   d  s
become anxious, restless, and aggressive. These animals may begin to lick
or chew at the site of pain. Most importantly, their routine pattern of
behavior changes can only truly be assessed by someone who knows the
animal's behavior.
62
CHAPTER 5 +Pain Behaviors
63
BOX5-1
Common Indicators of Pain in Dogs and Cats
Dogs
Cats
·Decreased social interaction
●Reduced activity
●Anxious expression
●Loss of appetite
●Submissive behavior
●Quiet/loss of curiosity
Refusal to move
● Hiding
●Whimpering
●Hissing or spitting
●Howling
Excessive licking/grooming
●Growrling
● Stiff posture/gait
●Guarding behavior
●Guarding behavior
● Aggression; biting
●Attempts to escape
● Loss of appetite
●Cessation of grooming
 Self-mutilation
●Tail flicking
B0X 5-2
Behavioral and Physiologic Characteristics Associated
with Pain in Dogs and Cats
Abnormal Posture
Hunched-up guarding or splinting of abdomen
"Praying" position (forequarters on the ground, hindquarters in the air)
Sitting or lying in an abnormal position
Not resting in a normal position (e.g., sternal or curled up)
Statuelike appearance
Abnormal body part position (e.g., extended head and neck)
Abnormal Gait
Stiff
Partial or no weight bearing on injured limb
Lameness, slight to obvious limp
Reluctance to move
Abnormal Movement
Thrashing
Restlessness
Circling
Continuous activity
vocalization
Screaming, howling, barking, meowing
Whining (intermittent, constant, or when touched)
Crying (intermittent, constant, or when touched)
None
Continued
64
PART TwO•Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
BOX 5-2
Behavioral and Physiologic Characteristics Associated
with Pain in Dogs and Cats -cont'd
Miscellaneous
Looking, licking, or chewing at the painful area
Hyperesthesia or hyperalgesia
Allodynia
Pain-Associated Characteristics That May Also Be Associated with Poor General
Health (Medical Problems)
Restlessness or agitation
 Trembling or shaking 
Tachypnea or panting
Tucked tail or tail flicking (cats)
Low carriage of tail 
Depressed or poor response to caregiver
 Head hanging down
Not grooming
Appetite decreased, picky, or absent
Dull, depressed
Lying quietly and not moving for hours
Stuporous
Urinates or defecates and makes no attempt to move
Recumbent and unaware of surroundings
Unwilling or unable to walk
Bites or attempts to bite caregivers
Pain-Associated Characteristics That May Also Be Associated with Apprehension
orAnxiety
Restlessness or agitation
Trembling or shaking
Tachypnea or panting
Weak tail wag
Low tail carriage
Slow to rise
Depressed (poor response to caregiver)
Not grooming
Bites or attempts to bite caregiver
Ears pulled back 
Restless
Barking or growling (intermittent, constant, or when approached by caregiver)
Sitting in the back of the cage or hiding (cat)
Continued
CHAPTER 5 + Pain Behaviors
65
B0X 5-2
Behavioral and Physiologic Characteristics Associated
with Pain in Dogs and Cats -cont'd
Pain-Associated Characteristics That May Be Normal Behavior
Reluctant to move head (eye movement only)
Stretching all four legs when abdomen is touched
Penile prolapse
Cleaning (licking) a wound or incision
Physiologic Signs That Can Be Associated with Pain
Tachypnea or panting
Tachycardia (mild, moderate, or severe)
 Dilated pupils
Hypertension
Increased serum cortisol and epinephrine
From Mathew KA: Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30(4):729-752, 2000.
Reluctance toMove
Animals that are reluctant to move usually have moderate to severe
pain (Figs. 5-1 to 5-3). This behavior provides protection against
movement-induced (incident) pain. Usually, slight movement results in
some other behavior associated with an abnormal gait (e.g., limping or
stilted gait), aggression, or vocalization.
Reluctance to Lie Down
Reluctance to lie down is often associated with acute abdominal or
thoracic pain (Fig. 5-4). Dogs or cats with abdominal pain may sit for
sun sos (s-s pue ts 'ssi) uosod sueid, e aunsse io snou
frequently attempt to sit or remain standing for hours. Some animals
commonly fall asleep, slump down, wake up abruptly because of the
pain, and then resume their original position (Fig. 5-6).
Changing Positions
Restlessness and frequent changes in body position indicate that an
animal is not comfortable. Some dogs may shift from side to side or get
up and lie down multiple times (Fig. 5-7). As stated previously, some
animals change positions frequently because of a full bladder and may
need to have their bladders expressed. Good nursing practices should not
be forgotten when caring for animals in pain:
● Dogs and cats experiencing severe pain are often anxious and restless
(getting up and lying down) and may become unmanageable. Some
become aggressive.
66
PART TwO · Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
FlG. 5-1. Reluctance to move and unresponsive. Abdominal pain caused this
FlG. 5-2. Reluctance to move. Abdominal (bladder) pain caused this cat to sit
in the litter box facing the back of the cage.
●Some animals become submissive or mentally depressed because of
acute pain (Fig. 5-8). Depression can be associated with chronic pain,
and the animal may be reluctant to move or engage in any activity.
e  d    si  o 
even those that have never displayed aggression, astheir pain becomes
more severe (Fig. 5-9).
·Aggression is frequently observed in association with severe acute
pain. Often, the slightest manipulation stimulates the patient to
attempt tobite thehandler.
●Some dogs may become much more vigilant, timid, and fearful.
● Cats are much more likely to hide or attempt to escape (Fig. 5-10)
CHAPTER 5Pain BehaviorS
67
FlG. 5-3. Reluctance to move. Pain caused by trauma to a cervical disk in a
dog. Note the statuelike appearance.
FlG. 5-4. Reluctance to lie down. This dog with traumatic peritonitis would not
liedown until exhausted.
68
PART TwO · Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
FIG. 5-5. Reluctance to lie down. The so-called praying position characteristic of
dogs and cats with abdominal pain.
FIG. 5-6. Reluctance to lie down. This dog with chronic bloat and abdominal
pain remained standing in one spot until exhausted. Note the tense abdomen,
open mouth breathing, and head-down, anxious expression.
LOCOMOTOR ACTIVITY
Limping and guarding (protecting an injured area from further insult) are
clearly the most obvious signs of limb pain, whether long bone, joint, or soft
tissue in origin (Fig. 5-11). Limping is a protective behavior potentially to
Stilted gaits, placing excessive weight on the front limbs (hip osteoarthritis),
and reluctance to move are also signs of acute or chronic pain (Fig. 5-12).
CHAPTER 5Pain BehaviorS
69
FlG. 5-7. Shifting positions. This dog with abdominal pain would frequently get
minutes to lie down.
FlG. 5-8. Submissive position. This dog with abdominal trauma demonstrated
70
PART TwO · Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
FlG. 5-9.Aggression.Expression of aggression in a cat with a femoral fracture.
Note the dilated pupils, flattened ears, and open mouth.
FlG. 5-1o. Escape behavior. This cat with chronic pancreatitis attempted to
hide or escape when approached. Note the dull, ungroomed hair coat.
CHAPTER 5Pain BehaviorS
71
FlG. 5-11. Acute pain. Left foreleg lameness in a dog. Pain causes the dog to lift
its left foreleg and walk with a limp.
FIG. 5-12. Chronic pain. Severe hip osteoarthritis in a dog. Note that the majority
of the dog's weight is being camied on the front legs.
72
PART TwO + Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
VOCALIZATION
·Vocalization canbe associatedwith painfulsituations that are
mild to severe, depending on the animal's behavior pattern and the
environmental circumstances.
·Vocalization is nonspecific. Most veterinarians have experienced situ-
ations in which animals are anesthetized for minor surgical procedures
and wake up vocalizing. Some animals vocalize postoperatively as a
result of emergence delirium associated with recovery from anesthesia.
This frequently resolves in a short period.
● Some animals will not display signs of pain until the pain is severe, at
which time they may begin to whimper or vocalize.
·Vocalization may also be an example of the animal's exhaustion of
protective mechanisms (e.g-, avoidance or escape) and increased
anxiety.
Vocalizationindogs likelymanifests as groaning, whining, whimpering
or growling-
· Cats frequently groan, growl, or purr.
● Some animals whine postoperatively. Whining can also indicate a full
bladder and the need to urinate. Good nursing practices should not be
forgotten when caring for animals in pain.
ALTERED FACIAL EXPRESSIONS AND APPEARANCE
Dogs
See Fig. 5-13.
● Fixed glare, focused
· Glazed appearance
● Oblivious
● Depressed
● Ungroomed
Cats
See Fig. 5-14.
●Furrowed brow
●Squinted eyes (Fig. 5-15)
●Depressed
● Poor hair coat, ungroomed
APPETITE
S     s  o    
pain. These animals may be misdiagnosed as having some other systemic
CHAPTER 5Pain BehaviorS
73
FlG. 5-13. Facial expression. Note the head-down, fixed-gaze, and depressed
expression. The dog was oblivious to its environment.
FlG. 5-14. Facial expression. Note the squinted dull eyes and abnormal facial
expression.
74
PART TwO·Recognition and Evaluationof Pain
FlG. 5-15. Facial expression. Note the hanging head and squinted eyes.
problem. One must determine whether there are concurrent problems
that could predispose to anorexia.
APPEARANCE
s io  ss o s  d    n s 
(Fig. 5-16; see Chapter 3).
 Cats with chronic pain often fail to groom themselves, resulting in an
unkempt appearance (Fig. 5-10).
RESPONSETOMANIPVLATION
· Dogs and cats frequently respond with purposeful movement and
area. Abdominal splinting or tenseness is often due to abdominal
pain, which can be determined only by abdominal palpaton
(Fig. 5-17). During palpation, animals may try to bite the handler
(Fig. 5-18).
● Animals may also become defensive by protecting the area or by
withdrawing to avoid being touched.
●Passive animals may freeze or look at the area in question (Figs. 5-18,
5-19, and 5-20).
CHAPTER5·PainBehaviors
75
FlG. 5-16. Some cats that are chronically stressed willlose their hair coat. This
is particularly noticeable along the spine.
URINARY AND BOWEL HABITS
Dogs and cats experiencing pain commonly lose their house training,
presumably because they are too uncomfortable to go outside.
· Dogs and cats may urinate frequently because of painful distention
of the bladder or irritation (inflammation) of the bladder or urethra.
One must remember that animals that have been administered opioids
experience urinary retention as a side effect of the drugs.
● Cats may also lose their house training as pain increases, which
manifests as failure to use the litter box.
76
PART TwO · Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
FlG. 5-17. Note the facial expression and tense abdomen in this dog with ab-
dominalpainofunknownorigin.
FIG. 5-18. Response to manipulation. This dog became aggressive any time its
pelvis was palpated.
CHAPTER 5 + Pain Behaviors
77
         e      
tized in an automobile accident.
FlG. 5-2o. This dog would stare at its left chest wall after a thoracotomy.
SuGGESTED READINGS
Bateson P: Assessment of pain in animals, Anim Behav 3:87-107, 1991.
 o un ssa e   i   s
ILAR J41:62-71,2000.
Hansen B: Through a glass darkly: using behavior to assess pain, Sermin Vet Med
Surg Small Anirm 12:61-74, 1997.
Mathew KA: Pain assessment and general approach to management, Vet Clin
North Am SmallAnim Pract 30(4):729-752,2000.
OBJECTIVE, CATEGORIC
METHODS FOR ASSESSING
PAIN AND ANALGESIA
PATRICE M.MICHANDPETERW.HELLYER
Feterinarians are well trained at assessing organ system function/
dysfunction using a wide variety of measurable and quantifiable
parameters. For example, changes in blood urea nitrogen,
creatinine, and urine specific gravity can be used to assess the degree of
renal failure and the response to treatment. Unfortunately, no similar set
of objective and easily measured parameters is available to assess pain in
hampered by a lack of objective criteria to measure pain intensity and a
reluctance of medical personnel to thoroughly evaluate, ask questions,
or rely on patients’ self-reports (signs) of pain. Understanding and
appropriately treating chronic pain in animals is even more complex, re-
quiring an accurate assessment of the amount and type of tissue injury in
addition to specific psychosocial, behavioral, and psychological factors.
It can be especially diffcult to assess the degree of pain experienced by
animals and the ability of an animal to cope with that pain.2 In a survey
of Canadian veterinarians, Dohoo and Dohoo? found that one of the main
factors influencing whether veterinarians routinely administered analgesic
felt by animals. The fact that 51.5% of those veterinarians surveyed were
considered to be analgesic nonusers (never used analgesics) highlights the
clinical importance of being able to recognize pain in the species under a
veterinarian's care. In a subsequent survey, animal health technologists in
Canada had higher pain perception scores than did veterinarians.4 A majority
(55%) ofthe animal health technologists surveyed agreed that risks of potent
opioids (morphine or oxymorphone) outweighed the analgesic benefits,
suggesting a lack of experience in treating and evaluating dogs and cats for
pain. Even among veterinary personnel committed to treating pain, it can be
difficult determining whether the benefits of the analgesic protocol selected
(i.e., decreased pain intensity) outweigh the side effects (e.g-, sedation and
78
CHAPTER 6 · Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
79
nausea). Complicating the evaluation ofpain isthe fact that one set of criteria
chronic, superficial, deep, or neuropathic. There is no question that as more
studies focus on species-specific pain behaviors, the ability to recognize and
treat pain in animals will improve. Nevertheless, the assessment of pain in
animals remains a subjective and inaccurate undertaking for the foreseeable
future. One truth remains certain: ignoring pain simply because one has
trouble measuring it condemns patients to undue suffering. Endeavoring
to assess and treat pain in animals is a worthwhile and laudable goal of
veterinary professionals notwithstanding current uncertainties.
The evaluation methods described in this chapter are primarily designed
to assess acute postoperative and traumatic pain in dogs. These methods can
be adapted to chronic pain conditions and pain in cats and other species pro-
vided that the caregiver recognizes that pain behaviors are likely to be differ-
ent between species. Importantly, all of the methods described are categorical,
subjective,andpronetotheerrorofunderestimatingoroverestimatingthedegree
ofpain.Eveniftheamountofpainiscorrectlyestimated,howwell theindividua!
the current pain scales are subject to some degree of interobserver variability.
Finally, it should be recognized that pain results in stress and suffering
(see Chapter 3), adversely affecting the animal's qualityoflife (QOL). Quality-
of-life assessments should be performed by both veterinarians and owners
and are essential for evaluating treatment regimens, focusing veterinarian-
owner therapeutic goals, and as independent predictors of survival.
UMITATIONS OF OBJECTIVE AND CATEGORIC
ASSESSMENT OFPAIN
NOESTABLISHED"GOLDSTANDARD"TOASSESSPAIN
can ask the patient if the patient is painful, if the analgesic treatment has
improved pain control, and how well the patient is coping with the pain.
complain of postoperative pain may be viewed as “bad patients."5
· Likewise, no “gold standard" exists to assess pain in animals or to
compare one type of scale or measurement instrument to another.
Most pain scales have been used to assess acute postoperative pain in
dogs and cats. These scales are likelyto be ineffective at assessing other
or vasculitis. These scales are probably not useful in the assessment of
emotional or psychological pain or in the assessment of chronic pain,
such as osteoarthritis or cancer pain.
PARTTwO·RecognitionandEvaluationofPain
1. All of the pain scales used in animals rely on the recognition
and/or interpretation of some behavior. The most useful scales
behaviors while minimizing the interpretation of those behaviors.
2. All pain scales have a subjective component and are vulnerable to
observer error and bias.
PHYSIOLOGICALASSESSMENT CANBEMISLEADING
● By no means is it clear that physiological data (e.g-, changes in heart
rate, respiratory rate, arterial blood pressure, and pupil dilation) are
useful in assessing response to a noxious (harmful) stimulus. For ex-
ample, physiological measurements, including heart rate, respiratory
rate, rectal temperature, plasma cortisol and β-endorphin concentra-
tions, did not differentiate between cats that underwent surgery (te-
nectomy, onychectomy) and control cats that were anesthetized and
bandaged but had no surgery.6
1. Cardiopulmonary reflexes may obtund the easily recognizable
changes in physiological parameters in response to pain.
pain from other stressors such as anxiety, fear, or physiological
responses to metabolic conditions (e.g-, anemia).7
3. Holton et al.8 found that heart rate and respiratory rate were not
useful indicators of pain in hospitalized dogs following surgery.
Pupil dilation was significantly correlated with the pain score
(numeric rating scale) in dogs following surgery. Nevertheless, the
authors indicated that pupil size is unlikely to be a useful parameter
 to assess pain in hospitalized dogs.
● Note that some ofthe pain scales presented in this chapter use physi-
ological data and some do not. In the authors' opinion, physiological
 s sonxou oi ssodsai hssssse  msn ane snd
 patients under general anesthesia or for transient periods in con-
scious patients. The longer a conscious patient experiences pain, the
less useful are physiological parameters in assessing the degree of
pain.
BEHAVIORALASSESSMENTISSUBJECT
TOINTERPRETATION
· Evaluation of pain in animals relies on behavioral assessment and in-
terpretation by an observer. Please refer to Chapter 3 for examples of
behaviors indicative of pain in dogs.
CHAPTER6·Objective,CategoricMethodsforAssessingPainandAnalgesia
LB
● Behavioral changes indicative of pain may be too subtle or take too long
to be recognized under routine clinical situations. This was verified in
the most extensive evaluation to date of pain behaviors in dogs following
Ovariohysterectomy.9 Using two evaluation methods, a numeric scoring
system and quantitative behavioral measurements, Hardie et al. evalu-
ated dogs following anesthesia only and anesthesia plus surgery, with or
without analgesia. Surgery resulted in an increase in pain score, sedation
score, time spent sleeping, and a decrease in greeting behaviors during
timed interactions with caregivers. Importantly, dogs that received oxy-
morphone (preoperatively and 6, 12, and 18 hours later) had a faster re-
turn to more normal greeting behaviors than did dogs that had surgery
and placebo. Quantitative behavioral measurements were able to differ-
entiate postoperatively the dogs that were administered oxymorphone
from placebo-treated dogs, whereas the numeric scoring system was not.
● Sporadic observation of animal behavior may not reveal signs ofpain. Ex-
    s ae  is  r  
stance, dogs may wag their tail and greet an observer at the cage door in
spite of being in pain. Cats may simply hide in the back of their cage and
demonstrate no behaviors that would suggest to a casual observer that
they are painful. Flock animals, such as sheep, may be startled when an
observer approaches and attempt to conceal any signs of pain by staying
bunched up with the rest of the flock (personal observations).
● Behavioral changes indicating pain may not be what one expects. A
cat sitting quietly in the back of the cage after surgery may be painful;
however, pain would not be recognized if the caregiver expects to see
more active signs of pain such as pacing, agitation, or vocalization.
1. A lack of familiarity with normal behaviors typical of a particular
species or breed makes recognition of pain-induced behaviors
      i  r
developed for most species, dogs being a notable exception.
2. Pain tolerance of individual animals within a species may vary
a   d n d   e
some of the variability observed in clinical patients.1l
GUIDELINES FOR USE OF PAIN SCALES
RECOGNIZETHEINTENDEDPURPOSE
OFTHEASSESSMENTMETHOD
Regardless of the scale or method used to assess pain, it is critical that the
caregiver recognize the limitations of the scale and the purpose for which
the scale was developed. For example, if a scale uses lack of grooming and
82
PARTTwO·RecognitionandEvaluationofPain
B e   s n d   e  e 
could draw anyreasonable conclusions about grooming in the immediate
postoperative period. Thus lack of grooming would not be expected to be
a helpful criterion during the first 12 to 24 hours after surgery. Likewise,
inactivity is a difficult, if not impossible, parameter to assess if the animal
● The evaluation of acute surgical and traumatic pain in dogs and cats
has received a fair amount of attention in recent years.9,12-15 Many
of the criteria commonly used—such as vocalizing, trying to escape,
and thrashingare not applicable to chronic pain. In addition, clini-
grooming, inappetence, weight loss—are not incorporated into these
scales for reasons already mentioned. In general, responses to acute
surgical and traumatic pain are likely to be more marked and readily
recognizable than clinical signs associated with chronic pain.
● The clinical signs of pain/discomfort associated with acute, nonsurgical
diseases (e.g- pancreatitis, pleuritis, and vasculitis) might not be recog-
how does one assess the discomfort/suffering associated with constant
vomiting, fever-induced myalgia, or abdominal pain/cramping? If a dog
vomits 5, 10, or 20 times an hour, are there simply concerns about stop-
ping the vomiting and rehiydrating the patient, or might there be concerns
regarding abdominal pain/discomfort associated with the vomiting?
How many times have veterinarians diagnosed abdominal pain in pup-
pies with parvovirus, yet analgesics were not administered? What does
a clinical sign such as head pressing or head banging on the side of the
cage indicate in a dog with acute septic peritonitis? Does the clinical sign
represent the desperate attempts of the animal to cope with its pain and
suffering? Assessing this type of patient with a standard pain scale devel.
oped to evaluate a dog following surgery would likely result in a score
that was too low to prompt analgesic therapy. Thus, care must be taken
    s s       
of good clinical judgment and assessment of the patient.
● Cancer pain may have components of acute pain (e.g-, expansion of
a tumor or side effects of surgical, radiation, or chemotherapy treat-
ment) and components of chronic pain. Thus, assessment of cancer
pain requires the caregiver to use methods that can detect behavioral
changes associated with acute and chronic pain. Indeed, an increase
in pain-related behaviors may indicate the progression of disease and
prompt further diagnostic and therapeutic interventions, as well as
changes in analgesic therapy.
CHAPTER 6 • Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
E8
B0X 6-1
Key Points Related to Pain Scales
1. Pain scales should be used to ensure that pain is assessed and treated in every patient.
2. Pain scales are an adjunct to good physical examinations and thorough patient
evaluation.
3. All pain scales have their limitations.
 4. Individual behaviors frequently prompt analgesic therapy regardless of pain score.
comfortable.
● Evaluation of the degree of lameness of the affected limb(s) is often
used to assess chronic orthopedic pain. In addition, observations of
owners are essential to detect more subtle signs of chronic pain such as
lack of activity, change in attitude or interaction with family members,
and changes in appetite. Response to therapy, such as increased ac-
tivity after administering a nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug, may
provide important information regarding the role that pain has played
in behavioral changes that was not illuminated by the pain scale and
that may even surprise owners.
USE PAIN SCALE TO GUIDE THERAPY
The purpose of any pain scale is to help guide analgesic, medical, or
surgical treatment and to provide diagnostic/prognostic information
regarding the onset of healing and the resolution of tissue injury
(Box 6-1).
● Pain scales may be used to ensure that individual animals are com-
fortable during the recuperative phase following surgery, trauma,
invasive diagnostic procedures, or medical conditions. This is
particularly important in animals that are unlikely to demonstrate
Overtly recognizable signs of pain, such as cats or “stoic" dogs.
· Pain scales may encourage the frequent evaluation of patients that are
likely to be in pain, ensuring that pain does not go unrecognized or
undertreated.
1. Many human hospitals in the United States are now required to
monitor pain as one of the patients' vital signs. Pain, like heart
rate, respiratory rate, and body temperature, is considered to be a
critical clinical sign.
2. An institutional commitment to the treatment of pain is
required in order to make certain that pain is not overlooked or
ignored.16
PART TwO·Recognition and Evaluation ofPain
3. The American Animal Hospital Association has incorporated
pain management standards as a component of its Standards of
Accreditation.
· Pain scales should not be used to deny analgesic therapy to an animal that
whether analgesic therapy needs to be increased or can be tapered off.
1. Do not use rigid minimum scores to prompt therapy.
2. Individual behaviors suggestive of animal pain/distress should
overrule results of pain score.
3. If the procedure was likely to be painful, but the pain score is too
low to prompt treatment, try a test dose of analgesic and observe
the patient'sresponse.
● Sedated, critically ill, or compromised animals may not be able to elicit
behaviors required to prompt treatment using the pain scale.
1. Consider low-dose opioid therapy in the animal likely to
surroundings, but not agitation, suggests a beneficial effect of
analgesic therapy.
· If one is unsure that the patient is painful, but tissue trauma has
occurred, treat for pain conservatively and observe results.
FREQUENTLYOBSERVETHEANIMAL
The health status ofthe animal, extent of surgery/injuries, and anticipated
duration of analgesic drugs determine the frequency and interval of
evaluations.
● In general, evaluations should be made at least hourly for the first 4 to
 6 hours after surgery, provided the animal has recovered from anes-
thesia, has stable vital signs, and is resting comfortably.
● Animals not recovering as anticipated from anesthesia/surgery and
critically ill animals require much more frequent evaluations until
they are stabilized.
· Patient response to analgesic therapy and expected duration of analge-
sic drug(s) administered help to determine frequency of evaluations.
For example, if a dog is resting comfortably following the postopera-
hive administration of morphine, it may not need to be reassessed for
2 to 4 hours. Animals should be allowed to sleep following analgesic
therapy. Vital signs can often be checked without unduly disturbing a
sleeping animal. In general, animals are not awakened to check their
pain status.
● Continuous, undisturbed observations, coupled with periodic interac-
five observations (open the cage, palpate wound) are likely to provide
CHAPTER 6 · Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
more information than occasionally observing the animal through the
cage door.9 Unfortunately, continuous observations are not practical
for most clinical situations.
● In general, the more frequent the observations, the more likely that
subtle signs of pain will be detected.
SUBJECTIVE AND SEMIOBJECTIVEPAIN
SCALES FOR ACUTE SURGICAL
AND TRAUMATIC PAIN
PREEMPTIVESCORINGSYSTEM
The preemptive scoring system is a subjective scoring system based on the
amount of pain an individual observer feels the animal will experience
following a given procedure.
Preemptive scoring systems assign a degree of pain (none, mild, mod-
erate, severe) based on the procedure performed and the amount of
tissue trauma involved (Box 6-2).17 In general, the greater the amount
of tissue trauma, the greater the assigned level of pain.
BOX 6-2
Preemptive Scoring System
Minor Procedures: No Pain or
Moderate Surgeries: Moderate Pain
Temporary Pain
Anal sacculectomy
Grooming
 Cutaneous mass removal
 Nail trim
Cystotomy
 Physical examination, restraint 
 Dental extraction
Radiography
Feline onychectomy
Suture removal, cast application, bandage
Ovariohysterectomy, castration,
change*
cesarean section
Minor Surgeries: Minor Pain
Severe laceration repair
Abscess lancing
Major Surgeries: Severe Pain
Dental cleaning
Ear canal ablation
Ear examination and cleaning
Fracture repair, cruciate ligament repair
Removal of cutaneous foreign bodies
Limb amputation
Suturing, debridement
Thoracotomy, laminectomy,
Urinary catheterization
exploratory laparotomy
Preemptive scoring system used to anticipate the amount of pain induced by surgical
procedures. Modifed from A roundtable discussion: rethinking your approach to sedation,
aesthesia, and anaigesia, Lenexa, Kan, 1997, Veterinary Medicine Publishing.
The pain categories are only a "best guess" of the amount of pain a certain procedure
Xew sjeurue jenpraipul ued ayi laears ayn 'ewnenl anss arow ayi jerauas ul saonpu!
have more or less pain than the category suggests.
*Setting of fractures and some bandage changes can be very painful.
86
PART TwO • Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
50
100
No pain
Worst pain
possible
FlG. 6-1. Visual analog scale (VAS) used to estimate an animal's current pain
status. The scale is a 100-mm line representing the entire spectrum of pain, from
te animal's estimated pain.
· The advanta ges of preemptive scoring systems include simplicity and
example, procedures inducing moderate to severe pain often require
the use of multiple analgesic drugs and techniques to manage pain
adequately.
● One of the primary disadvantages of preemptive scoring systems is
they are not useful in determining the degree of pain felt by an indi-
vidual patient. As a result of species, breed, temperament, and indi-
 scoring systems are not useful in assessing response to therapy.
VISUAL ANALOG SCALE
● The visual analog scale (VAS) is a semiobjective scoring system used
to quantify pain intensity.
· The VAS is typically a straight, horizontal line, 100 mm in length,
bracketed with descriptors of pain intensity (e.g., No Pain, [Very Ex-
treme] Worst Pain Possible) on either end of the line (Fig. 6-1).
● The patient draws a vertical line across the scale that best represents the
patient's degree of pain. The patient may be asked to assess pain at the
current time or the worst pain that occurred since the last assessment.
· The VAS has been used extensively in human beings and is gener-
ally completed by the patient experiencing the pain. The scale avoids
the use of imprecise descriptive terms and provides many points from
which to choose. In people, bracketing the VAS with terms such as
“no relief of pain” and “complete relief of pain" may provide more
clinically useful information because patients do not all start with the
same degree of pain.18
1. The primary advantage of the VAS is its ease of use as a quantitative
mechanism providing a general assessment of trends (i.e., whether
pain is getting worse or improving). This scale is not species
specific.
CHAPTER 6·Objective,Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
28
BOX 6-3
Simple Descriptive Scale
0 = No pain
1 = Mild pain
2 =Moderate pain
3= Severe pain
Simple descriptive scale used to estimate an animal's current pain status.
2. Disadvantages of the VAS include the concept that pain is a
multidimensional experience and pain intensity as measured by the
VAS is only one aspect ofthat experiencel°; the use of the VAS may
scale (see the following); and the VAS may erroneously appear
as a more sensitive scale compared with other scales, resulting in
Overinterpretation or excessive confidence in the results.13
· The use of the VAS in veterinary medicine relies on an observer to
identify and interpret pain behaviors in the patient. Advantages and
disadvantages of the VAS as used in animals are similar to those noted
before. Additionally, consider the following:
1. Observer bias may play a key role in assessing pain, leading to the
possibility of overdiagnosing or underdiagnosing pain.
2. Variability of visual acuity among observers may affect the accuracy
of the VAS.13
3. Observer variability, when more than one observer evaluates an
animal, affects the accuracy of the VAS.13
4. In human beings, at least one study has shown that an individual's
score must move at least 13 mm along the 100-mm scale in order
for a significant change in acute, traumatic pain to be clinically
significant. Even if there is a 50% change in VAS score, it is not
known whether that represents an adequate degree of pain relief
unless the patient is asked.18,20 The sensitivity of the VAS has not
been determined in animals; therefore, changes in VAS score
should be interpreted in light of overall patient appearance.
SIMPLEDESCRIPTIVESCALE
The simple descriptive scale (SDS) is a semiobjective scoring system.
● The SDS usually consists of four or five categories or descriptions of
pain intensity (Box 6-3). Each description is assigned a number, which
becomes the patient's pain score.13 This differs from the preemptive
88
PARTTwO·RecognitionandEvaluationofPain
scoring system in that the SDS assigns a score based on observation of
the individual animal and not the nature of the procedure performed.
Advantages ofthe SDS are that it is simple to use, it is not species-spe-
cific, and the results are not affected by visual acuity (no drawing of a
line required). The SDS can be used to follow response to therapy and
thereby guide therapy. Unlike the VAS, the SDS better addresses the
multidimensional aspects of pain.
· Disadvantages of the SDS are that it is not a sensitive scale (consists
of only 4 or 5 categories); therefore, it may overestimate or under-
estimate the degree of pain and the efficacy of analgesic therapy. In
addition, observer bias may play a key role in determining pain score;
and like theVAS, observer variability, when more than one observer
evaluates an animal, affects accuracy.
NUMERICALRATINGSCALE
● The numerical rating scale (NRS) is a semiobjective scoring system.
● The NRS consists of multiple categories with descriptive definitions
of pain for each category (Table 6-1).21 The NRS generally uses cat-
egories that are assigned whole numbers, and the importance of each
category is not weighted. 12
● The NRS prompts the observer to evaluate certain aspects of the pa-
tient that might otherwise go unnoticed (e.g-, appearance of the eyes,
interactive behaviors, and physiological parameters).
· Advantages of the NRS include a more thorough patient evaluation
than what is prompted by the VAS or SDS, an easy method to tabulate
the score, and numerous categories on which to base an assessment of
patient comfort and response to therapy.
● Disadvantages of the NRS include lack of accuracy and little improve-
mentover theSDs.12
1. Categories are generally scored by whole numbers, suggesting that
not be true.12
2. In spite of numerous categories, painful animals may go
undiagnosed. For example, a dog with severe abdominal pain may
not receive a high enough number to be considered painful when
using a scale designed to assess surgical pain.
3. In the postsurgical patient, the NRS may be too insensitive to detect
differences in some animals that receive analgesics and those that
go untreated.9 Thus the NRS may only be able to identify those
animals with extreme pain that overtly demonstrate pain behaviors
and would have been identified otherwise.
CHAPTER 6 · Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
68
4. The NRS may not be useful in species other than dogs.
5. The NRS does not account for the residual or adverse effects of
anesthesia in scoring. Examples include dysphoria and persistent
sedation.
BEHAVIORAL PAIN SCALES FOR ACUTE
SURGICAL AND TRAUMATIC PAIN
THE UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE PAIN SCALE:
A BEHAVIORALANDPHYSIOLOGICALRESPONSES SCALE
● The University of Melbourne Pain Scale (UMPS) is a scale based on
specific behavioral and physiological responses. 12
● The UMPS includes multiple descriptors in six categories of param-
eters or behaviors related to pain (Table 6-2).
· Advantages of the UMPS may include increased accuracy over the pre
emptive scoring system, VAS, SDS, or NRS and an ability to weight the
importance of certain behaviors or parameters.
1. Multiple factors evaluated increase the sensitivity and specificity of
the UMPS.
2. The UMPS relies on behavioral observations, thereby limiting
interpretation and observer bias.
3. The UMPS evaluates changes in behavior or demeanor, adding to
the sensitivity of the scale.
· Disadvantages of the UMPS include limited validation to date. The
specific types of patients and procedures in which the UMPS would be
expected to be accurate have not been elucidated.
1. The UMPS may not be sensitive enough to detect small changes in
pain behaviors, particularly if patient evaluations are performed
only periodically.
2. The UMPS was designed to evaluate dogs following surgery. The
accuracy of the scale for other uses or for use in other species has
not been established.
3. The UMPS requires some knowledge of the demeanor (mental
and behavioral status) of the dog before anesthesia and surgery.
Although the veterinary staff usually knows this, the dog's actual
temperament when truly comfortable at home will probably not
be known. In other words, the demeanor of the dog after surgery
will be compared with an already altered demeanor that exists
       i    
familiar surroundings. An important consideration is that previous
experiences may play a significant role in the response of a patient
and may alter the accuracy of the scale.
06
PART TwO • Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
 guarding; hunched-up position; legs in abnormal position; grunting before expiration; teeth grinding 
Volent reaction to stimuli; vocalizing when wound is not touched; snapping, growling, or hissing
Markedly abnormal: very restless; vocalizing; self-mutilation; grunting; facing back of cage
Vocalizing when wound is touched; somewhat restless; reluctant to move but willif coaxed 
Mild changes: eyelids partially closed; ears flattened or carried abnormally
alow spunom pe syool pauanot si ahis jeibuns uaum keme siind
Moderate agitation; restless and uncomfortable
Frequent position changes or reluctance to move
Extremely agitated; thrashing
Normalamount of movement
 Patient Criteria
Asleep or calm 
Minor changes
Veterinary Medical Center
Thrashing
Hormal
Normal
Normal
Score
23
1
2
0
23
23
23
Behavior (unprovoked)
TABLE 6-1
 hteractive behavior
Observation
Movement
 Appearance
Comfort
CHAPTER 6 · Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
L6
dogs and cats that may be in pain after surgery or trauma. The exact score that will indicate that treatment for pain is appropriate and willvary from individual
866l ssi-ooz snpa uiuo puaduo si ioue 'Md 1akah uoi paidep sies pue ssop ut ued ssasse oi pasn aes Sui suaunn
Intermittent crying or whimpering; no response to calm voice and stroking
Continuous noise that is unusual for this animal
'paiou iotaeyaq ut sasueuo pue paiaistupe aq pinoys sisaaigue jo asop isal e 'ued ut st eue
ons pue ai wea on sposai uii
0%-15% above presurgical value
16%-29% above presurgical value
0%-45% above presurgical value
 anen i6.nsa.d 9noge %g t-%0
16%-29% above presurgical value
30%-45% above presurgical value
>45% above presurgical value
>45% above presurgical value
Quiet
3
012301230123
Respiration rate
Total score (0-24)
Vocalization
Heart rate 
9
92
PART TwO + Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
Score
02
123
12312023001023
 (umop pue dn buma6 Aisnonuguos buned) ssapsad
 Percentage increase in heart rate relative to
Rectal temperature exceeds reference range 
Physiologic data within reference range
No change from preprocedural behavior 
Guards/reacts* when touched 
Guards/reacts* before touched
to preprocedural rate 
preprocedural rate
 rest semiconscious
 rest sleeping 
Rolling, thrashing 
Dilated pupils
 rest: awake
Descriptor
%00K
>20%
>50%
%00K
Salivation
Eating 
University of Melbourne Pain Scale
2. Response to palpation (choose only one)
 3. Activity (choose only one)
 Choose only one 
d. Choose only one
TABLE 6-2
1. Physiologic data
Category
CHAPTER 6 · Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
6
an saurexa iossasse aul snea saunu pausisse are ieyi sioaeuaq snoea jo sioidiusp sueiuo Aioaie ypeg 'saogaies xis sapnput aess ured aui
Includes turning head toward affected area biting,licking, or scratching at the wound; snapping at the handler; or tense muscle and a protective (guarding)
0123
2
01
2１
2
0223
and postprocedural scores. The minimum possible total pain score is 0 points; the maximum possible pain score is 27 points.
Guarding or protecting affected area includes
Abnormal posture(eg., prayer position or
htermittent vocalization
Continuous vocalization
Lateral recumbency
 fetal position)
hunched back)
Overtly friendly
Not vocalizing
Aggressive
Modified from Firth AM, Haldane SL: I Am Vet Med Assoc 214:651-659, 1999.
Moving 
4. Mental status (choose only one)
6. Vocalizationt (choose only one)
rSusyreq lale apnpu lou saod1
b. Choose only one 
 5. Posture 
posture.
PARTTwO·Recognition andEvaluationofPain
4. The UMPS does not account for the residual or adverse effects of
anesthesia in scoring. Examples include dysphoria and persistent
sedation.
BEHAVIORALRESPONSESCALES
· The Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Score (GCMPS) is a scale
based on specific behavioral signs believed to represent pain in the
dog (B0x 6-4).22
1. The behaviors included in the scale were derived from a
questionnaire of veterinarians.
2. The expressions used to describe pain behaviors were reduced to
specific words and validated using a variety of statistical methods.
3. Potential advantages of this scale include the following:
a. Limited interpretation and bias is required by the observer.
b.Accuracy is increased over the preemptive scoring system,VAS,
SDS, and NRS
c. Observers simply identify the presence or absence of a behavior.
d. Terms used to describe individual behaviors are specifically
defined, thereby decreasing uncertainty in using the scale.
e. Physiological data are not included, making the scale easier to
use than the UMPS and perhaps more accurate.
4. Disadvantages of the scale are the following:
a. Limited validation in actual animal studies
b. Lack of a numeric scoring system that would allow for compari-
son of scores over time
c. Designed for use in dogs only
d. Does not take into account the impact of demeanor/tempera-
ment, as well as previous experience of the patient
e. Does not account for residual effect of anesthetics
· Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Score Short Form (GCMPS-SF) is
a modification of the Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Score and as
such can be applied quickly in a clinical setting. The short form was
designed as a clinical decision-making tool developed for dogs in acute
pain (Box 6-5).23
1. Advantages of this scale include those listed before for the original
Glasgow scale as well as its use as a numeric rating scale that
facilitates therapeutic decision making and comparison among
observers and over time. Additionally, the shorter format allows
for easier use and potentially increased use.
2. Disadvantages include those listed before with the notable
exception of b.
CHAPTER 6·Objective,CategoricMethods forAssessingPain and Analgesia
95
B0X 6-4
The Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Score
The questionnaire is made up of a number of sections, each of which has several
possible answers. Please check the answers that you feel are appropriate to the
dog you are assessing. If more than one answer is appropriate, then check all that
apply. Approach the kennel and ensure you are not wearing a laboratory coat or
  ss      a aa , 
While you approach the kennel, look at the dog's behavior and reactions. From
outside the dog's kennel, look at the dog's behavior and answer the following
questions.
Look at the Dog's Posture; Does It Seem ...
Neither of these 
Hunched or tense 
Does the Dog Seem to be ...
Restless 
Comfortable 
If the Dog is Vocalizing, Is It ..
Crying or Whimpering 
Screaming 
Groaning 
Not vocalizing/none of these 
If the Dog Is Paying Attention to Its Wound, Is It ...
Chewing 
Ignoring its wound 
Licking, looking, or rubbing 
Now approach the kennel door and call the dog's name. Then open the door and
encourage the dog to come to you. From the dog's reaction to you and behaviors when
Does the Dog Seem to be ...
Aggressive 
Quiet or indifferent 
Depressed 
Happy and content 
Disinterested 
Happy and bouncy 
Nervous, anxious, or fearful 
During This Procedure, Did the Dog Seem to Be ..
口券
None of these 
Slow or reluctant to rise or sit 
Assessment not carried out 
Lame
The next procedure is to assess the dog's response to touch. If the animal has a
wound, apply gentle pressure to the wound using two fingers in an area approximately 2
 inches around it. If the position of the wound is such that it is impossible to touch, then
apply the pressure to the closest point to the wound. If there is no wound, apply the same
pressure to the stifle and surrounding area.
Continued
From Holton L, Reid J, Scott EM, et al: Vet Rec 148(17):525-531, 2001.
96
PARTTwO·RecognitionandEvaluationofPain
B0X 6-4
The Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Score -cont'd
When Touched, Did the Dog..
Cry □
Growl or guard wound 
Hinch 
None of these 
Snap
Definitions of expressions used in the Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Score for dogs
Posture
Rigid: Animal lying in lateral recumbency, legs extended or partially extended in
a fixed position.
Hunched: When animal is standing, its back forms a convex shape with abdomen
tucked up, or, back in a concave shape with shoulders and front legs lower than hips.
Tense: Animal appears frightened or reluctant to move; overallimpression is of tight
muscles. Animal can be in any body position.
Normal body posture: Animal may be in any position, appears comfortable, with
musclesrelaxed.
Comfort
Restless: Moving bodily position, circling, pacing, shifting body parts, unsettled.
Comfortable: Animal resting and relaxed, no avoidance or abnormal body position
evident or setted, remains in same body position, at ease.
Vocalization
Crying: Extension of the whimpering noise, louder and with open mouth.
Whimpering: Often quiet, short, high-pitched sound, frequently closed mouth (whining).
Groaning: Low moaning or grunting deep sound, intermittent.
Screaming: Animal making a continual high-pitched noise, inconsolable, mouth wide open.
AttentiontoWoundArea
Chewing: Using mouth and teeth on wound area, pulling stitches.
Licking: Using tongue to stroke area of wound.
Looking: Turning head in direction of area of wound.
Rubbing: Using paw or kennel floor to stroke wound area.
Ignoring: Paying no attention to the wound area.
Demeanor
Aggressive: Mouth open or lip curled showing teeth, snarling, growling, snapping, or
barking.
Disinterested: Cannot be stimulated to wag tail or interact with observer.
Nervous: Eyes in continual movement, often head and body movement, jumpy.
Anxious: Worried expression, eyes wide with whites showing, wrinkled forehead.
Fearful: Cowering away, guarding body and head.
Quiet: Sitting or lying still, no noise, will look when spoken to but does not respond.
Indifferent Not responsive to surroundings or observer.
Content Interested in surroundings, has positive interaction with observer, responsive
andalert.
Continued
CHAPTER 6 + Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
97
BOX6-4
The Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Score-cont'd
Mobility
Stiff: Stilted gait, also slow to rise or sit, may be reluctant to move.
Slow to rise or sit: Slow to get up or sit down but not stilted in movement.
Reluctant to rise or sit Needs encouragement to get up or sit down.
Lame: Irregular gait, uneven weight bearing when walking.
Normal mobility: Gets up and lies down with no alteration from normal.
Response to touch
Cry: A short vocal response. Looks at area and opens mouth, emits a brief sound.
Hinch: Painful area is quickly moved away from stimulus either before or in response
to touch.
Snap: Tries to bite observer before or in response to touch.
Growl: Emits a low prolonged warning sound before or in response to touch.
Guard: Pulls painful area away from stimulus or tenses local muscles in order to
protect from stimulus.
Nbne: Accepts firm pressure on wound with none of the aforementioned reactions.
B0X 6-5
Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Score -Short Form
Dog's Name:
Hospital Number:
Date:
Time of Assessment:
Assessor:
Surgery: Yes / No
Routine Analgesic Intervention: Yes / No
Procedure or Condition:
Do you think this dog needs analgesia? Yes / No
A. Look at dog in kennel. Is the dog?
0
Quiet
0
Crying or whimpering
1
Groaning
2
Screaming
3
(ii)
Ignoring any wound or painful area
0
Looking at wound or painful area
1
Licking wound or painful area
2
Rubbing wound or painful area
3
Chewing wound or painful area
4
In the case of spinal, pelvic, or multiple limb fractures, or where assistance is
required to aid locomotion, do not carry out section B and proceed to C. Please
mark if this is the case, and then proceed to C.
Continued
98
PART TwO·Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
B0X 6-5
Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Score-Short Form
cont'd
B. Put lead on dog and lead out of kennel. When the dog walks/rises, is it?
(i)
Normal
0
Lame
1
Slow or reluctant
2
3
It refuses to move
4
C. If it has a wound or painful area, including abdomen, apply gentle pressure
2 inches around site. Does it?
(iv)
Do nothing
0
Look around 
1
Flinch
2
Growl or guard area
3
Snap
4
Cry
5
D. Overall. Is the dog?
(v)
 Happy and content or happy and bouncy
0
Quiet
1
Indifferent or nonresponsive to surroundings
2
Nervous or anxious or fearful
3
 Depressed or nonresponsive to stimulation
4
(vi)
Comfortable
0
Unsettled
1
Restless
2
Hunched or tense
3
Rigid
4
TOTAL SCORE (i+ii+ ili+ iv+V+ vi} =
From Reid J, Scott M, Nolan A: Vet Anaesth Analg 32(6):7, 2005.
RECOMMENDED PAIN SCALE: COLORADO
STATE UNIVERSITY VETERINARY MEDICAL
CENTER ACUTE PAIN SCALES
(CANINE AND FELINE)
A modified pain scale is presented in Figs. 6-2 to 6-4. This scale is a
composite scale derived from the UMPS, GCMPS, GCMPS-SF, and
the SDs. The format is intended to incorporate the most practical
features of the other scales in a single-page, user-friendly design.
The scale uses an observational period and a hands-on evaluation of
the patient. In general, the assessment begins with quiet observation
CHAPTER 6·Objective,Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
of the patient in its cage at a relatively unobtrusive distance. Afterward,
the patient as a whole (wound and the entire body) is approached to
assess reaction to gentle palpation, indicators of muscle tension and
heat, and response to interaction.
● The scale uses a generic 0-to-4 scale with quarter marks as its base
(Fig. 6-5) along with a color scale as a visual cue for progression along
the 5-point scale.
 Realistic artist's renderings of animals at various levels of pain add fur-
ther visual cues. Additional drawings provide space for recording pain,
warmth, and muscle tension; this allows documentation of specific
areas of concern in the medical record. A further advantage of these
drawings is that the observer is encouraged to assess the overall pain of
the patient in addition to focusing on the primary lesion.
● The scale includes psychological and behavioral signs of pain and pal-
pation responses. Further, the scale uses body tension as an evaluation
tool, a parameter not addressed in other scales.
● There is a provision for nonassessment in the resting patient. To the
authors'knowledge,thisisthe only scalethatemphasizesthe importance
of delaying assessment in a sleeping patient while prompting the
observer to recognize patients that may be inappropriately obtunded
by medication or a more serious health concern.
· Advantages of this scale include ease of use with minimal interpre-
tation required. Specific descriptors for individual behaviors are pro-
vided, which decreases interobserver variability. Additionally, a scale is
 provided for the dog and the cat. This is the first comprehensive feline
pain scale as of this date.
S         
comparing it with other scales. Further, its use is largely limited to and
is intended for use in acute pain. As of this writing, scales have not
been developed for other species.
100
PART TwO + Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
Not grooming
punqO
Inappetant
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY VETERINARY TEACHING HOSPITAL
Descrlptors (Circke):
 PAIN MANAGEMENT PLAN
Ibs/ kgAtitude:
Restless
Trembling
Comnments:
Diagno
C/F
Reluctant to move 
Non-ambulatory 
Aggressive 
Causa of pain:
Departrment:
Weight:
bupeng
Recumbent 
Lame non-weight bearing 
N quo uoded uo uld
Previous Analgesic History:
Leff
Right
Respiratory rate:
Agitated 
Hunched 
Other 
|BSJ0
Date:
Continuous 
Is pain present upon admission?YN
Excited 
Lame weight bearing 
1
 PATIENT ID CARD
Depressed
Dccasional
口□□口
口□□
□□□□
口□口
Slgns of paln (Chack allthat apphy:
Normal 
None 
Normal 
punos
Secondary hyperalgesia
Othar signs of pain:
Central anagesia
Vocalization:
:JoAeqeg
Postura:
Gait:
CHAPTER 6 · Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
101
口
Chemotherapy 
口
THERAPY
Surgery
Radiation
WorstPossiblePain
CompleteAnalgesia
Release date:
Comments
VISUALANALOGSCALE
VISUALANALOGSCALE
Jose/Rout
Comments:
NoAnalgesia
Date
No Pain
laookogcandaltarnatna)
RESPONSETOTHERAPY:
Time [HH:MM]:
SEVERITYOF PAIN:
Time [HH:MM]:
Prascribad
Event:
Currant
Clinician:
102
PART TwO + Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
Body Tension
jewuin
PI!W
Response to Palpaticn
Nontender to palpation of
Interested in or curious about surroundings
Psychological&Behavioral
Comfortable when resting
laaiss
Date
guur
口
口口
Canine Acute Pain Scale
VeterinaryMedical Center
Rescore when awake
Example
niversity
Pain Score
CHAPTER 6 + Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
103
ejeiepon ql PI
uend oisebigue
uend isebieul
Moderate
May react aggressively to palpation
BSE
threat, andior pulling away
口
or surroundings
but willook around to see what is gcing on
May bite or chew at wound, but unlikely to
Potentially unresponsive to suroundings
ded
Warm
1 Difficult to distract from pain
chewing wound when unet
■
MOIC
RIGHT
口口
口口
口□
 2006/PW Hellyer, SR Uhrig, NG Robinson
Comments
3
4
Robinson.)
104
PART TwO + Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
Body Tension
Minima
OIW
Response to Palpation
pain
口
unsettled
Interested in cr curious about surroundings
Psychological & Behavioral
pepueneun ueum
o fuo s!jeum eas ol punoe
resting
Aeu
8
ime
000
口
□口
VeterinaryMedical Center
FelineAcutePainScale
Op
ColoradoStateUniversity
Rescore when awake
Example
iversity
CHAPTER 6 · Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
105
Mild to Moderate
Moderate
LEFT
movement
allodynia
口
口
口
□口
Decreased appelite, not interested in food
Tender to palpation
unresponsive locrunaware
 
cifficult to distra
ox
irritating
口□
口
口口
口
口
□□
口
 2006/PW Hellyer, SR Uhrig, NG Robinson
Comments.
2
3
Robinson.)
106
PART TwO • Recognition and Evaluation of Pain
0
No
pain
Mild
pain
Moderate
pain
Severe
+
pain
Verysevere
(worse) pain
FIG. 6-5. The Ohio State University Veterinary Teaching Hospital Pain Scale
and Pain Management Form. (Courtesy W.w. Muir.)
HEALTH RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE SCALES
(CANINE AND FELINE)
Quality of life in animals can be assessed by the use of multi-item
questionnaires that incorporate general yes or no or multiple option
(psychological), and social.24-26 Physical factors include those issues
that are associated with animals’ ability to perform daily living
activities including but not limited to locomotion, appetite, and sleep.
Behavioral factors include level of consciousness, sense of well-being,
and cognitive functioning. Social factors include both quantitative and
qualitative consideration of owner-animal, social relationships, and
societal integration. All pain assessment tools should (must) be used
in conjunction with QOL assessment to maximize animal well-being
(Fig. 6-6).
CHAPTER 6 •Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia
107
Date:
Animal name:
Case#:
Type of disease:
Classification of QOL
Domain
Regularly Sometimes Rarely
Physical
Is your pet's energy level normal?
Is your pet capable of completing normal
everyday tasks (playing, working, going up
stairs, etc.)?
 Is your pet eating normal amounts of food?
 Does your pet get up to greet you?
 Does your pet run around the house?
 Can your pet get up easily?
Is your pet breathing normally?
Does your pet let you touch the painful area?
Behavioral
Is your pet behaving normally?
Does your pet groom itself?
Does your pet sleep comfortably?
Is your pet urinating and defecating normally?
Does your pet ever seem depressed?
Is your pet ever anxious or nervous?
Does your pet cry out unexpectedly?
Is your pet ever aggressive?
 Is your pet reacting adversely to any
medications?
 Do you think your pet is happy?
Social
Is your pet happy to see you when you get
home?
 Does your pet interact normally with you and
other people?
 Does your pet interact normally with other
 animals?
Clinician:
What is your pet's quality of life?
Quality of life could not be worse
Quality of life could not be better
0.
10
FIG.6-6.Quality-of-life questionnaire.
108
REFERENCES
1. Turk CD, Okifuji A: Pain: assessment of patients' reporting of pain—an
integrated perspective, Lancet 353:1784-1788, 1999.
2. Mathews KA: Pain assessment and general approach to management, Vet
Clin North Am SmallAnim Pract 30:729-755,2000.
3. Dohoo SE, Dohoo IR: Factors influencing the postoperative use of
analgesics in dogs and cats by Canadian veterinarians, Can Vet f 37:552-556,
1996.
4. Dohoo SE, Dohoo IA: Attitudes and concerns of Canadian animal health
Vet f 39:491-496, 1998.
5. Salmon P, Manyande A: Good patients cope with their pain: postoperative
analgesia and nurses' perceptions of their patients' pain, Pain 68:63-68, 1996.
6. Cambridge AJ、 Tobias KM, Newberry RC, Sarkar DK: Subjective and
objective measurements of postoperative pain in cats, f Am Vet Med Assod
217:685-689,2000.
7.Carroll GL: Smallanial pain management, Lakewood, Colo,1998,AAHA
Press.
8. Holton LL, Scott EM, Nolan AM et al: Relationship between physiological
factors and clinical pain in dogs scored using a numerical rating scale.
SmallAnim Pract 39:469-474,1998
9. Hardie EM, Hansen BD, Carroll GS: Behavior after ovariohysterectomy in
the dog: what's normal? Applied Animal Behaviour Science 51:111-128, 1997.
10. Dobromylskyj P et al: Pain assessment. In Flecknell P, Waterman-Pearson A,
editors: Pain management in anirmal, London, 2000, WB Saunders.
11. Mogil JS: The genetic mediation of individual differences in sensitivity to
pain and its inhibition, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:7744-7751, 1999.
12. Firth AM, Haldane SL: Development of a scale to evaluate postoperative
pain in dogs, f Am Vet Med Assoc 214:651-659, 1999.
13. Holton LL, Scott EM, Nolan AM et al: Comparison of three methods used
for assessment of pain in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:61-66, 1998.
14. Hansen BD, Hardie EM, Carroll GS: Physiological measurements after
ovariohysterectomy in dogs: what's normal? Applied Animal Behaviour
Science 51:101-109,1997.
15. Smith JD, Allen SW, Quandt JE: Changes in cortisol concentration in
response to stress and postoperative pain in client-owned cats and correlation
with objective clinical variables,Am Vet Res 60:432-436、1999.
16. Ferrell BR, Dean GE, Grant M, Coluzzi P: An institutional commitment to
pain management, JClin Oncol 13:2158-2165, 1995.
17.A roundtable discussion:Rethinking yourapproachto sedation,anesthesia,and
anaigesia, Lenexa, Kan, 1997, Veterinary Medicine Publishing.
18. McQuay HJ, Moore RA: Methods of therapeutic trials. In Wall PD,
Melzack R,editors: Textbook of pain, ed 4, Edinburgh, 1999, Churchill
Livingstone.
     s n       
Melzack R,editors: Textbook of pain,ed 4,Edinburgh、1999,Churchill
Livingstone.
CHAPTER 6 ● Objective, Categoric Methods for Assessing Pain and Analgesia  109
20. Todd KH, Funk KG, Funk JP, Bonacci R: Clinical significance of reported
changes in pain severity, Ann Emerg Med 27:485-489, 1996.
21. Hellyer PW, Gaynor JS: How I treat: acute postsurgical pain in dogs and cats,
Compend Contin Educ 20:140-153,1998.
22. Holton L, Reid J, Scott EM et al: Development of a behaviour-based scale to
measure acute pain in dogs, Vet Rec 148(17):525-531, 2001.
23. Reid J, Scott M, Nolan A: Development of a short form of the Glasgow
Composite Measure Pain Scale (CMPS) as a measure of acute pain in the
dog, Vet Anaesth Analg 32(6):7, 2005.
24. McMillan FD: Quality oflife in animals, J Am Vet Met Assoc 216:1904-1910,
2000.
 25. McMillan FD: Maximizing quality of life in il animals, J Am Anirmal Hosp
Assoc39:227-235,2003.
26. Wiseman ML, Nolan AM, Reid J et al: Preliminary study on owner-reported
behavior changes associated with chronic pain in dogs, Vet Rec 148:423-424,
2001.
PHARMACOLOGIC
PRINCIPLES AND PAIN:
PHARMACOKINETICS
AND PHARMACODYNAMICS
WTLLIAMW.MUIRIIIANDRICHARDA.SAMS
Mhe administration of drugs to painful animals is an everyday
occurrence. Knowledge of the general principles that define drug
.doses and dosage regimens, however, is often incomplete or absent.
Veterinary clinical pharmacology is the study of drug administration and
drug effects in animals, many of which are sick or injured. For example, if it
is known that drug elimination is decreased by renal failure, then the dose of
that drug must be reduced for an animal with renal failure. Familiarity with
the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodymamics of a drug is a prerequisite to
understanding clinical pharmacology. At first glance, pharmacokinetic-
pharmacodynamic relationships may seem undecipherable, for they are based
On a quagmire of confusing terms, mathematical formulas, and complex
computer-based modelseach claimingto more accurately represent the drug
disposition in living animals. Regardless, a knowledge of pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic principles is essential to a rational understanding of drug
therapy and the selection of therapeutic regimens that are safe and efficacious.
This last statement is important for drugs that are used to treat pain because of
the potential for analgesic drugs to produce side effects and toxicity.
1. Fundamental principles described by clinical pharmacology
a. Factors affecting drug absorption, metabolism, distribution, and
elimination
b. Relationships between drug concentration and effect
C. Calculation of drug dose and dosage regimens
d.Effect of route of administration on drug concentration and effect
PHARMACOKINETICS
Pharmacokinetics is a quantitative approach to the determination of
drug or drug metabolite disposition in the body. The time course of drug
elimination is determined from blood or plasma, although other fluids such
113
114
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), tears, and saliva have been used to determine
whether therapeutically relevant drug concentrations have been achieved.
Once administered, drugs distribute into theoretic compartments (central,
peripheral) that do not necessarily correspond to any physiologically
relevant space (e-g-, extracellular water; Fig. 7-1). Once in the body, all
drugs are subjected to a multitude of metabolic and excretory processes that
result in their inactivation and elimination. Drug concentration versus time
● Plasma is the most commonly assayed fluid for the detection of drug.
Most of the time, the rate of drug elimination from the plasma de-
pends on the concentration of drug in the plasma, so-called first-order
elimination (one exponential term [Fig. 7-2]). In other words, the rate
of drug elimination from the plasma decreases as the concentration
of drug in the plasma decreases. A plot of the log concentration of
the drug versus time produces a straight line. More complex multiple
compartment models are used when the plot of the drug log con-
centration versus time curve is not linear (Fig. 7-3). Nonlinear drug
log concentration-time profiles suggest complex drug metabolism or
elimination processes.
● The rates of drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimina-
tion are used to derive mathematically the pharmacokinetic variables
(volume of distribution [Val, clearance, half-life) that are used to de-
scribe the disposition of a drug in the plasma, standard doses, and
dosageregimens.
● Physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling is a quantitative at-
physiologically identifiable compartments and thereby to predict tis-
sue concentrations within specific organs (liver, kidney), tissues (skin,
muscle), and fluids (blood, CSF, urine). This latter approach provides
minimal additional clinically relevant information regarding drug-
dosing regimens and therefore is not discussed further.
FACTORS AFFECTING DRUG ABSORPTION
AND DISTRIBUTION
Drugs administered by routes other than the intravenous route (e.g-,
transcutaneous, subcutaneous, intramuscular, or oral) must be absorbed
into the body so that they can be distributed to the target site. Drugs
that are administered intravenously depend on the injection technique
used (bolus, incremental injection, infusion) and factors that promote
(increased tissue blood flow) or limit (high protein binding) drug access
to the target site.
CHAPTER 7 + Pharmacologic Principles and Pain
115
B
D
500
102030405060708090
 Patch removed
400
Time (minutes)
Time (hours)
300
200
100
2.5=P75
8
80
2.0
1.5
6
9'0
Serum morphine (ng/mL)
concentration (ng/mL)
Plasma fentanyl
005
Transdermal
12 -120
400
(snoy) a
Time (minutes)
300
6
6-12
rectal
PO
200
8
234
100
Oral
Plasma concentration (Cp)
35
3
5
2
5
5
4
Serum morphine (ng/mL)
116
PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Drug
Volume of
Drug
A
input
distribution
k10
 elimination
120
100
concentration
80
60
B
Plasma
40
20
D
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time (hours)
100
0y=d
icentration
10
lasma
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time(hours)
FIG.
7-2.One-compartmentmodelof intravenous drugdisposition.
A, Pharmacokinetic models are used to describe drug disposition (drug concen-
tration versus time profiles). B, The disposition of many drugs can be described
by a first-order or one-compartment mode (e.g., ketoprofen), in which the rate
of drug elimination depends on the drug plasma concentration (Cp:i.e., the rate
of Cp is a straight line.
CHAPTER 7·Phamacologic Principles and Pain
117
Drug
input
T
k12
Central
Tissue
A
compartment
compartment
k21
一
Drug
elimination
14
12
JQ
10
concentrati
B
lasma
D
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (hours)
100
Cp=Aeat+Be-βt
Q
T
0.1
D
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (hours)
FIG. 7-3. Two-compartment model of intravenous drug disposition. A,Multiple
compartment models are used when B, a plot of the Cp versus time, and C, log of
Cp versus time, curves show curvature. Two-compartment models are common
for many drugs (opioids, αz-agonists).
118
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
ABSORPTION
A drug must pass through several different membranes to reach its
site of action. The nature of the membranes determines the rate of
passage of the drug through them (diffusion) and, consequently,
the rate at which the drug response occurs. The rate of passage of a
drug through a membrane can range from zero (i.e., no movement of
drug across the membrane) to the rate of blood flow to the membrane
{i.e., the drug moves across the membrane as fast as it is delivered).
Biologic membranes are composed of a bimolecular layer of lipid
molecules coated on either side by a protein layer. Hydrophilic drugs
have a difficult time crossing lipid (hydrophobic) membranes. Many
biologic membranes appear to contain pores that permit passage of
small molecules. Some biologic membranes have mechanisms that
transport specific molecules across the membrane. Examples of various
transport mechanisms include diffusion, ultrafiltration, and carrier-
mediated transport.
Diffusion
The following are determinants of rates of diffusion across biologic
membra nes:
· Concentration gradient: The concentration difference across a bio-
logic membrane determines the direction of diffusion (high concen-
tration to low concentration) and its rate (i.e., the rate of diffusion is
directly proportional to the concentration difference).
● Lipid solubility: Lipophilicity is a term used to describe the solubility
of the drug in fatty or oily solutions and is measured by determining
the oil/water partition coefficient (P= lipophilicity). The lipophilicity is
determined by the number and type of chemical constituents that are
attached to the primary chemical molecule (Table 7-1). The oil/water
partition coefficient of a drug is a major determinant of the rate of drug
diffusion across biologic (lipid/hydrophobic) membranes. The rate of
diffusion across a membrane increases linearly with log P up to a maxi-
mum value. The optimal value is log P= 0.5 to 2.0.
[Drug ]an :[Drug ]wae
[Drug Jai
P=
[Drug ]wae
 Membrane characteristics (anatomic and structural characteristics) and
CHAPTER 7 + Pharmacologic Principles and Pain
119
TABLE 7-1
Relative Lipophilicity of Drugs
Drug
Key Chemical Substituents
Relative P
Most NSAIDS
CO0-, C0OH
Poor
Procaine, xylazine
NH2
Morphine 
HO
Intermediate
Lidocaine, bupivacaine
NHCH2 H5
Oxymorphone
=0
Good
 Butorphanol 
CH2-cyclobutyl
Fentanyl
CH,N(CHg)2
Naloxone
CH,CH=CH2
Excellent
Barbiturates
CgHs
P, Lipophilicity; NSA IDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
membranes of the brain contain glial cells that are much less permeable
to the diffusion of less lipophilic molecules. (The blood-brain barrier is
not a barrier to the diffusion of lipophilic molecules because they readily
diffuse through the membrane.) Drugs that have a low molecular weight.
are not electrically charged, or are highly lipophilic readily diffuse into
the various tissue compartments (e.g-, extracellular space, intracellular
space, and CSF). The epidural or intrathecal administration of analgesic
drugs provides a good example of the practical importance of lipophilic-
ity. Highly lipid-soluble drugs (e.g., fentanyl and oxymorphone) rapidly
diffuse out ofthe epidural space or CSF into surrounding tissues, produc-
ing a relatively short duration of analgesic effect. Morphine is less lipid
soluble than fentanyl or oxymorphone and therefore produces a much
longer duration of analgesia when administered by the epidural route.
● Small molecules (e.g-, electrolytes, water, and ethanol) appear to dif-
fuse through membranes via aqueous pores. Very large molecules do
not readily diffuse through membranes.
Utrafiltration
Water and relatively small molecules (molecular weight <30,000 D)
are forced through certain membranes (e.g-, glomerular filtration) by
the hydrostatic pressure of the blood. Drug molecules bound to plasma
           sn
pass through the membrane.
Carrier-Mediated Transport
Many membranes possess specialized transport mechanisms that regulate
the movement of drugs and other molecules across cell membranes.
These transport mechanisms generally use a carrier molecule that may
120
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
or may not require energy. Carrier-mediated transport is particularly
important for the transfer of drugs across the renal tubules, biliary tract,
gastrointestinal tract, and the blood-brain barrier.
● Carrier-mediated transport may or may not limit diffusion but often
has a maximum value (becomes saturated). Competitive inhibition of
transport may occur ifa second molecule binds to the carrier, thereby
interfering with the transport of the first molecule.
● Active transport is usually coupled to an energy source such as adenos-
ine triphosphate and can transport molecules against an electrochemical
gradient (e.g-, transport of essential nutrients from the gastrointestinal
tract against a concentration gradient). Active transport is usually spe-
cific and competitive.
         
single substance or a group of closely related substances (e.g--
transport of anions from the blood into the renal tubule in the
nephron).
2. Competitive: The transport process is competitively inhibited by
other molecules also transported by the system (e.g- probenecid
competitively inhibits transport of various penicillins in the renal
tubules).
● Facilitated transport promotes the equilibration of the transported
substance. For example, the transport of a molecule in the same direc-
tion as its electrochemical gradient (Na+ flux into renal tubules).
DISTRIBUTION
The distribution ofa drugtothe active site is governed by four factors: drug
binding, ionization, perfusion, and difusion (discussed previously). Once
a drug enters the blood, it is distributed throughout all the tissues of the
body based on their total blood flow. The tissues can be categorized based
on the percentage of cardiac output they receive into vessel-rich group
(e.g-, heart, lung, brain, liver, and kidney), muscle group, fat group, and
vessel-poor group (e.g-, tendons, ligaments, and joint spaces). Skin can
be a vessel-rich or vessel-poor group tissue, depending on temperature.
Vessel-rich group tissues receive the majority (greatest percentage) of
   e a   a    
drug in the shortest time. A decrease in cardiac output prolongs the
time necessary for drug distribution and, as a result of compensatory
homeostatic responses, alters drug distribution. Animals in shock, for
example, have a greater percentage of their cardiac output (and therefore
any intravenously administered drug) delivered to vessel-rich group
(heart, lungs, and brain) tissues.
CHAPTER 7 ·Phamacologic Principles and Pain
121
Blood Flow Rate
Drugs are delivered rapidly to highly perfused tissues and slowly to poorly
perfusedtissues. The rate of diffusion ofa drugacross a membrane depends
on its rate of delivery to the tissue if the drug rapidly passes through the
membrane; this is known as blood-flow rate-limited diffusion.
The rate of diffusion of a drug across a membrane depends on the
membrane permeability characteristics if the membrane is a barrier to
drug passage; this is known as membrane-limited diffusion.
ProteinBinding
Many drugs bind reversibly to macromolecules such as plasma
proteins (e.g-, albumen, Q-acid glycoprotein) and tissue proteins
(Drug + Protein= Drug-protein complex). A bound drug is not free to
diffuse or interact with receptors; some active transport processes strip
bound drugs from binding sites.
● Drug protein binding in the blood reduces the concentration of free
drug available for diffusion across membranes; therefore the rate of
diffusion across the membrane is decreased when a drug is extensively
protein bound.
● At equilibrium, the concentration of free drug is the same on both
sides of the membrane; the concentration of the total drug (bound
and unbound) may be different on the two sides of the membrane,
depending on how much of it is bound to proteins.
Differentiallonization
Ionized substances do not diffuse across biologic membranes. Differences in
ranges from about 2 to 3 and that of plasma is 7.4). These differences lead
to accumulation of more total drug (i.e., ionized plus nonionized) on that
side of the membrane where the drug is more ionized.
The partitioning (tissue-to-plasma ratio [Rr/p] of a drug between
two regions of differing pH) is described by the Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation:
(1+antilog[pKa-pH])
RT/p=
[1+antilog [pKa-pH,]}
where pH and pHp are the pH values of a tissue and plasma, respectively.
and pKa is the dissociation constant ofthe drug. Although the pH of the
plasma is maintained within narrow limits, the pH of injured or infected
tissues can vary considerably.
122
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
DRUG EUMINATION
Two principal mechanisms, metabolism and excretion, determine drug
elimination from the body. The liver and kidneys are the two major
organs of elimination for most drugs, although the plasma (Hoffman
elimination) and lungs are potential sites for the metabolism and
elimination of some drugs (nitrous oxide [NzO]) and vapors (inhalant
anesthetics). The metabolism of drugs and other foreign substances
is a protective mechanism that usually results in a decrease in the
lipophilicity of a drug, protein binding, or its ionization. Occasionally,
drug metabolism results in the activation of drug effects (e.g-, prodrugs
such as parecoxib) or toxicity (drug metabolites; lidocaine).
METABOLISM IN THELIVER
Liver metabolism depends highly on the cytochrome P4so enzyme
system, a heterogeneous group of highly active and effcient enzymes.
Synthesis of some of these enzymes is induced by exposure to drugs such
as phenobarbital and rifampin, and some of these enzymes are inhibited
by exposure to drugs (chloramphenicol). The capacity of the cytochrome
P4so enzyme to metabolize drugs is very high; therefore, most drugs
administered at therapeutic concentrations rarely saturate the system.
Consequently, the rate of drug metabolism is generally proportional
to drug concentration (first order); however, in cases of poisoning, the
enzyme system may saturate, and the rate of metabolism is slowed.
 The anatomic position of the liver requires that drugs absorbed from
the gastrointestinal tract pass through the liver before reaching the
systemic circulation; if the drug is rapidly and extensively metabolized
by the liver, the substance undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism
(Fig. 7-4) with only a small fraction of the dose reaching the systemic
circulation (e.g-, isoxsuprine, propranolol, morphine, and lidocaine).
First-pass metabolism is the reason many drugs (opioids) are ineffec-
five when administered orally to dogs and cats.
● Major metabolic pathways in mammals include the following:
1. Phase I pathways: Oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis (Esterases are
also found in plasma.)
2. Phase II pathways: Conjugation (e.g-, reaction of a drug or phase
I metabolite with glucuronic acid). Note that glucuronic acid
conjugation is deficient in cats. Differences between species are
frequently due to the absence ofa particular enzyme system in one
species versus another; for example, in cats the ability to conjugate
most substances with glucuronic acid is deficient.
CHAPTER 7 + Pharmacologic Principles and Pain
123
Orally administered drugs
are exposed to the liver
and may be extensively
metabolized beforereaching
the rest of the body.
Esophagus
Hepatic
To the
vein
body
Heart
IV administered drugs
enter the systemic
circulation and have
Portai vein
direct aocess to the
rest of the body.
FlG. 7-4. First-pass elimination. The effects of many drugs are greatly reduced
(e.g., oral opioids) or rendered biologically inactive by metabolism in the liver or
3. Spontaneous decomposition occurs in the plasma at physiologic
pH and near-normal temperature by means of a base-catalyzed
reaction (Hoffman elimination). In this reaction, protons (H+)
are cleaved from the α-carbon atom of the molecule, resulting in
subsequent metabolism and inactive by-products (e.g-, etomidate and
atracurium).
EXCRETION OFDRUGSANDDRUGMETABOLITES
Excretion of drugs and drug metabolites involves the kidneys, biliary
mechanisms, and other routes (sweat, saliva, feces).
Renal Excretion
Renal excretion is the most important route of excretion; it involves
three mechanisms: glomerular filtration, tubular secretion, and passive
reabsorption.
● Glomerular filtration of unbound drug (Highly bound drugs such as
the nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs [NSAIDs] are not excreted
by glomerular filtration.)
●Tubular secretion of anions (e.g-, NSAIDs, penicillins, cephalosporins,
glucuronic acid conjugates) and cations (e.g-, cimetidine) occurs with
many drugs.
124PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
found effects on the extent of tubular reabsorption.)
Biliary Excretion
Biliary excretion is an active process usually restricted to drugs or
metabolites above a species-specific molecular size; drug conjugates
are frequently secreted in the bile.
Enterohepatic cycling involves the intestinal reabsorption of a drug
excreted by the liver into the bile and the intestine.
Other Routes of Excretion
Excretion of drugs occurs in sweat, saliva, and feces
ROUTES OF DRUG ADMINISTRATION
The advantages and disadvantages of various routesofdrug administration
are described in more detail elsewhere in this text (see Chapter 8). From a
pharmacokinetic viewpoint, a drug can be administered by intravenous
and extravascular routes with conventional or modifed (prolonged
release) delivery systems.
INTRAVENOUSBOLUSDOSE
An intravenous bolus dose refers to the rapid injection of a drug directly
into a vein; the dose is usually expressed in terms of mass (e.g-, milligrams
or gra ms) or mass per unit of body weight (bw, e.g., milligrams/kilogram
bw), not in milliliters/kilogra m.
INTRAVENOUSINFUSION
Intravenous infusion is slow, continuous injection of the drug directly
into a vein; the dose is usually expressed in terms of mass and time
(e.g-, milligrams/minute or grams/hour) or mass per unit of bw per
unit of time (e.g-, micrograms/kilogram per minute). A variety of
commercially available infusion pumps are available for the infusion
of drugs.
EXTRAVASCULARADMINISTRATION
Extravascular administration is administration of a drug by a route other
than the vascular system (e.g-, oral, rectal, intramuscular, subcutaneous,
intraarticular, or transcutaneous).
CHAPTER 7 ·Phamacologic Principles and Pain125
PROLONGED-RELEASEDOSAGE FORMS
Drug formulations designed to release the drug at a slow rate (e.g-, slow-
release tablets, liposome-encapsulated) are available. Prolonged-release
dosage forms designed for use in human beings may not work in animals.
PHARMACOKINETIC CONCEPTS
Pharmacokinetic variables help to understand drug disposition and the
duration ofdrug action in the body. The basic variables include Va, clearance,
and half-life. These data are used to determine loading dose, maintenance
dose, and dosing interval. Additional variables such as mean resonance time
and bioavailability are used to adjust and refine initial calculations.
VOLUMEOFDISTRIBUTION
The V is the apparent volume within which the drug is distributed. The
word apparent is used because some drugs are bound to tissues, resulting
in Va much larger than the total volume of body water they truly occupy.
Simply explained, if 10 mg of drug were injected into the body and the
plasma concentration (Cp) was 0.002 mg/ml, then the V would be 5000
ml (5 L). The Va of morphine is 6.1 L/kg in the dog and 1.35 L/kg in the
cat. The Va of lidocaine is 4.9 L/kg in the dog and 3.6 L/kg in the cat.
These examples emphasize species differences and the much smaller Vd
of morphine in the cat compared with that in the dog. The Va calculated
during the elimination phase is described by the relationship between
the amount of drug injected into the body and the Cp of the drug before
elimination begins or at time 0 (Cpo):
Amountinjectedintobody
=A
Cpo
The Va calculated at steady-state equilibrium (Vdss) defines the
accurate assessment of drug dilution in the body. The Vds, is calculated
as follows:
Dose
whereAUC is area under the curve.
● Units of Va are volume (e.g-, milliliter or liter) or volume per unit of
bw (e.g-, milliliter/kilogram bw).
126PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
● A large Va implies extensive distribution of the drug to tissues, where-
as a small Va implies more limited distribution.
● The lower limit for Va is the plasma volume; there is no upper limit,
but values of 5 to 10 L/kg bw for lipophilic (e.g- propranolol) or high-
ly tissue-bound (e.g., digoxin) drugs are not uncommon.
● The mean resonance time (MRT) is a term used to describe the average
time that the drug stays in the body or the time it takes for 63.2% of a
drug injected into the body to be eliminated. The MRT can be used to
calculateVdss
Dose
Vas=
AUCXMRT
CLEARANCE
Plasma clearance (CL) is the volume of biologic fluid (blood, plasma)
that is completely freed (cleared) of drug by all routes of elimination.
Units for clearance are flow (e.g., milliliters/minute) or flow per unit of
minute per kilogram) emphasize that clearance is not the amount of
drug being removed from the body but the amount of biologic fluid
"cleared" of drug. Clearance can be calculated as the rate of elimination
of the drug by all routes divided by the Cp of the drug:
Rateofelimination
CL=
Cp
● The lower limit for clearance by an organ of elimination is zero. The
upper limit is the plasma flow to the organ. Individual organ clearances
can be added together for the total body clearance:
CL = CLy + CL+CLorter
where CL is the total clearance, CLh is the hepatic clearance, CLR is the
renal clearance, and CLother represents the sum of all other clearance
processes.
+ The total clearance is considered the most useful pharmacokinetic param-
eter because it is a direct indicator of organ function and can be used to
predict the average concentration or steady-state concentration of drug in
the blood or plasma. For example, if the CL is 0.1 ml/min per kilogram
and the rate of drug administration is 0. 1 μg/kg per minute, then the aver-
age drug concentration of the plasma is 1.0 μg/ml (0.1 μg/min per kilo-
gram divided by 0.1 ml/min per kilogram). Knowing the total clearance
provides the ability to adjust the drug dose rate during administration.
CHAPTER 7 ●Phamacologic Principles and Pain
127
● The total clearance of all of the elimination processes in the body is
calculated by dividing the dose administered by the total area under
the Cp time curve (AUC) from the time of dosing until drug concen-
trations can no longer be measured (CL = Dose/AUC). In other words,
if the target steady-state Cp and clearance for a drug are known, then
x       a  e  
For example, ifthe target Cp is 80 μg/ml and the clearance is 0.125 ml/
min per kilogram, then the dose rate will be 10 μg/min per kilogram
(80 μg/ml x 0.125 ml/min per kilogram) or 3.6 mg every 6 hours.
HALF-LIFE
The elimination half-life (tvz) is the time required for the Cp of the drug
to decrease to 50% of an earlier value (Box 7-1). The units for half-life are
expressed as time (minutes, hours).
● The half-life ofa drug can also be used to determine the time required
for an infused drug to reach steady state (Box 7-2).
● The ty2, total clearance, and Va are related by the following equation:
0.693xV
/2=
CL
● Changes in total clearance or V alter the ti/2- For example, reduced
clearance and increases t1/2-
B0X 7-1
Estimated Time for Drug Removal
1 half-life—50% eliminated
2 half-lives—75% eliminated
3 half-lives—87.5% eliminated
3.3 half-lives—90% eliminated
4 half-lives—93.75% eliminated
 5 half-lives—97% eliminated
BOX 7-2
Estimated Time Required to Reach Steady State
1 half-life —50% of steady state
2 half-lives—75% of steady state
3 half-lives—87.5% of steady state
3.3 half-lives—90% of steady state
128PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
BIOAVAILABILITY
The term bioavailability is the amount of drug that reaches the systemic
circulation after being administered by a nonintravenous route. For
oral administration beca use of erratic absorption and metabolism by the
liver (first-pass effect) before the drug reaches the systemic circulation.
BIOEQUIVALENCE
Bioequivalence is a term that is used when two drugs are compared.
Two drugs are considered to be bioequivalent when the Cp versus
time profiles and pharmacologic, therapeutic, and toxic effects are the
same after administration of equal doses by the same route. Although
the peak and trough Cps of two drugs may not necessarily be exactly
       a   a
and minimum Cps and the time required to produce a predetermined
response are the same.
CALCULATION OF DOSAGEREGIMENS
The ability to estimate and calculate drug dosage regimens is critical to
producing an appropriate therapeutic effect and avoiding adverse drug
effects.
MaintenanceDose
The maintenance dose is the dose administered throughout a dosage
regimen to maintain effective drug concentrations (Fig. 7-5). The
maintenance dose (MD) is equal to the desired Cp times the total body
clearance.
MD=CpxCL
● For example, calculate the maintenance dose for a drug with a Vd
of 2000 ml/kg bw and clearance of 20 ml/min per kilogram bw to
be administered to a 10-kg dog to achieve a steady-state plasma drug
concentration of 2 μg/ml:
MD=2μg/ml×20ml/minperkilogrambw
MD = 40 μg/min per kilogram bw
MD =40 μg/min× 10 kg = 400 μg/min
or (60 minutes X6 hoursX40 μg/min per kilogram) 14.4 mg every 6 hours
CHAPTER 7 • Pharmacologic Principles and Pain
129
IV infusion
(jw,6r)
ion
Steady-state
rati
A
concer
5
10
15
20
Time (hours)
Multipledosingregimen
1.4
Toxicity
1.2
1,6rt)
1.0
0.8
B
0.6
Minimumeffectiveconcentration(MEC)
0.4
10
20
30
40
Time (hours)
HG. 7-5. A, Drugs administered intravenously by constant rate infusion (CRl reach 
a steady-state value that can be predicted by their half-lives (ie., 90% of steady
state in 3.3 half-lives). B, The plasma concentration (Cp) varies between a Cpmax
and Cpmin when drugs are administered at regular intervals (hours). Fluctuations
between Cpmax and Cpmin at steady state increase as the dosing interval increases
and can be predicted by the half-life of the drug. The Cpmax is equal to 2 times the
Cpmin when the dosing interval is equal to the half-life of the drug.
130PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
● The time required to reach steady-state drug concentrations is de
termined by the terminal half-life of the drug (50% of final value in
one half-life; 75% in two half-lives; 87.5% in three half-lives; 90%
in 3.3 half-lives; Box 7-2). Delay in achieving desired plasma drug
concentrations may be critical for certain drugs (e.g-, transcutaneous
fentanyl patch).
Loading Dose
The loading dose (LD) is administered at the start of a dosage regimen to
achieve effective Cp rapidly. The LD is equal to the desired or target Cp
multiplied by the V&:
LD=CpxVa
For example, calculate the LD required to achieve a Cp of 2 μg/ml
for a drug with a Va of 2000 ml/kg bw and clearance of 20 ml/min per
kilogram bw to be administered to a 10-kg dog:
LD = 2 μg/ml×2000 ml/kg bw
LD = 4000 μg/kg bw×10kg bw
LD =40,000 μg/1000 μg = 40 mg
Note: The value of the clearance term was provided but was not
needed for this calculation.
Dosing interva!
The dosing interval is the period between doses. An infinitely small dosing
interval is a constant rate infusion (CRl). The time taken to achieve 90%
of the final steady-state Cp during CRI is 3.3 half-lives. A drug with a
2/-hour half-life would take approximately 814 hours to reach 90% of
        s  s
between the maximum plasma concentration (CPmax) and minimum
plasma concentration (Cpmin) at steady state increase as the dosing interval
increases. CPmax =2 x CPmin when the dosing interval equals the half-life.
For example, calculate the maximum dosing interval for a drug with
a Va of 2000 ml/kg bw and a clearance of 20 ml/min per kilogram bw to
achieve a CPmax no more than twice CPmin-
Dosing interval =t=0.693xV/CL
Dosing interval = 0.693×(2000 ml/kg bw)/(20 ml/min per kilogram bw)
Dosing interval = 69.3 minutes
CHAPTER 7●PharmacologicPrinciples and Pain
131
PHARMACODYNAMICS
Pharmacodynamics is a quantitative approach for describing the
relationship between drug Cp and drug effect. Pharmacologic effects
require that drug molecules be bound to constituents of cells or tissues
to produce an effect. Most drugs exert their effects by combining with
various regulatory proteins, including enzymes (NSAIDs), carrier
molecules, ion channels (local anesthetics), and receptors (opioids,
Q2-agonists). The term receptor is commonly used to mean any
to produce its effects. Drug concentration at the receptor site is not
commonly measured but is assumed to be related to the concentration
of drug in blood or plasma. The drug concentration at the receptor site,
however, may not be identical to its concentration in blood because
of a number of factors, including drug binding to plasma and tissue
proteins, ion trapping of the drug, and slow passage of the drug through
membranes. Equilibration of drug between the plasma and the receptor
site generally produces a predictable relationship between Cp and effect
 a therapeutic regimen that establishes and maintains an effective drug
Cp for as long as required.
RECEPTOR PHARMACOLOGY
Many different types of drug receptors exist in the body that when
including analgesia (Table 7-2). The pharmacologic response that follows
drug (ligand) occupation of receptors is proportional to the number or
fraction of receptors occupied.
Agonist
An agonist is a drug that binds to and activates a receptor and produces
possible are called full agonists (i.e., the intrinsic activity is 1).
Antagonist
effect. Drug antagonists block, interfere with, or reverse the effects of
agonists. A pure antagonist is assumed to produce no agonistic effects
and has an intrinsic activity of zero.
● Competitive receptor antagonists compete for the receptor site. Their
effects are said to be surmountable or reversible because they can be
132
PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
TABLE 7-2
Receptor Agonists and Antagonists Known to
Produce Analgesia
Receptor Agonists/Antagonists
Receptor Subtypes
RECEPTORAGONISTS
Opioid
μ, k, 8
C.2
O2A, OX2B, O20
Cannabinoid
CB1.2
RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
Prostaglandin
EP1-4
Histamine
H1
Calcium
N and L type
Tachykinin 
NK
NMDA
NR1
AMPA
iGluR1 -3
NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; AMPA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole
propionic acid.
Dose-response curve
120
Maximal Effect
Full agonist
100
%
n=5:
Partial agonist
response
80
60
40
Ma
n=
20-
More potent — Potency — Less potent
0.1
1
10
100
Dose
FlG. 7-6. The dose-response curve can be thought of in terms of the plasma
effect produced. Drugs that act at receptor sites (e.g., opioids, αz-agonists) are
less than the maximal effect (é.g., buprenorphine). Drugs that produce a maximal
shape (slope) of the Cp-effect curve (N) is important for estimating the therapeutic
range of the drug and is important in the development of pharmacokinetic-
pharmacodynamic models.
CHAPTER 7 ·Pharmacologic Principles andPain133
overcome by a higher dose of the agonist. Competitive antagonists
shift the dose-effect curve to the right (e.g-, atropine and most opi-
oid and c-antagonists [opioid—nalorphine, naloxone, nalmefene;
Q2—tolazoline, yohimbine, atipamezole]).
● Noncompetitive receptor antagonists produce an effect that cannot
be overcome by increasing concentrations of the agonist (e.g--
phenoxybenzamine, an α-antagonist]). Effects of noncompetitive
receptor antagonists are irreversible until the drug is completely
eliminated.
● Physiologic antagonism is not receptor mediated but is a term used
to describe the production of an effect that is opposite to that which
is not wanted (e.g-, dopamine administration to raise blood pressure
during hypotension).
Partial Agonist
A partial agonist is a drug that interacts with a receptor but produces less
than the maximal effect (Fig. 7-6). A partial agonist produces less than
full agonist effects (i.e., intrinsic activity is between 0.0 and 1.0) and is by
definition less efficacious than a full agonist. Partial agonists may also act
as partial antagonists (e.g-, buprenorphine).
Intrinsic Activity
The term intrinsic activity refers to the maximal possible effect that can be
assumes that the effect of a drug is proportional to the number of
receptors occupied, implying that a greater effect is produced by
occupation of more receptors and that a maximal effect can be produced
without occupation of all the receptors of the drug. Low-efficacy opioids
(e.g., butorphanol) or partial agonists (e.g., buprenorphine) must by
effcacy opioids (e.g., fentanyl) and demonstrate a ceiling effect in which
larger doses of the drug do not produce a greater degree of analgesia
because all the receptors are occupied. Intrinsic efficacy for opioids is
butorphanol > nalbuphine.
Potency
Drug potency depends on the affinity of a drug for the receptor (i.e., tendency
for the drug to bind to the receptor) and efficacy (ie., ability to produce an
         e si  
Two drugs can be equiefficacious (i.e., produce the same maximal response)
134
PART THREE·Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
requires the larger dose to produce the desired effect is said to be less potent.
Spare Receptors
The term spare receptors or receptor reserve is used to describe situations
in which a drug produces a maximal effect by occupying only a small
fraction of the total number of receptors, leaving the remaining receptors
a smaller number of receptors than less potent drugs to produce a given
effect and therefore have a larger receptor reserve.
Racemic Mixtures
Some drug molecules have two or more three-dimensional structures.
Drugs that have the same chemical formula but two different structures
are termed isomers of one another. Isomers that have different structures
as a result of the interchange of any two groups around a central carbon
atom are termed enantiomorphs. A drug that has an asymmetric carbon
atom (an asymmetric center is termed a center of chirality) and exists
as an equimolar mixture of optical (mirror image) isomers is called a
racemic mixture. The two components of racemic mixtures may have
similar or different receptor effects. Medetomidine is a racemic mixture
of dexmedetomidine and levomedetomidine.  Levomedetomidine is
believed to be pharmacologically inactive.
PHARMACODYNAMICMODELS
As stated previously, pharmacodynamics is the study of the relationship
between drug
concentration and effect. Pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics share drug concentration as a common feature,
allowing them to be combined to describe the dose-effect relationship.
The most commonly used and simplest model for describing the dose
effect relationship over a range of drug concentrations is derived from
the Hill equation, which relates the drug effect to the maximum drug
effect (Emax), Cp, and the drug concentration required to produce 50%
of the maximum effect (ECso):
E=EmxCp
ECs+Cp
This equation usually produces a hyperbolic or sigmoid drug Cp-effect
curve, which permits the estimation of drug effects at differing drug doses
CHAPTER 7●Pharmacologic Principles and Pain
135
Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic models are valuable in designing
drug dosage regimens, particularly when the desired effect is known. In
addition, information obtained from these models is valuable in defining
the therapeutic index and lethal dose of a drug (Fig. 7-7).
Median Effective Dose
The median effective dose (EDso) is the dose of drug required to produce
a predetermined specified effect in 50% of treated animals.
MedianLethalDose
The median lethal dose (LDso) is the dose of drug required to cause death
in 50% of treated animals.
Therapeutic Index
The therapeutic index (TI) is a measure of the margin of safety of a drug
and is determined by dividing the LDso by the ED so
LDg
T1=
EDs
Therapeutic index
120
100
%
Analgesia
ise
80
on
resp
60
Death
40
axima
20
Therapeutic index = 5
EDs0 = 1
LD5o = 5
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
100010000
Dose
FIG. 7-7. The therapeutic index of a drug is determined by dividing the median
lethal dose by the median effective dose and provides a measure of the margin
of safety for that drug.
136PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
The TI may vary depending on the predetermined pharmacologic
EDso increases while the LDso stays the same, resulting in a decrease in
the TI.
DRUG INTERACTIONS
The ability of one drug to alter the effects of another, thereby producing
a different drug effect, is frequently encountered and often expected
during drug therapy. Drug interactions can be pharmacokinetic or
pharmacodynamic in origin and may produce beneficial, untoward, or
toxic effects. Pharmacokinetic drug interactions occur when one drug
alters the Cp and therefore the effects of another drug. Infusions of
lidocaine, for example, are known to slow the metabolism and elimination
of drugs that depend on liver metabolism (opioids, αa-agonists), thereby
intensifying and prolonging their effects. Pharmacodynamic drug
interactions occur when one drug alters the effects of a second drug
without changing the Cp or elimination (pharmacokinetics) of the
second drug. The opioid antagonist naloxone, for example, can reverse
 d   ( )    
(morphine, hydromorphone) administration.
PHARMACOKINETICDRUGINTERACTIONS
Pharmacokinetic drug interactions occur when one drug alters the
concentration and therefore the effects ofanother. Most pharmacokinetic
drug interactions occur when one drug chianges the absorption,
distribution, metabolism, elimination, or protein binding of another
drug. (Protein-bound drugs are inactive.)
PHARMACODYNAMIC DRUGINTERACTIONS
Pharmacodynamic drug interactions occur when one drug alters the
effects of another drug without altering its Cp. The most common causes
of pharmacodynamic drug interactions include the various types of drug
antagonism [competitive, noncompetitive)or agonism (potertiation,
additivity, and supraadditivity). Elaborate mathematical and statistical
methods have been developed to determine whether various drug mixtures
produce additive or supraadditive (synergistic) effects. The isobologram is
derived by comparing the effects of two drugs alone and in combination at
several fixed dosages or ratios and, in its simplest form, illustrates when a
drug combination is additive, antagonistic, or symergistic (Fig. 7-8).
CHAPTER 7 + Pharmacologic Principles and Pain
137
Isobologram
6
EDso drug A
bnup
Antagonism
Additivity
Synergy
ED50
drugB
2
3
4
Dose drug B
FlG.7-8. Isobologramsareone method usedto determinewhethercombinations
of drugs are additive, synergistic, or antagonistic. The median effective dose
values for two drugs are plotted on the x- and y-axes. The line that connects
them is the line of additivity: a dose of drug A that produces a 25% effect and a
dose of drug B that produces a 25% effect should produce a 50% effect. If lower
doses than anticipated produce a 50% effect, the drug combination is said to be
synergistic (concave curve), and if higher doses are required to produce the 50%
effect, then the drugs are antagonistic (convex curve).
Additivity
Additivity or summation of drug effects occurs when the effects of one
drug are simply additive to those of another drug. For example, if two
drugs that produce analgesia are mixed together and administered.
the analgesia produced is the sum of the individual analgesic activity
of each drug. This is generally the case when two full opioid agonists
(e.g-, morphine and fentanyl) are mixed together and administered.
The drug dosages need not be the same because of differences in drug
potency.
Potentiation
Potentiation or synergism occurs when a mixture of two or more
drugs produces a greater response than expected (i.e., greater than the
sum of their individual effects; Fig. 7-8). The ability of acepromazine
a drug with little or no analgesic effects, to increase the analgesic
effects of opioids (e.g-, morphine and oxymorphone) is an excellent
138
example of drug-induced potentiation or synergism. Clinically,
drug synergism can be expected when drugs that act by different
mechanisms ofaction are mixed together.Various drug combinations
(e-g-, NSAIDs and opioids; opioids and α2-agonists; opioids and
demonstrate synergistic effects. Synergistic drug combinations must
be administered carefully, however, because unwanted and potentially
toxic effects may also be potentiated (e.g-, respiratory depression and
bradyarrhythmias).
CLINICAL ISSUES
Therapeutic regimens, although dependent on and guided by the
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic principles discussed previously,
must be designed and adjusted to treat disease effectively based on the
severity or intensity of the disease. Patients should be treated individually
after considering all of the drug-related issues. Furthermore, chronic
responsible for changes in the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
behavior of a drug.
CLINICAL EFFICACY
Clinicalefficacyrefers tothe ability of a drug to produce a clinically beneficial
therapeutic effect, regardless of the intrinsic activity (maximal effect) of
that drug and the dose required to produce that effect (potency). Analgesic
drugs are only as good as the pain being treated. Fentanyl, for example,
may be totally ineffective in the treatment of severe pain produced by a
herniated disk. This last example has important clinical implications for
the administration of analgesic drugs because it implies that the severity
of the disease, or in this case the intensity of pain, determines the clinical
efficacy of the drug. When the intensity of pain increases, the effectiveness
of any drug decreases, and in the case of opioids, more receptors need to
be occupied to produce a therapeutic effect. Eventually, a point is reached
difficult to produce. In other words, the intensityof the pain dictates which
butorphanol, and pentazocine) may be adequate for the treatment of most
causes of mild to moderate pain and can be used in combination with
higher-efficacy opioids (e.g-, morphine and oxymorphone) to enhance
analgesic effects when used to treat severe pain. The degree of analgesia
CHAPTER 7 ● Phamacologic Principles and Pain 139
the intrinsic activity of the opioid. If an opioid produces analgesic effects
when administered alone, an additive drug interaction takes place when it
is administered with another opioid.
TOLERANCE
Tolerance is said to occur when the patient requires increasing drug doses
over time to maintain a desired effect. Drug tolerance can develop acutely
 a n (   )   ( )
attributed to pharmacokinetic (e.g-, liver enzyme induction and increased
clearance) or pharmacodynamic (altered cellular metabolism reducing the
effects of the drug) changes. One potential mechanism for opioid tolerance
receptors following chronic opioid administration. Regardless of cause,
the development of drug tolerance presents a significant problem in the
treatment of pain, generally requiring that drug therapy be discontinued
Drugs that require occupancy of a smaller number of receptors to
produce an effect (e.g-, fentanyl) are less likely to produce tolerance than
less potent drugs (e.g-, codeine, butorphanol, and meperidine).
PHYSICALDEPENDENCE
Physical dependence is characterized by the development of untoward
effects when a drug is acutely withheld or withdrawn. The occurrence of
physical dependence in animals is unknown.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Abram SE, Mampilly GA, Milosavljevic D: Assessment of potency and intrinsic
activity of systermic versus intrathecal opioids in rats, Anesthesiology 87:
127-134, 1997.
Dohoo S, Tasker RAR, Donald A: Pharmacokinetics of parenteral and oral
sustained-release morphine sulphate in dogs, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 17:
426-433,1994.
Egger CM, Duke T, Archer J, Cribb PH: Comparison of plasma fentanyl
concentrations by using three transdermal fentanyl patch sizes in dogs, Vet
Surg 27:159-166, 1998.
Holford NHG、 Sheiner LB: Understanding the dose-effect relationship:
clinical application of pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic models, Clin
Pharmacokinet 6:429-453,1981.
Morgan D, Cook CD, Smith MA et al: An examination ofthe interactions between
the antinociceptive effects of morphine and various μ-opioids: the role of
140
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Solomon RE, Gebhart GF: Synergistic antinociceptive interactions among drugs
administered to the spinal cord, Anesth Anaig 78:1164-1172, 1994.
Tallarida RJ: Statistical analysis of drug combination for synergism, Pain 49:
93-97、1992.
Woolf CJ, Chong N: Preemptive analgesia: treating postoperative pain by
preventing the establishment of central sensitization, Anesth Anaig 77:
362-379,1993.
DRUGS UsED
TO TREAT PAIN
WILLIAMW.MUIRIII
he pharmacologic approach to the treatment of pain has evolved
from a long history of folk remedies, herbal medicine, and
 more recently, the deliberate synthesis of chemical compounds
specifically designed to activate or depress a wide variety of receptors or
ion channels that are known or believed to be responsible for producing
pain. Regardless of the significant scientific and technologic advances
periods in dogs and cats without the risk of significant side effects or
toxicity. Inadequate or unavailable scientific data, limited formulations,
and an astonishing absence of controlled clinical trials further limit the
chronic use of many drugs in dogs and cats. In general, currently popular
drugs that have demonstrated some efficacy in the treatment of pain fall
into one of five broad categories: opioids, nonsteroidal antinflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), Q2-agonists, local anesthetics, and others. Behavior
modifiers (e.g-, acepromazine) and antidepressa nts (e.g-, amitriptyline)
have also been used to augment the effects of classical analgesics or to
more or less efficacious, depending on the type and severity of the pain
being treated. Many so-called adjunctive medications are known to alter
central or peripheral neuronal activity (e.g-, neuroleptics [tranquilizers],
anticonvulsants, antidepressants, and topical preparations) or produce
antinflammatory effects  (e.g-, glucocorticosteroids). This chapter
provides a general overview of the drugs available for the treatment
of pain, emphasizing the most clinically relevant aspects of each drug
 group. Other chapters inthis text describe and discuss the pharmacology
of specific representatives of each drug group, emphasizing the drug
mechanism of action, relevant pharmacology and pharmacokinetics,
toxicity, and potential drug interactions (Table 8- 1).
141
142
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
TABLE 8-1
Principal Analgesic Drugs
Relative Efficacy
Drug
Chronic Use
Acute Use
Practical Issues
Opioids
+/-
++
Tolerance
NSAIDS
++
+-
Efficacy, toxicity
c.2-Agonists
一
+
Sedation
Local anesthetics
+++
Loss of motor
control, toxicity
+, Efficacious; -, minimal efficacy; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs.
OPIOIDS
The term opioid ispreferred to the older name narcotic because bydefinition
S ro so nq s  rn si  so
do not induce sleep, at least not in animals. Simply stated, opioids are
    g       
produce morphinelike effects by acting on opioid receptors (e.g., OP3 [μ],
OP2 [k], and OP1 [8]) with the principal desired effect being the
production of analgesia. From a pharmacologic perspective, opioids are
of three different types: opioid agonists; opioid antagonists that are in
general devoid of agonist activity and are used clinically to antagonize or
that produce morphinelike effects but are generally less toxic (although
often less effective) than opioid agonists.
  d s    a s
at the different opioid receptors (μ, K, 8), resulting in a wide variety
of clinical effects depending on the opioid administered, the dose,
and the species to which the drug is administered (e.g-, dog, cat, or
           
μ-receptors and are noted for their ability to produce analgesia and
sedation (e.g-, morphine, 1
 meperidine, and oxymorphone). Opioid
antagonists (e.g-, naloxone and naltrexone) block or reverse the effects
minimal or no effects. Opioid agonists-antagonists and partial agonists
act by combining with opioid receptors and producing partial or
incomplete activation of the receptor, depending on the receptor
(μ, K, 8) being activated. Larger doses of opioid agonists-antagonists and
partial agonists may act as antagonists for opioid agonists because of
their relatively high affinity for opioid receptors and comparatively low
potential for toxicity.
CHAPTER 8·Drugs Used toTreatPain
143
B0X 8-1
Opioid Receptor Subtypes
Receptor
Subtype
P
Supraspinal, spinal, and peripheral analgesia; minimal to mild
sedation; respiratory depression; bradycardia; ileus; urine
retention; temperature reduction
K
Supraspinal, spinal (?), and peripheral analgesia; minimal
sedation, respiratory depression, and bradycardia
8
Supraspinal, spinal, and peripheral analgesia; minimal sedation,
respiratory depression, and bradycardia; ileus, urine
retention; temperature reduction
口
Excitement-delirium, tachycardia, hypertensior
PHARMACOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
effects based on their ability to combine with and activate the various
opioid receptors and receptor subtypes located in the central nervous
system and periphery. The prevalence and location (central or peripheral)
of the various receptors in the different species, opioid receptor selectivity,
molecular size and shape, and the influence of various disease processes
ultimately determine the pharmacologic effects of the opioid in any given
animal. Methadone, for example, is known to act primarily at μ-opioid
receptors but is also known partially to inhibit N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors in the spinal cord. Although the central nervous
their effects on peripheral opioid receptors should not be underestimated
and is the basis for their administration intraarticularly.
CENTRALNERVOUSSYSTEM
Opioids relieve or reduce pain by combining with opioid receptors in
the central nervous system (CNS) and periphery. Opioids are generally
widely in their analgesic potency and clinical efficacy when used to treat
pain (e-g-, superficial, visceral, or deep). Fentanyl, for example, is at least
100 times more potent than morphine and produces excellent clinical
analgesia when administered at what would be considered extremely small
(micrograms/kilogram) doses compared with most opioid analgesics (e.g-
morphine, oxymorphone, and butorphanol [milligrams/kilogram]}.
Most opioid agonists produce minimal to moderate sedation
when administered at recommended dosages as single-drug therapy.
144
PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
TABLE8-2
Selectivity for Opioid Receptor Subtypes
Drug
K
AGONISTS
Codeine
+
+
+
Fentanyl
++++
Hydromorphone and
+++
+
+
oxymorphone
Meperidine
++
+
++
Methadone
+++
+
++
Morphine 
+++
++
++
PARTIAL/MIXED AGONISTS
Buprenorphine
(+++)
(++)
 Butorphanol 
++
++
Nalbuphine 
+
(+++)
(++)
+
 Pentazocine
+
(++)
++
ANTAGONISTS
Naloxone
+++
++
+++
Naltrexone
+++
++
++
ATYPICAL OPIDID
Tramadol
+
？
？
+, Mild effect; ++, moderate effect; +++, pronounced effect; ++++, very pronounced effect;
O), partial agonist effects; , unknown; -, little or no effect.
However, opioid agonists are capable of producing profound CNS and
respiratory depression or arrest when administered with tranquilizers
(neuroleptanalgesia) or with injectable or inhalant anesthetics to patients
that are depressed from head trauma or seizures or are clinically
debilitated. Some dogs administered opioids react wildly and aggressively
to loud or high-pitched noises. Increased dosages of opioids can produce
nervousness, agitation, increased locomotor activity, dysphoria, and
occasionally hyperthermia (cats). Cats are particularly susceptible to
the neuroexcitatory effects of opioids. Early experience with morphine
suggested that opioids, é
 at least morphine, could produce excitement
and mania in cats (morphine mania). This response is now known to be
due to species differences and a relative drug overdose. Seizures can be
triggered on rare occasions and have been attributed to drug metabolites,
solution preservatives, or preexisting CNS disorders. Aged pets may be
particularly susceptible to the CNS and behavioral effects of opioids,
with some animals demonstrating indifference, malaise, disorientation,
and agitated behavior. Other pets may become timid or aggressive when
approached. The development of “release of suppressed behavior,"
CHAPTER 8+Drugs Used to TreatPain
manifesting as aggression, must be considered when any drug that alters
CNS activity is administered. Changes in behavior and the development
of aggression have been attributed to central neurochemical mechanisms
involving opioid and dopamine receptors.
Nausea and vomiting (in dogs and cats) and panting (in dogs) are
acute phenomena that are frequently observed after intramuscular opioid
administration. Opioids are known to stimulate the chemoreceptor trigger
        
resulting in a slight fall in body temperature. Vomiting (rare in cats)
may be considered an advantage in dogs that have recently eaten and
are being considered as surgical candidates. Vomiting and retching.
however, are problematic if the patient is believed to have a pharyngeal,
esophageal, or gastric foreign body. Panting is a common clinical sign
after the administration of most opioid agonists to dogs but does not
provide adequate ventilation because only dead-space gas is moved
nan aaeu ie sieo pun so shemn raddn a jo ino pue 
opioids as preanesthetic medication may require manual or mechanical
ventilation to achieve adequate ventilation and avoid respiratory acidosis
during anesthesia. Shivering is common after anesthesia because
body temperature may be decreased. Shivering increases postoperative
oxygen and caloric requirements, which could become important in
older, very young, and small patients. Shivering may also be a sign of
inadequate analgesia. Some opioids (e.g-, meperidine) decrease the
         s
effects of the drug.
Most opioids depress the cough reflex by a central mechanism. Cough
suppression is produced at subanalgesic doses and is prominent with
less effective opioids (e.g-, codeine) and opioid agonists-antagonists
(e.g-, butorphanol). Cough suppression may lead to the accumulation of
mucous secretions in the airways of patients recovering from anesthesia,
predisposing them to upper airway obstruction.
Opioids generally produce pinpoint pupils (miosis) in dogs as a result
of CNS stimulation ofparasympathetic segments ofthe oculomotor nerve.
This response can be inhibited by prior administration of anticholinergic
drugs (e.g-, atropine and glycopyrrolate). The pupil dilates (mydriasis) in
cats and horses as a result of stimulation of CNS sympathetic pathways.
RESPIRATORYSYSTEM
Opioids are notorious for their respiratory depressant effects in depressed
or anesthetized animals. Opioids increase the concentration of carbon
dioxide necessary to stimulate the rate and depth of breathing
146
PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
to increases in inspired concentrations of carbon dioxide (decrease
hypoventilation and the development of respiratory acidosis. Although
of significant clinical relevance, respiratory depression is not frequently
reported in dogs and cats administered opioids compared with human
beings. The best explanation for this difference is that most opioids
dogs or cats as they do in human beings. In other words, the severity
of opioid-induced respiratory depression in dogs and cats is directly
related to the amount of preexisting CNS depression. As long as the
patient remains conscious, it is unlikely that respiratory depression will
tranquilizers or sedatives in conjunction with opioids before anesthesia
is of greater concern, and in these patients, ventilation should be closely
monitored.
Chest wall rigidity, or “woody chest syndrome," can occur in dogs
Increased thoracic and abdominal efforts and muscle rigidity may be
related to the CNS excitation caused by larger doses of opioids. Increased
respiratory effort and centrally mediated mechanisms may produce
increases in body temperature resulting in hyperthermia in cats
CARDIOVASCVLARSYSTEM
Other than bradycardia and occasional bradyarrhythmias, opioids
produce relatively few if any clinically significant cardiovascular side
effects in dogs and cats when administered at recommended doses. First-
degree (prolonged PR interval), second-degree (P wave not followed
by a QRS interval), and rarely, third-degree (no relationship between
P wave and QRS complexes) atrioventricular block can occur, which is
is therefore responsive to anticholinergic (atropine, glycopyrrolate)
therapy.
Opioids produce clinically insignificant effects on the force of cardiac
contraction (inotropy), arterial blood pressure, and cardiac output unless
administered as a rapid intravenous bolus. Some opioids (e.g-, morphine
and meperidine) are noted for producing histamine release or splanchnic
sequestration of blood (dogs), which could exacerbate hypotension. The
clinical impact of these effects, however, remains to be demonstrated.
Histamine release in cats is signaled by increased redness of the ears and
paws.
CHAPTER8·DrugsUsedtoTreatPain
147
OTHERORGANSYSTEMS
Gastrointestinal System
Opioids, particularly μ-receptor agonists, delay gastric emptying and
prolong intestinal transit time. Gastric and intestinal smooth muscle tone
are increased, producing“ropy guts" that are particularly evident after the
administration of an opioid to puppies or kittens. Increases in intestinal
tone and activation of opioid receptors throughout the gastrointestinal
tract. The onset of opioid-induced gastrointestinal effects may result
in defecation and a period of diarrhea in dogs. This is followed by a
decrease in propulsive peristaltic activity and absorption of water from
the intestinal tract, predisposing the patient to constipation, a condition
that becomes more prominent when opioids are administered for several
days. Opioids increase esophageal, biliary, duodenal, and anal sphincter
tone, making it difficult to perform endoscopic examinations, particularly
of the duodenum. Opioids should be avoided in patients believed to
have an obstructed biliary tract or biliary neoplasm. Butorphanol or
butorphanol drug combinations are generally preferred for endoscopic
procedures involving the gastrointestinal system because of lesser effects
Genitourinary System
Opioids inhibit the voiding reflex and increase external urethral sphincter
tone, resulting in urine retention. Urine retention can be an important
postsurgical consideration in dogs and cats that have undergone
 prolonged orthopedic surgical procedures or abdominal surgery or in
those with preexisting bladder dysfunction. Although popular because
of their analgesic and sedative effects, most opioids decrease uterine
contractions, thereby prolonging labor. This issue may be of little
of the fetus is of potential concern, however, and can be treated with
opioid antagonists or doxapram.
CLINICAL ISSUES
Opioids are controlled substances, making their clinical use potentially
problematic because of strict ordering, storage, and record-keeping
requirements. These bureaucratic issues aside, opioids are the most
effective therapy for pain from all causes and are critical components of
so-called multimodal therapeutic pain regimens. Opioids are less effective,
however, in the treatment of pain caused by nerve injury and other forms
148
PART THREE•Therapy for the Alleviation of Pair
of neuropathic pain (e.g-, spinal cord compression). The routine clinical use
of opioids for analgesia or as preanesthetic medication must be considered
within the framework of the patient's medical problems, the severity of
the patient's pain, and the potential for anesthesia. Low doses of opioid
agonists-antagonists (e.g., butorphanol), for example, can be additive
with opioid agonists (e.g, hydromorphone and oxymorphone). Opioid
antagonist effects, however, are to be expected when large or repeated doses
of an opioid agonist-antagonist (e.g-, butorphanol or pentazocine) or partial
agonist (e.g., buprenorphine) are administered to a patient that has received
an opioid agonist (e.g-, morphine or hydromorphone). Furthermore, not all
opioid effects can be antagonized. The administration of the partial agonist
buprenorphine, for example, after administration of an opioid agonist
S     (   
depression in some patients. As noted, low doses of opioids may produce
excitatory effects in some species, especially cats and horses. It has been
suggested that the administration of low doses of an opioid antagonist
(naltrexone)before administration of an opioid agonist (morphine,
hydromorphone) may help to prevent opioid-related excitatory effects,
enhanceopioid-related analgesia,and attenuatethedevelopmentoftolerance
associated with chronic opioid use. The clinical utility and relevance of this
suggestion remains to be validated in clinical veterinary practice. Finally,
diseases (liver, renal, CNS) and drugs (anesthetics) that prolong opioid
resulting in extended periods of depression and unconsciousness.
NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORYDRUGS
the most popular analgesic drugs used in small animal veterinary practice
for acute or chronic pain (Box 8-2). In addition to anaigesia, NSAIDs are
nonspecifically inhibiting the various isoforms of cyclooxygenase synthase
(COX) or, in the case ofthe dualinhibitortepoxalin, COXand 5-lipoxygenase
(LOX), which are responsible for prostaglandin (e.g-, COX: prostaglandin
E2) and leukotriene (e.g, LOX: LTB4) production from arachidonic acid.
Prostaglandinsproduce their algesic, proinflammatory, and pyretic effects by
activating prostaglandin (EP) receptors throughout the body. Leukotrienes
stimulate chemotaxis and are associated with increased neutrophil
activation and their subsequent adhesion and degranulation. Leukotrienes
 as d   i n n  n
of COX exist: COX-1 and COX-2. Although COX-1 is considered to be
CHAPTER 8 + Drugs Used to Treat Pain
149
B0X 8-2
Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
Salicylic Acid
Oxicams
Aspirin
 Piroxicam
Para-Aminophenol
Meloxicam
Acetaminophen
Acetic Acids
Fenamic Acids
Ketorolac
Funixin meglumine
Etodolac
Coxibs
Pyrazolones
Deracoxib
Dipyrone
Phenylbutazone
Frocoxib
Propionic Acids
Lipoxygenase/Cyclooxygenase
Carprofen
Inhibitor
Ketoprofen
Tepoxalin
Naproxen
lbuprofen 
“"housekeeping" COX and to be involved in cell signaling and maintaining
tissue homeostasis, COX-1 and COX-2 have housekeeping roles in select
tissues. COX-1 inhibition is believed to be responsible for the majority of
acute and chronic toxicities ofNSAIDs, especially gastrointestinal ulceration,
although one theory contends that inhibition of COX-1 or both of the COX
enzymes shunts substrate toward the production of leukotrienes, increasing
the production of LTB4 and thereby exacerbating mucosal damage. COX-2,
often but inappropriately referred to as inducible COX, is the principal
enzyme responsible for the overproduction of prostaglandins following
acute injury or infection. Most NSAIDS that are currently available inhibit
COX-1 and COX-2 isoenzymes, although several are relatively COX-
2 selective (deracoxib), if not specific (frocoxib). The recent availability
of a highly COX-2-selective NSAID (firocoxib) offers the potential to
provide improved analgesic and antinflammatory effects with minimal
interference of gastrointestinal physiology, although this has not been borne
out by clinical data. The nonsedating, analgesic, and low-toxicity profle of
newer NSAIDs (e.g., carprofen, etodolac, deracoxib, and firocoxib) and the
regarding gastrointestinal toxicity, although the potential for renal toxicity,
blood clotting abnormalities, and efficacy remain controversial. Currently
available NSAIDs offer reduced side effects and toxicity, improved
convenience (oral and parenteral preparations), and a long duration of
action (administration once a day) compared with the many nonapproved
formulations.
150
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pair
PHARMACOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Regardless oftheir diverse chemical structure and selectivity for COX-1
or COX-2 or LOX, most NSAIDs produce subtle and individual animal-
dependent analgesic effects. Noteworthy is that NSAIDs that are COX-
1 selective (e.g-, aspirin and ibuprofen) inhibit platelet aggregation.
Because it is not easy to determine the extent to which pain and
inflammation depend on COX-1-mediatedor COX-2-mediated effects,
it is difficult to select the one best NSAID for the treatment of pain in
every animal. Because the majority of proinflammatory prostaglandins
induced by acute tissue damage or trauma are believed to be produced
by the induction (up-regulation) of COX-2, it is reasonable to conclude
that drugs producing more specific COX-2 effects should be more
effective in producing analgesic, antinflammatory, and antipyretic
effects, but this conclusion remains unproven. Similarly, NSAIDs that
interfere with normal homeostatic activity (COX-1 effects) should
be more likely to produce toxicity. Clinically, these conclusions turn
out to be generally true because drugs that produce COX-2 inhibitory
effects exhibit good efficacy and less gastrointestinal toxicity than
COX-1 inhibitors. Nevertheless, given the potential for serious toxic
side effects, veterinarians should consider analgesic adjuncts (tramadol,
gabapentin, amantadine) if the NSAID currently selected does not
prove to be of therapeutic benefit before switching to an alternative
NSAID. Also important to remember is that all current NSAIDs can
produce renal toxicity.
CENTRALNERVOUSSYSTEM
NSAIDs do not produce important CNS effects that alter the animal's
level of consciousness or behavior. Peripheral analgesia, although
primarily resulting from the local inhibition of prostaglandins, may
also be due to the inhibition of prostaglandin generation in the CNS.
The activation of glial cells and microglia within the CNS are suspected
to central sensitization and amplification of pain associated with
chronic pain states. The use of NSAIDS that target CNS sites may have
special advantage in providing analgesia for chronic pain. NSAIDs
are synergistic with opioids, which are noted for their CNS analgesic
effects, and reduce the amount of opioid required to produce effective
analgesia.
Neurons within the hypothalamus that are responsible for regulating
body temperature are affected by prostaglandins, resulting in an increase
CHAPTER 8 + Drugs Used to Treat Pain  151
in the thermoregulatory set-point and fever. NSAIDs return the set-point
to normal by inhibiting prostaglandin production.
RESPIRATORYSYSTEM
system. NSAIDs may, however, improve respiratory function in animals
with respiratory-  and  inflammatory-mediated  bronchoconstrictive
diseases. On rare occasions, NSAIDs have been incriminated in the
production of acute asthmalike signs. The mechanism for this is unclear,
but it has been suggested that leukotriene (e.g-, LTC-4 and LTD-4)
production may increase when arachidonate metabolism is diverted
from the COXpathway. Increased production of LTC-4 and LTD-4 causes
airway hyperreactivity and bronchial contractions.
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
NSAIDs do not produce significant cardiovascular effects.
Inhibition of prostaglandin production following infection, trauma,
        
vasodilation, edema, and platelet aggregation.
Some NSAIDs, particularly those that are more COX-1 selective (e.g-x
aspirin), are noted for their inhibitory effect on platelet aggregation,
resultinginthe potential for prolonged bleeding times and the development
of edema at sites of tissue injury.
NSAIDs occasionally cause fluid retention in patients with heart
failure.
OTHERORGANSYSTEMS
Gastrointestinal System
Prostaglandins play an important role in the development of a
protective gastric barrier to intraluminal acidity by  stimulating
mucous production and bicarbonate secretion and promoting blood
flow. Prostaglandins also sustain cell turnover and repair and maintain
normal gut motility. The use of NSAIDs predisposes animals to gastric
disease (Box 8-3).
Genitourinary System
n   u  n  d so
tubular function. The use of NSAIDs may promote renal blood flow and
produce diuretic effects in some animals.
152
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
B0X 8-3
Treatment of Gastrointestinal Side Effects of Nonsteroida
AntinflammatoryDrugs
●Discontinue nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug
●Initiate antibiotic therapy
· Sucralfate, 0.5 to 1.0 g P0
● Ranitidine, 2.5 mg/kg IV q12h
●Famotidine, 0.5 to 1 mg/kg IV q1 2h
●Misoprostol, 0.7 to 5 μg/kg P0 q8h
CLINICALISSUES
NSAIDs are, in general, effective for the treatment of mild to moderate
(e.g-, inflammation and trauma), NSAIDs rarely eliminate all pain and
are relatively ineffective for treating severe pain. Gastrointestinal, renal, or
hepatic toxicity and excessive bleeding are potential problems associated
with the clinical use of NSAIDs. These issues are particularly important in
very young or old animals and in animals that are immunocompromised
or have preexisting cardiovascular, renal, or liver disease. The potential
for altered platelet function and blood dyscrasias should be considered
if NSAIDs are to be administered chronically. Significant differences
between drugs and their metabolism by different species(dogs versus cats)
emphasize the importance of strictly adhering to dose recommendations
and dosing schedules if toxicity is to be prevented.
C2-AGONISTS
Q2-Agonists were initially developed for use as antihypertensive agents
(e.g-, clonidine) in human beings and for their sedative, muscle relaxant,
and analgesic effects in animals (Box 8-4). Moderate to excellent analgesia
can be produced, but only with moderate to profound degrees of sedation.
Q-Agonists produce their clinically relevant pharmacologic effects by
activating a variety of αz-receptor subtypes (e.g-, Q2A, Q2B, Q2c, and C2D)
in the CNS and periphery. The discovery of a receptor-based mechanism
has led to the identification and synthesis ofα.-receptor antagonists (e.g-
yohimbine, tolazoline, and atipamezole). Based on differences in chemical
structure, some Q-agonists are capable of activating imidazoline receptors
(I, I2) and producing direct effects (e.g-, xylazine). The diversity in
chemical structure, receptor specificity, and receptor density and location
dosages and effects of α-agonists among and within species. Notorious
CHAPTER8·DrugsUsed toTreatPain
153
BOX 8-4
Cz-Agonists
· Conidine
● Detomidine
· Dexmedetomidine
·Medetomidine
●Romifidine
●Xylazine
for the frequency, scope, and severity of their cardiovascular side effects,
particularly bradycardia and bradyarrhythmias, Q-receptor antagonists
must be administered with caution to very young, aged, or debilitated
patients and are contraindicated in most patients with cardiovascular
diseases. Future αz-agonists will be designed to activate specific receptor
subtypes, ideally limiting their CNS depressant actions and decreasing the
frequency of side effects.
PHARMACOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
More than any other group of drugs that produce analgesic effects, the
clinical use of o2-agonists centers on their associated CNS (sedative),
cardiovascular, and respiratory effects. Consideration must be given to
the potential for the development of profound sedation with unexpected
or aggressive behavioral changes, significant bradycardia, and respiratory
     d  ss
anesthetics) and amplification of toxic side effects is high.
CENTRALNERVOUSSYSTEM
Q2-Agonists activate presynaptic and postsynaptic Q-receptors in the
CNS, producing sedation and analgesia. Sedation in dogs and cats is
are responsible for awareness, arousal, and vigilance. Activation of α
and imidizoline receptors may play some part in the pharmacology of
most α-receptor agonists because most currently available o-receptors
        s   
or poor sedation attributed to activation of CNS α-receptors. Like other
calming drugs (e.g-, acepromazine), Q2-agonists are capable of eliciting a
 s de p sio  o g ssa, po s
become suddenly aroused and aggressive if disturbed. Many dogs, cats,
154
PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
and especially horses seem to demonstrate increased sensitivity to sound
and initial tactile contact.
Activation of oz-receptors in the brain and spinal cord decreases
pain-related neurotransmitters and interferes with sensory transmission.
Q2-Agonists also act peripherally at o-receptors to produce analgesia, and
some Qz-agonists (e.g-, xylazine) produce local anesthetic effects.
Vomiting isa common side effect in dogs and cats after the intravenous
administration of an Cz-agonist. Activation of αz-receptors within the
CTZ is responsible for nausea and retching.
All αa-agonists impair the control of body temperature through CNS-
mediated dose-dependent effects on temperature thresholds for sweating.
vasoconstriction, and shivering. These effects predispose dogs and cats
to hypothermia, particularly during the postoperative period. However,
Q2-agonists are also an effective treatment for shivering. Occasionally, the
administration of α-agonists is responsible for triggering hyperthermia
resulting from intense peripheral vasoconstriction and an inability
environments.
RESPIRATORYSYSTEM
02-agonists agonists produce a dose-dependent rate and volume that
parallels the degree of CNS depression. Pronounced CNS depression
is associated with a decrease in respiratory center response (increased
threshold to Pco2) and sensitivity (decreased response to Pco2) to carbon
dioxide. Both effects combine to produce significant respiratory acidosis
and hypoxemia in older or sick animals. Clinical doses generally produce
unconscious or anesthetized.
Q2-Agonists cause considerable relaxation of upper airway muscles in
the pharynx and larynx, which can result in irregular breathing patterns,
brachycephalic breeds.
CARDIOVASCVLARSYSTEM
cardiovascular effects. Chief among these effects are decreases in heart
rate. Sinus bradycardia and bradyarrhythmias are common following the
administration of a2-agonists. First- and second-degree atrioventricular
block are the most common bradyarrhythmias to occur, although third-
degree atrioventricular block and sinus arrest with ventricular escape
CHAPTER 8·Drugs Used toTreatPain
155
beats are occasionally observed. Atrioventricular block and decreases
in heart rate are caused by the combined effects of decreases in CNS
sympathetic output and increases in vagally mediated parasympathetic
   n n    
       
bradycardia and atrioventricular block. One must remember, however,
 r sn  s   n no  n 
been given an Qz-agonist may predispose them to the development
of cardiac arrhythmias, including ventricular tachycardia and rarely
ventricular fibrillation. Therefore, anticholinergics and Q-agonists should
not be administered to animals with preexisting ventricular arrhythmias,
myocardial contusion, heart failure, or any other cause of ventricular
electrical instability. Some Q2-agonists (e.g-, xylazine) transiently sensitize
the heart to catecholamine-induced arrhythmias. The clinical relevance of
this effect, however, has not been established.
Arterial blood pressure usually increases transiently and then decreases
from baseline values after the administration of an α-agonist. The early
period of vasoconstriction and hypertension is initiated by stimulation of
peripheral vascular α- and α.-receptors and is partly responsible for the
development of bradyarrhythmias because of increases in baroreceptor
reflex activity and vagal tone. The long-term decrease in arterial blood
 pressure parallels decreases in CNS sympathetic output and heart rate.
Cardiac output decreases almost immediately after the administration
of an Qz-agonist, primarily because of a decrease in heart rate
(CO=HR x Stroke volume, where CO is cardiac output and HR is heart
rate). The short-term and long-term decreases in cardiac output also can
be attributed to vasoconstriction (increased afterload) and decreases in
CNS sympathetic output, resulting in a decrease in cardiac contractile
force and stroke volume.
OTHER ORGAN SYSTEMS
GastrointestinalSystem
Vomiting and retching are common consequences of αz-agonist
administration to dogs and cats. Lower doses and subcutaneous
administration help decrease this side effect, which is mediated by Q2-
receptor effects in the CTZ in the CNS. c-Agonists produce immediate
and pronounced decreases in gastrointestinal motility in dogs and cats,
which can last for several hours. Gastrointestinal stasis is caused by
stimulation of cz-receptors in the gut and increases in serum gastrin
concentration. This effect is dose-dependent but is believed to be
responsible for postoperative ileus, gas accumulation, and potentially, the
development of "bloat” in dogs.
156
PART THREE•Therapy for the Alleviation of Pair
Endocrine System
Q-Receptors modulate the release of insulin by the pancreas, causing
a transient decrease in serum insulin concentration and an increase
in serum glucose, resulting in glycosuria. This effect is mediated by
Q2-receptor modulation of insulin secretion by beta cells in the pancreas.
GenitourinarySystem
Q2-Agonists promote diuresis bytheir glucosuric effects and directactions
on the renal tubules to decrease renal tubular salt and water absorption.
Labor can be delayed and prolonged as a result of sedative and muscle
relaxant effects.
CLINICALISSUES
Although potentially useful as analgesics for minor medical or surgical
procedures or as preanesthetic medication for general anesthesia, the
routine use of oz-agonists as analgesics has been hampered by side effects,
especially bradyarrhythmias. The administration of an anticholinergic
for the treatment of bradycardia, although indicated, may precipitate
ventricular arrhythmias. The best approach to the treatment of
severe bradycardia with hypotension may be the administration of an
C2-antagonist (atipamezole). αz-Agonists are excellent anxiolytics,
however, and the administration of low doses (≤2 μg/kg) or infusions (0.2
to 1.0 μg/kg per hour) with opioids or NSAIDs as part of a multimodal
approach for the treatment of postoperative pain should be explored.
α-Agonists may have considerable benefit as analgesics when administered
into the epidural or subarachnoid space, but these routes ofadministration
and others await detailed clinical evaluation on dogs and cats.
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
All local anesthetics block the initiation and conduction of electrical
A8) nerve fibers are blocked first in preference to large myelinated fibers
(Aβ), thereby producing a loss of sensation (analgesia) and varying
degrees of paralysis (i.e., loss of motor function). More specifically, local
anesthetics block sodium ion channels in neuronal cells and other tissues,
and a decrease in propagated action potentials. Nonspecific membrane
effects similar to those produced by inhalant anesthetics may be partially
CHAPTER 8 + Drugs Used to Treat Pain  157
TABLE 8-3
Local Anesthetic Drugs
Drug
Route of Administration
Bupivacaine
, NB, E, S
Cetacaine (benzocaine, butamben,
T
and tetracaine hydrochloride)
Lidocaine
M,T, I, NB, E, S
Mepivacaine
, NB, E, S
Mexiletine
PO
Ropivacaine
I, NB, E, S
E, Epidural; I, infiltration; IV, intravenous (systemic or regional); NB, nerve block; PO,
oral; S, spinal; T, topical.
result of sodium ion channel blockade and membrane stabilization. Local
anesthetics are most frequently administered at specific sites (topical,
local) or on nerves (regional) to produce analgesia.
PHARMACOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Although noted for their local analgesic effects after topical or local
infltration, most local anesthetic drugs produce mid CNS depressant
(anesthetic-sparing), antiarrhythmic, mild antinflammatory, antishock,
and gastrointestinal promotility effects. Significant differences exist
among local anesthetics regarding their metabolism, elimination, and
potential to produce toxicity in dogs, cats, and horses. Cats and horses
(Chapter 22), for example, are much more susceptible to the neurotoxic
side effects of local anesthetics than dogs.
CENTRALNERVOUSSYSTEM
Local anesthetics, as their name implies, produce analgesia by suppressing
or blocking electrical activity in sensory and motor nerves. The preferential
blocking of small unmyelinated nerves suggests that smaller doses should
limit motor dysfunction, but this is difficult, if not impossible, to take
advantage of clinically.
Low doses of local anesthetics produce negligible effects on the CNS.
Mild sedation may occur as a result of membrane-stabilizing effects, a
generalized decrease in neuronal activity, and a centrally mediated decrease
in sympathetic activity. Most local anesthetics potentiate the effects of
injectable (e.g., thiopental and propofol) and inhalant anesthetics (e.g-)
isoflurane and sevoflurane), resulting in a decrease in the amount of
anesthetic required (anesthetic sparing) to produce unconsciousness and
surgical anesthesia.
1 58 PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Large doses of local anesthetics are capable of producing CNS
stimulation typified by nervousness, disorientation, nystagmus, nausea,
excitement, agitation, and convulsions. These effects are believed to be
caused by the inhibition of inhibitory neurons within the CNS, and when
RESPIRATORYSYSTEM
Recommended doses of local anesthetics produce minimal if any
significant effects on the respiratory system other than those associated
with their effects on the CNS.
Solutions containing local anesthetic drugs have the potential to
(subarachnoidal) routes. The migration of the local anesthetic cranially
   a d o son n - a 0
hypoventilation and apnea.
CARDIOVASCULARSYSTEM
Therapeutic doses of local anesthetics produce minimal cardiovascular
effects in otherwise healthy dogs and cats. Heart rate may increase as a
result of sympathetic suppression, arteriolar dilation, and decreases in
arterial blood pressure.
A large dose or rapid intravenous administration of a local anesthetic
drug decreases cardiac output, arterial blood pressure, and heart rate. The
P   s a  se   e 
output, myocardial contractile force, and venous return. These effects
    s    n   
sympathetic tone for maintaining homeostasis.
All local anesthetics produce antiarrhythmic effects but have the
potential to produce sinus bradycardia and bradyarrhythmias and
hypotension when administered too rapidlybythe intravenous route. Local
anesthetics should not be administered to dogs or cats with high-grade (two
or more blocked P waves) second-degree or third-degree atrioventricular
block because they can cause further depression of conduction and
suppress ventricular escape beats, leading to cardiac arrest.
OTHER ORGAN SYSTEMS
GastrointestinalSystem
High sympathetic tone can cause complete gut stasisand maybe responsible
for the development of ileus in the postsurgical patient. Local anesthetics
CHAPTER 8·DrugsUsed toTreatPain
159
Hematopoietic System
tetracaine hydrochloride], benzocaine, and dibucaine) can produce
methemoglobinemia. This is particularly important in puppies and cats
Of all ages.
CLINICAL ISSUES
The most clinically relevant issues associated with the administration
of currenly available local anesthetic drugs are their lack of selectivity
for sensory nerve fibers, their potential to cause motor paralysis, and the
good to excellent analgesia when administered topically or injected
d onl  r jo  a ie q 
when administered epidurally), which can become problematic in some
surgical patients (cesarean section, fracture repair) and induce untoward
behavioral responses in others. The systemic infusion of lidocaine
produces clinically relevant analgesia and anesthetic-sparing effects
when administered as adjunctive therapy with inhalant (e.g-, isoflurane
or sevoflurane) or injectable (e.g-, ketamine or propofol) anesthetics,
opioids, or Qz-agonists. Mexiletine ("oral lidocaine") can be used as
and cardiovascular) is most likely to occur affer accidental intraarterial
injection, overdose, during high infusion rates, or when multiple bolus
injections of smaller doses are administered over a short period. Cats and
horses are particularly more susceptible to the CNS side effects of local
anesthetics than are dogs, mandating a reduction in intravenous drug
dosage (>0.5 mg/kg IV). Cimetidine and other drugs that impair liver
metabolism can prolong the elimination of local anesthetics and increase
the potential for toxicity.
NONTRADITIONAL ANALGESICS
FOR THE TREATMENT OF PAIN
A growing number of chemicals representing widely diverse drug
families are being increasingly prescribed as adjunctive and adjuvant
therapy for the treatment of acute and, more commonly, chronic pain
(Tables 8-4 and 8-5). Corticosteroids, local anesthetics, anticonvulsants,
antidepressants, antiviral and anticancer agents, herbal remedies, and a
adjuvant analgesic activity. Anticonvulsants (gabapentin, pregabalin) and
160
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
TABLE 8-4
AdjuvantAnalgesicDrugs
 Drug Category
Possible Side Effects
CORTICOSTEROIDS
Prednisone
Tissue edema, immune suppression
Prednisolone
Dexamethasone
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Lidocaine 
Central nervous system toxicity,
Mexiletine
cardiovascular depression
TRANQUILIZERS/MUSCLE
RELAXANTS
 Acepromazine 
Central nervous system
Chlorpromazine
depression, hypotension
Diazepam
Midazolam
ANTICONVULSANTS
Carbamazepine
Disorientation, depression
Gabapentin
 Phenytoin
ANTIDEPRESSANTS
 Amitriptyline
Behavioral changes,
 Comipramine
anticholinergic effects
CALCIUM ANTAGONISTS
Diltiazem
Bradycardia, hypotension
SYMPATHOLYTICS
Atenolol
Bradycardia, hypotension
Prazosin
 Propranolol
MISCELLANEOUS DRUGS
Aendronate
Disorientation, depression
Amantadine
Clonidine
Codeine
 Dextromethorphan
Ketamine
 Magnesium salts (Mg-2S04-2)
Tramadol
behavior-modifying drugs (e.g-, amitriptyline and clomipramine) may be
efficacious for treating chronic pain syndromes, particularly neuropathic
pain. Several drugs have weak but potentially relevant NMDA receptor
blocking activity (amantadine, dextromethorphan) and have been
used in conjunction with NSAIDs and opioids to control chronic pain.
CHAPTER 8 ▪ Drugs Used to Treat Pain
161
TABLE 8-5
Adjuvant Analgesic Drug Dosages
Drug
Dosage in Dogs
Dosage in Cats
CORTICOSTEROIDS
 Dexamethasone 
0.10-0.15 mg/kg SC, P0
0.10-0.15 mg/kg SC, P0
Prednisolone
1.0-2.2 mg/kg P0
1-2 mg/kg P0
Prednisone
1.0-2.2 mg/kg P0
1-2 mg/kg P0
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Lidocaine 
2-4 mg/kg IV bolus and then
0.25-1.0 mg/kg Iv
25-75 μg/kg Iv infusion
bolus and then 10-40
 μg/kg Iv infusion
Mexiletine
4-10 mg/kg P0
TRANQUILIZERS/MUSCLE
RELAXANTS
Acepromazine
0.025-1.13 mg/kg IV, SC, IM
0.05-2.25 mg/kg
IM, SC, IV, P0
Chlorpromazine
0.05-0.50 mg/kg SC, IM;
0.5 mg/kg IM, IV;
0.8-4.4 mg/kg P0
2-4 mg/kg PO
Diazepam
2-5 mg/kg IV; 0.5-2.2 mg/kg P0
2-5 mg/kg IV;
0.5-2.2 mg/kg P0
Midazolam
0.066-0.22 mg/kg Iv, IM
0.066-0.22 mg/kg Iv, IM
ANTICONVULSANTS
Carbamazepine
Not recommended
Gabapentin
1-3 mg/kg PO,initial dose
 Phenytoin
 20-35 mg/kg PO
2-3 mg/kg PO
ANTIDEPRESSANTS
Amitriptyline
1-2 mg/kg P0
1-2 mg/kg P0
 Comipramine
1-3 mg/kg P0
1-5 mg/kg P0
CALCIUM ANTAGONISTS
Diltiazem
0.5-1.5 mg/kg P0
1.75-2.5 mg/kg P0
SYMPATHOLYTICS
Atenolol
0.25-1.0 mg/kg P0
2-3 mg/kg
Prazosin
1 mg/15 kg P0
 Propranolol
0.125-1.10 mg/kg P0
0.4-1.2 mg/kg P0
MISCELLANEOUS DRUGS
 Alendronate
10-20 mg/kg P0
 Amantadine
3-5 mg/kg P0
3-5 mg/kg PO
Clonidine
10 μg/kg IV
10 μg/kg Iv
Codeine
1-2 mg/kg PO
 Dextromethorphan
0.5-2 mg/kg PO, SC, IV
Ketamine 
0.5 mg/kg SC
0.5 mg/kg SC
 20 μg/kg per minute IV
 5-10 μg/kg per minute IV
Magnesium salts
5-15 mg/kg IV
5-15 mg/kg IV
(Mg-2S04-2)
Tramadol
2-5 mg/kg P0, bid-tid
1-3 mg/kg P0, sid-bid
162
PART THREE•Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Tramadol acts at both opioid receptors, inhibits the reuptake of serotonin
and norepinephrine, and has been administered alone or as adjunctive
therapy with NSAIDs to control chronic pain. Tramadol should not be
administered in conjunction with tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline)
because of the potential for behavioral abnormalities. Many drugs used
to produce anxiolysis and produce muscle relaxation before surgery (e.g-,
combined with inhalant (e.g-, isoflurane and sevoflurane) or injectable
(e.g-, ketamine and propofol) anesthetics, opioids, or C2-agonists. The
potential to produce significant drug interactions and side effects and to
enhance the toxicity of the primary analgesic drug presents a risk. The
coadministration ofacepromazine and opioids, for example, may improve
overall analgesic efficacy by 2 to 3 times but also increases the potential
acidosis. To date, there are no controlled clinical trials demonstrating the
efficacy or safety of most if not all of the drugs considered to be useful for
producing adjuvant analgesia. Ideally, future studies will fill this void.
SUGGESTEDREADINGS
Boothe DM: Small animal clinical pharmacology and therapeutics, Philadelphia,
2001, WB Saunders.
Carroll GL, Simonson SM: Recent developments in nonsteroidal antinflammatory
drugs in cats, JAAMHA 41:347-354, 2005.
Dahl JB, Moiniche S: Pre-emptive analgesia, Br Med Bull 71:13-27 2004.
Hobbs WR, Rall RW,Verdoorn TA: Hypnotics and sedatives: ethanol. In
Hardman fG et al, editors: Goodmane Gillman's the pharmacological basis of
therapeutics, ed 9, New York, 1996, McGraw-Hill.
Muir WW: Pain. In Muir WW, Hubbell IAE, Skarda RT et al: Handbook of
veterinary anesthesia, ed 3, St Louis,2000, Mosby
Reisine T, Pasternak G: Opioid analgesics and antagonists. In Hardman JG et al,
editors: Goodman e Gillman's the pharmacological basis of therapeutics,ed 9
New York, 1996, McGraw-Hill.
Wieseler-Frank J, Maier SF, Watkins LR: Central proinflammatory cytokines and
pain enhancement, Neurosignals 14:166-174,2005.
OPIOIDS
ANN E. WAGNER
DEFINITION
An opioid can be defined as any natural or synthetic drug that has opiate-
like activities, exerting its effects by interacting with opiate receptors of
cell membranes (Box 9-1).
ANALGESICEFFICACY
Opioids, which characteristically produce anaigesia without loss of
proprioception or consciousness, are currently the mostefficacious systemic
means of controlling acute or postoperative pain.
OTHER EFFECTS
 In addition to their analgesic effects, opioids may cause side effects (see
Side Effects/Toxicity).
OPIATERECEPTORS
● Functior: Opiate receptors mediate the various effects of opioids (Table 9- 1).
● Classification: The location, identification, and actions of various opi-
the classification of opioid drugs and receptors presented may not
reflect the latest findings. (For instance, there may actually be seven
subtypes of the μ-receptor; see also Relevant Pharmacology.)
Locations
1. Central nervous system: Traditionally, it was believed that
opiate receptors were located only in the central nervous system,
particularly in the brain and in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord,
163
164
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
B0X9-1
Definitions
●A pure opioid agonistbinds to one or more types of receptor and causes certain effects,
such as analgesia or respiratory depression (e.g., morphine).
An opioid is considered a partiaf agonist if its binding at a given receptor causes an effect
that is less pronounced than that of a pure agonist (e.g., buprenorphine).
●An opioid antagonist binds to one or more types of receptor but causes no effect at
those receptors. By competitively displacing an agonist from a receptor, the antagonist
effectively “reverses” the effect of the agonist (e.g.,naloxone).
● An opioid agonist-antagonistbinds to more than one type of receptor, causing an effect at
one but no effect or a less pronounced effect at another (e.g., butorphanol).
Classification of Opiate Receptors and
TABLE 9-1
Their Effects
Class
Effects
,-1
Supraspinal analgesia
,-2
Respiratory depression
Bradycardia
 Physical dependence
Euphoria
u-3
Hyperpolarization of peripheral nerves induced by inflammation/
immune response
K
Analgesia
Sedation
Miosis
8
Modulation of μ-receptor activity
where impulses from peripheral nerves are modulated before being
transmitted to higher centers.
2.
receptors and activities also occur in some peripheral tissues,
 a on i  si ssn no se i 
evaluated.
PROTOTYPEANDMEMBERS
AGONISTS
Morphine*
DEScRlPTioN:Morphineisthepnincipafaikaioidderivedfromopiumand
*Morphine, Morphine Sulfate Injection; Elkins-Sinn, Cherry Hill, N.J
CHAPTER 9 +Opioids 165
small animal practice
ANALGESICEFFICACY:Aifhough other opioids may be more potent, to
date, none is more effective than morphine at relieving pain. Cats do not
producetheactivemetaboiteofmorphineaffterintramuscuaradministra-
fion,andonly5o%ofcatsproduceitafterintravenousmorphineadminis-
tration. Therefore, morphine is less efficacious in most cats than in dogs.
MAIN EFFECT:Anaigesiawithout loss of sensation orproprioception
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
1. Depression of the respiratory center, resulting in decreased minute
volume and increased arterial carbon dioxide tension
2. Depression of the cough center
3. Stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone and increased
intestinal peristalsis, which may cause defecation shortly after
administration, along with stimulation of gastrointestinal
sphincters, which can lead to eventual constipation
4. Increased antidiuretic hormone, with urine production decreased
by up to 90%
5. Histamine release: Morphine should be administered slowly and in
conservative doses if given intravenously because of the potential
for endogenous histamine release, which may occur within 1
minute and persist for at least 60 minutes.
6. Cardiovascular effects: Morphine generally causes minimal
       
which is generally responsive to anticholinergic agents. Histamine
release, if it occurs, may result in hypotension.
7. Excitement/dysphoria: Morphine may cause excitement or
dysphoria in some animals, with dogs generally being less affected
than cats and horses.
DURATIoN: Anaigesic effects of systemically administered morphine may
lastup to4hours,anadvantageinthemanagement ofacutepainassoci-
ated with trauma or surgery.
COST:Morphine is inexpensive enough that cost shouid not be an excuse
fornadeguatetreatmentofpain.
Oxymorphone*
DESCRIPTION: A semisynthetic opioid
ANALGESICEFFICACYANDDURATION:Simiar toMorphine
166
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Oral tablets and suspension also available
Jse caution when given intravenously
Bioavailability is poor when morphine is
Not recommended for intravenous use
 Constant rate infusion (CRl) required for 
Unpredictable sedation; may require 
Minimal to no histamine release
Minimal to no histamine release
(histamine release)
(histamine release)
 sustained effect
qiven orally
 tranquilizer
Comments
CRI:1-4 μg/kg per hour
 (pain management);
10-30 μg/kg per hour
(surgical analgesia)
Cat Dose (mg/kg)
Loading: 1-3 μg/kg
0.2-0.5 q3-4h 
0.02-0.1 q3-4h 
0.05-0.1 q2-6h 
3-5 q1-2h
0.1-0.5
uedy anoy lad 6y/6n s-z iuo
eunsj any ad byyn
analgesia and minimum 
alveolar concentration 
 5 μg/kg loading; 0.1 μg/kg
management); 10-45
(6x/6w) aso0 600
Loading:2-5 μg/kg
of Common Opioid Analgesics
0.05-0.4 q2-4h
.05-0.2 q2-6h
reductionj
per minute 
0.5-2 q2-4h
2-5 q1 2h
3-5 q1-2h
0.5-1
Relative
Potency
10-15
1-1.5
100
1000
10
Opioid Analgesic
Morphine, sustained 
TABLE 9-2
release (oral)
Oxymorphone
Hydromorphone
Methadone
Meperidine
Morphine 
 Sufentanil
Fentanyl
CHAPTER 9 +Opioids
167
Rapid onset, short duration (1 0 minutes?)
 May be difficulto antagonize
Cats:Instillin cheek pouch for
 Extremely rapid elimination 
 transmucosal absorption.
-xjuo saujapine are asayi jenpiaipu o lenpiaipu! wuoiy AieA visaeue jo uoneinp pue sabesop painbay 'paeis
0.005-0.02 q8-12h;
0.01-0.02 P0,tid, qid
0.2-0.4 q1 -44h
0.1-0.4 q2-6h
0.5-1 q6-8h 
1-3 q2-4h 
℃
 (pain management; 20-60
 enjbuns anou lad by/6n
CRI:4-10 μg/kg per hour
Loading:4-10 μg/kg
0.005-0.02 q8-12h
analgesia)
0.5-2 q6-8h
0.5-1 q1-4h
1-3 q2-4h 
0.25-0.5
10
6
3
25
一
Butorphanol, oral
Buprenorphine 
 Remifentanil
Butorphanol
Nalbuphine
Pentazocine
 Alfentanil
168PART THREE ● Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
OTHEREFFECTS
1. Oxymorphone does not cause histamine release; therefore, it is
safer for intravenous (IV) administration than morphine.
2. Clinical impression suggests that oxymorphone may be less likely
to produce excitement than morphine.
3. Oxymorphone is more likely to induce panting than morphine.
Panting results from a resetting of the thermoregulatory center,
so the animal “thinks" it needs to cool off despite a normal or low
body temperature.
COST: Oxymorphone is approved for use in dogs and cats but is consider-
ably more expensive than morphine.
Hydromorphone*
DESCRIPTIoN: A semisynthetic opioid
ANALGESIC EFFICACY:Hydromorphone has nearly the same efficacy
analgesiaincatsthandoesmorphine
DuRATloN:Simiar tomorphine and oxymorphone
CosT: Currenty, hydromorphone is considerably fess expensive than
oxymorphone,soit hasbeenrecommended as a lower-cost alternative to
oxymorphone.
OHER CoMMENTS:  Aithough hydromorphone can induce some histamine
hypotension,so IV administration is consideredrelatively safe.Hydromor-
phoneproducesfesssedationthanmorphineoroxymorphonendogsano
cats.Catsmaybecomehyperthermicafterhydromorphoneadminisration
Methadone'
DESCRIPTION: A synthetic opioid
ANALGESIC EFFICACY:  Simiar to morphine
DURATION:2to6hOUrS
OTHER CoMMENTS:Methadone is the feast fikely of the p-agonist opi-
Meperidine
DESCRIPTIoN: Meperidine is a synthetic opioid about one tenth
as potent as morphine. Because of its short duration and possibie
Methadlone (Dolophine); Eli Lilly, Indlianapolis, Ind.
Meperidine, Meperidine HCl; Astra, Westborough, Mass.
CHAPTER 9 +Opioids169
cardiovascuiar effects, meperidine is less satisfactory for long-term anal-
gesia than morphine.
ANALGESIC EFFICACY:Similar to morphine
DURATloN: Appears to be of much shorter duration in animais, with
anaigesia fasting generally fess than 1 hour
OTHER COMMENTS
1. Negative inotropy: Unlike other opioids, meperidine reportedly
may have significant negative inotropic effects.
release. For this reason, IV administration is not recommended
Fentany!
DESCRIPTIoN:A short-acting synthetic opioid
ANALGESICEFFICACY: Simiiar to morphine. Fentanyi can decrease the
minimumalveoiarconcentraton(MAc)requlrementfornhafed anesthetcs
by up to 63%.
DURATloN:Theeffectsoffentanyilastonlyabout30minutesaffera
single injection.For cfinicafappfication,thedurationoffentanyf is com
monlyextendedbyadministeringitasaconstantrateinfusionintra
forinhalationanesthetics(10to45μg/kgperhour)andpostoperatively
for pain management (2 to 5 pg/kg per hour). Despite the supposed short
durationoffentanyi,thereisagreatdeaiofindividualvariation inrecov-
ery time from infusions.
OTHERCOMMENTS
1. The use of fentanyl intraoperatively may be especially advantageous
inhaled anesthetics) it causes minimal cardiovascular depression
or hypotension while contributing to significant reduction in the
MAC requirement.
2. Experimental findings and clinical impression suggest that
tolerance to fentanyl can occur, perhaps as soon as 3 hours after
administration is begun.
Sufentanil!
DESCRIPTloN: A synthetic opioid about 1oo0 times as potent as morphine
DURATIoN:About haff as longas thatoffentany!
OTHER COMMENTS: Currently, sufentanil is not commonly uSed for pain
managementinanimais.
*Fentanyl, Fentanyl Citrate Injection; Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago.
Sufentanil (Sufenta); Taylor Pharmaceuticals, San Clemente, Calif.
170PART THREE ● Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Alfentanil*
DEScRIPTloN:  A synthetic opioid about 25 fimes as potent as morphine
DURATIoN:Shorter in duration than fentanyi
OTHER COMMENTS:Currenty, alfentanil is not commonly used for pain
managementinanimais.
Remifentanil
DESCRIPTIoN: Remifentanil is another synthetic opioid that is about half
paogea st ll pe ui spioido buoue anbn st pue ueuai se juaod se
body (mainly in skeletal muscle). This gives remifentanil the clinicai advan
tage of extremely rapid clearance that does not depend on fiver or kidney
function.
DURATIoN:Because of this rapid clearance,constant rate infusion is
within3 to7minutesaftertermination of aninfusion.
OTHER COMMENTS: Remifentanil may be usefuf in situations in which
intense anaigesia is needed for a short or vaniabfe period.
Carfentanil
than morphine
OTHER COMMENTS: Used mainiy for capture of wid and feral animaiS;
not normally used inpainmanagement
AGONIST-ANTAGONISTS
Butorphano!:
DESCRIPTloN: Butorphanof is a synthetic opioid beffeved to exert its ef-
fects mainly at x-receptors, producing varying degrees of anaigesia and
sedatonwt minimal cardiopumonary depression.Butorphanol binds
to,but has minimaleffect at,y-receptors and,consequently,isfabefeda
μ-receptorantagonist.
ANALGESICEFFICACY:  Butorphanof appears to be a fess effective anaf-
gesic than morphine and other pure p-agonist opioids.
*Alfentanil (Alfenta); Taylor Pharmaceuticals
t Remmifentanil (Ultiva); GlaxovWellcome, Research Triangle Park, N.C.
Carfentanil (Vvildnil; Wilife Pharmaceuticals, Fort Collins, Colo.
CHAPTER 9 +Opioids
1. Plateau or ceilingeffect: Although atlow doses, the analgesic potency
of butorphanol is about 3 times that of morphine, doses greater
than about 0.8 to 1 mg/kg are associated with a plateau or ceiling
effect, such that no further enhancement of analgesia occurs.
2. Butorphanol appears to be more effective for mild to moderate
pain and for visceral pain than for severe or somatic pain.
DURATloN:  The duration of anaigesia from butorphanoi is debatabie and
istration. Some studies suggest a duration of fess than an hour in dogs, where-
asothersindicate a fongerdurationof up to6 hours,particulary incats.
OTHERCOMMENTS
1. Interaction of butorphanol with pure agonists: Traditionally, it
was thought that simultaneous or sequential administration of an
agonist-antagonist such as butorphanol and a pure agonist such as
oxymorphone or morphine would be counterproductive in that the
agonist-antagonist might inhibit or even reverse the analgesic effects
of the agonist. However, a recent study in cats, in which the colonic
balloon model for visceral pain was used, suggests that combining
butorphanol with oxymorphone (0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg of each) results
in synergistic analgesia, minimal cardiopulmonary effects, and
decreased excitement or dysphoria compared with oxymorphone
alone.l This result suggested that a combination of an agonist-
antagonist and a pure agonist may have advantages, particularly
However, another study, in which butorphanol was combined with
hydromorphone in cats, found that although duration of analgesia
was enhanced, the intensity of analgesia was reduced.2
2. Partial antagonism of pure agonists: Another use for butorphanol
and other agonist-antagonists is to partially antagonize the
as morphine or oxymorphone, without completely removing
analgesia. This technique is particularly useful for reversal of
excessive sedation and restoration of laryngeal reflexes so that a
butorphanol, 0.1 mg/kg, administered IV, is generally effective.
Nalbuphine*
DESCRIPTIoN: A x-agonist and partial p-antagonist, naibuphine produc-
culareffectwith aduratonof action of about fhour
* Nalbuphine, Nalbuphine HCl Injection; Astra
172PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
OTHERCOMMENTS
1. Cost: One of the main advantages of nalbuphine is that it is
inexpensive.
2. Nalbuphine is not on the Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA) scheduled substance list because of its low abuse potential.
3. Partial antagonism of pure agonists: Nalbuphine, like butorpha nol,
may also be effective in partially antagonizing the sedative effects
of a μ-agonist, at a dosage of 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg administered IV.
Pentazocine*
DESCRIPTIoN: Pentazocine is another x-agonist and μ-antagonist similar to
butorphanofandnaibuphne,producingmidanaigesiaofuncertainduraton
OTHER CoMMENTs: Pentazocine appears to be fess reliabfe than butor-
phanoi or naibuphine as a partial antagonist for other opioids.
Buprenorphine
DESCRIPTIoN:Buprenorphine is different from other agonist-antagonists
at x-receptors.
ANALESIC EFFICACY: Because it is only a partial agonist, buprenorphine
may notprovide adequateanaigesiaformoderate toseverepain,such as that
thosecinicallyrecommendedmayactuallyresutinreducedanalgesia.
ONET OF AcTloN:  Buprenorphine has a slower onset of acton than many
otheropioids,wthfspeakeffectdelayeduptoanhour afterVadministrahon.
DURATIoN: Although a purported advantage of buprenorphine is its long
duraton of anaigesia (up to 12 hours), its clinical anaigesic effect in animals
oftenseemstowaneby6hours.
OTHERCOMMENTS:
1. Once bound to μ-receptors, buprenorphine is reportedly difficult
to displace, meaning that its effects may be difficult to antagonize.
2. Buprenorphine is well absorbed when administered transmucosally
(placed in the cheek pouch) in cats, with a duration of 6 to 8 hours,
making this a practical analgesic for cats.
COST:Buprenorphine is considerably more expensive than morphine.
MECHANISMOFACTION
● Inhibit pain transmission in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord
● Inhibit somatosensory afferent nerves at supraspinal levels
●Activate descending inhibitory pathways
*Pentazocine (Talwin); Sanofi Vinthrop, New York
CHAPTER 9 +Opioids 173
● Bind to receptors on the terminal axons of primary afferent
nerves within the substantia gelatinosa of the spinal cord,
causing a decrease in the release of neurotransmitters such as
substance P
EFFICACY/USE
REGIONAL OR LOCAL ADMINISTRATION
Epidura!
● Epidural administration of morphine is widely practiced in a variety
of species, including dogs, cats, and horses.
Morphine, 0.1 mg/kg, administered epidurally provides analgesia with
fewer side effects than systemically administered morphine.
1. Onset: Approximately 30 to 60 minutes in small animals; longer in
horses
2. Duration: Approximately 18 hours
● Preservative-free morphine is recommended because preservatives
may be neurotoxic. However, in horses and other large animals,
preservative-containing morphine is typically used but is diluted with
sterile physiologic saline.
ntraarticular
● Trauma or inflammation may activate opioid receptors on
nociceptive nerve terminals and/or inflammatory cells (possibly
μ-3 receptors).
● Morphine instilled into joints at the end of surgery reportedly provides
up to 18 hours of analgesia.
● Based on human studies, application of a tourniquet proximal to
the joint is recommended for 10 minutes after injection but is rarely
 practiced in veterinary patients.
● Intraarticular morphine administration may be combined with a local
anesthetic such as bupivacaine for enhanced analgesia.
Topica! Application on Cornea
● Specially prepared, pH-controlled 1% morphine sulfate solution
has been applied to experimentally induced corneal ulcers in
dogs.3
● Topical use of morphine on the cornea was associated with decreased
pain behaviors (reduced blepharospasm and lower esthesiometer
readings).3
●Healing of corneal ulcers was not affected by topical morphine.3
174PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
TRANSDERMALADMINISTRATION
Fentanyl is available in a transdermal delivery system.*
DOSAGE: 2 to 4 μg/kg per hour
1. Patch sizes: 25, 50, 75, or 100 μg/h.
 2. For very small animals, remove the backing from only a portion of
the patch that represents an appropriate dose (i.e., for a 4-kg cat,
use a 25 μg/h patch with only half the backing removed: →→12.5
μg/h, or 3.125 μg/kg per hour).
APPLICATION
1. Site is the back of the neck or shoulders, lateral thorax, or metatarsus.
2. Clip hair; clean skin with water only.
3. Apply patch and hold firmly in place for at least 2 minutes.
4. Apply a bandage over the patch.
ONSET:6 to24 hours
DURATI0N:72 t0104 hourS
RELEVANT PHARMACOLOGY
HISTORICALCLASSIFICATION
Opiate receptors were originally classified as O, x, μ, and 8.
RESULTS OF OPIOID AGONIST OCCUPYING
OPIATE RECEPTOR
d e o  o   o   sa
opiate receptor, which result in inhibition of activation of neurons, are
the following:
● Depression of cyclic adenosine monophosphate formation
· Activation of potassium channels, resulting in membrane
hyperpolarization
● Activation ofG proteins
● Inhibition of opening of voltage-sensitive calcium channels
·Decreased release of neurotransmitters such as substance P
LOCATION OF OPIATE RECEPTORS
Traditionally, it was thought that opiate receptors were confined to the
central nervous system. However, more recentlya peripheral, local action
of opioids has also been demonstrated.
*Fentanyl (Duragesic); Janssen Pharmaceutical, Titusville, N.J.
CHAPTER 9 +Opioids 175
Brain (Predominantly μ-Receptors)
● Mesencephalic periaqueductal gray
● Mesencephalic reticular formation
●Medulla
●Substantia nigra
● Ventral forebrain
●Amygdala
Spina! Cord (μ-, K-, and &Receptors)
●Dorsal horn laminae I to V
● Substantia gelatinosa
Peripheral Receptors
Opioids may have local actions under certain conditions ofinflammation
with hyperalgesia, suggesting that inflammatory cells that release
cytokines and other nerve-sensitizing products may contain opiate
receptors that can suppress these events.
SIDEEFFECTS/TOXICITY
Possible side effects of opioid administration are many and varied,
although rarely problematic enough to prevent the use of opioids in
pain management. One of the major advantages of opioids in pain
management is their safety.
SEDATIONORCENTRALNERVOUSSYSTEMDEPRESSION
● Sedation commonly occurs after opioid administration in small
animals, more so in dogs than in cats.
● Sedation is generally considered an advantage when an opioid is used
 as a preanesthetic or in the immediate postoperative period when rest
is desirable.
           
behaviors such as eating and drinking.
● Options for preventing excessive sedation are as follows:
1. Reduce the dosage of opioid.
 2. Administer a low dose of an agonist-antagonist such as nalbuphine
morphine.
3. Administer a low dose of a pure antagonist such as nalmefene in
176
EXCITEMENT ORDYSPHORIA
· Excitement occurs in some, but not all, animals after opioid
administration. A great deal of species and individual variation exists,
with cats, horses, and northern breeds of dogs (e.g-, malamutes and
huskies) apparently more susceptible to dysphoria.
● The recommended dosages (milligrams/kilogram) for most opioids
in cats are about half those recommended for dogs to minimize the
incidence of excitement. Use of lower opioid dosages may minimize
dysphoria in susceptible animals.
● If dysphoria or agitation occurs, administration of a tranquilizer such
as acepromazine (0.01 to 0.03 mg/kg) or a sedative such as xylazine
(0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg) or medetomidine (0.5 to 5 μg/kg) should help to
calm the animal.
● Another option is to use an agonist-antagonist such as nalbuphine
or butorphanol to antagonize the excitatory effects of a pure agonist
such as morphine, without antagonizing analgesia. A study in cats
demonstrated that 0.1 mg/kg each of oxymorphone and butorphanol
provided synergistic analgesia without excitement.1
Determination of whether an agitated animal is dysphoric or in pain is
(See Chapters 3 and 4 for more information on assessing pain and
analgesia.)
BRADYCARDIA
[a Aiepau paonu-pioido jo isan e se snsno eiesapeig 
stimulation.
(a ud n no re  un no on  ao si  
when an opioid is given as a preanesthetic).
● Some animals may develop second-degree atrioventricular block.
● Prevention and treatment: Atropine (0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg)
or
glycopyrrolate (0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg), administered subcutaneously,
intramuscularly, or IV, is generally effective at restoring heart rate to
an acceptablelevel.
OTHERCARDIOVASCVLAREFFECTS
● With the exception of meperidine, opioids generally cause litle to no
depression of myocardial contractility.
· Therefore as long as bradycardia is prevented, cardiac output and
blood pressure should be minimally affected by opioid administration.
CHAPTER 9 + Opioids
177
RESPIRATORY DEPRESSION
● Respiratory depression results from an opioid-induced decrease in
responsiveness of the brainstem respiratory center to Pacoz-
· In human beings, opioid-induced respiratory depression can be
profound, but in animals, clinically useful analgesic dosages of
depression.
● However, when opioids are used in high dosages to provide surgical
analgesia (such as fentanyl infusions at 20 μg/kg per hour or higher) or
when they are used in conjunction with other respiratory depressant
drugs (such as thiopental, propofol, or the inhaled anesthetics),
assisted or controlled ventilation may be required.
PANTING
· Panting may occur in some dogs after opioid administration,
particularly after oxymorphone administration.
hypoventilate and become hypercapnic.
● The cause of panting is resetting of the thermoregulatory center in the
thalamus, which makes a normothermic dog “think" it is hot, causing
it to pant to cool off.
● Panting can be annoying or inconvenient, for instance, during
radiography when excessive motion is problematic.
● Panting can also interfere with rewarming a hypothermic animal, for
instance, in the postoperative recovery period. However, hypothermia
should not be a reason to withhold opioid analgesics from a patient
during the postoperative period; rather, external warming devices
such as circulating warm water blankets or forced warm air heating
blankets should be used to restore and maintain body temperature
while analgesia is provided.
COUGH SUPPRESSION OR DEPRESSION
OFLARYNGEALREFLEXES
depending on circumstances.
●Many dogs can be intubated after receiving IV administration of an opioid
and benzodiazepine, even though they remain conscious. This technique
can be used to induce profound neuroleptanalgesia in critical patients,
thus avoiding the use of more depressant anesthesia induction drugs.
178PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
· Depression of laryngeal reflexes might be desirable when a
brachycephalic (or other airway-challenged) dog is recovering from
anesthesia because it will allow the animal to tolerate the endotracheal
tube for a longer time, during which inhaled anesthetic can be
eliminated.
● Some opioid-treated dogs have excessively prolonged recoveries from
anesthesia, in part because of insensitivity to the endotracheal tube. In
those cases, a small dose of an agonist-antagonist such as nalbuphine
or butorphanol (0.1 mg/kg IV) or a very small dose of an antagonist
such as naloxone (1 to 10 μg/kg IV) may restore laryngeal reflexes to
the point that the dog can be extubated safely.
HISTAMINE RELEASE
● Histamine release can occur with administration of certain opioids,
such as morphine and meperidine, particularly with IV administration.
· Sequelae of histamine release include vasodilation and hypo
tension.
●Morphine should be given by the IV route only if given cautiously and
slowly and in low dosages. Morphine should generally not be given by
the IV route to an animal during general anesthesia.
It is best to avoid IV administration of meperidine.
·No significant histamine release occurs after administration of
oxymorphone, hydromorphone, or fentanyl, so these opioids are
considered safe for IV use. Methadone is also commonly administered
IV without apparent complication.
VOMITING AND DEFECATION
 Vomiting and defecation commonly follow administration of opioids,
particularly when administered as preanesthetics to animals not in
pain; these effects are less common when administered to animals in
pain or those that have had surgery.
● Nausea and vomiting are caused by stimulation of the chemoreceptor
trigger zone in the medulla.
● Defecation may result from an initial increase in gastrointestinal
tone.
CONSTIPATION
and reduced peristalsis may lead to constipation.
CHAPTER 9 +Opioids 179
● Constipation is not usually a clinical problem in short-term pain
management.
URINARYRETENTION
· Urinary retention is caused by increased detrusor muscle tone and
increased vesical sphincter tone.
· Urinary retention is especially common after epidural morphine
administration.
● The bladder may need to be manually expressed or catheterized.
EFFECT ONBILIARY SMOOTH MUSCLE
● In human beings, morphine has been shown to cause constriction of
the sphincter of Oddi, ca using pain from increased pressure within the
common bile duct.
● Other opioids such as meperidine, fentanyl, and pentazocine may
similarly affect this sphincter, but nalbuphine and buprenorphine
appear to have minimal effect. Thus certain opioids may be
contraindicated in patients with pancreatitis or biliary disease.
● Dogs often have separate bile and pancreatic ducts, so use of opioids
in dogs with pancreatitis may not be problematic.
● Most cats do have a common pancreatic and bile duct, so nalbuphine
or buprenorphine may be the best choice for pain management in cats
with pancreatitis.
SPECIALISSUES
COMPREHENSIVEDRUGABUSEPREVENTION
AND CONTROLACT{UNITEDSTATES)
· Drugs are classified according to potential for abuse.
1. Most opioid agonists have a high potential for abuse and are listed
 inschedule II: morphine, hydromorphone, methadone, meperidine,
and others.
2. Butorphanol, an opioid agonist-antagonist with moderate abuse
potential, is listed in schedule IV.
· Prescribing of controlled substances is regulated in the United
States.
1. Veterinarian must register with DEA (registration to be renewed
every 2 years).
2. Veterinarian must keep inventory of controlled substances.
3. Controlled substances must be ordered by using special forms.
180PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
TOLERANCEANDPHYSICALDEPENDENCE
● It has been shown that tolerance to the effects of opioids can develop
rapidly.
●Nociceptive stimulation reportedly antagonizes or prevents
development of tolerance to fentanyl; therefore, tolerance is less likely
to occur during pain management.
● Clinically, occurrence of tolerance or physical dependence in animals
is anecdotal and apparently rare.
HYPERTHERMIA
P    n      
the administration of μ-opioid agonists (morphine, oxymorphone,
hydromorphone). Cats should be treated with antipyretics if necessary.
ANTAGONISTS
Genera! comments: Opioid antagonists are often used to arouse animals
that are excessively sedated or obtunded from opioid administration, for
instance, when recovery from anesthiesia is prolonged and the patient hias
not regained laryngeal/cough reflexes. One should remember that reversal
of opioid effects, particularly in an animal that is potentially in pain, may
result in intense acute pain with accompanying sympathetic stimulation
that may be detrimental. Therefore, opioid antagonists should be used
conservatively and only with good reason in animals experiencing pain.
If bradycardia is the main cause for concern, an anticholinergic such as
atropine or glycopyrrolate should be used instead of an opioid antagonist
 to restore a normal heart rate without affecting patient comfort.
Naloxone*
DESCRIPTIoN: Naloxone does not induce any effects when administered
anopioidagonistsuchasmorphine,iteffectivelyreversestheeffectsofthe
agonist, causing increased alertness, responsiveness, and coordination, as
welfl as increased awareness of pain.
DURATIoN:The duration of naloxone is shorter than that of many opioid
whereas 0.04 mg/kg, administered intramuscuiarly, lasts 40 to 70 minutes.
*Naloxone, P/M Naloxone HCl Injection; Mallinckrodt
CHAPTER 9 · Opioids  181
Therefore, animais shouid be watched for renarcotization or resedation
after a dose of naloxone.
OTHERCOMMENTS
1. Excitement or anxiety may accompany naloxone reversal of the
effects of an opioid agonist.
2. Although not common, cardiac dysrhythmias such as ventricular
premature contractions can occur affer naloxone reversal of the
circulating catecholamines.
3. In potentially painful situations (such as after surgery), the dose of
naloxone should be greatly reduced and given in small increments,
 just to the point of arousal, to avoid precipitatinga painful recovery.
 For this purpose, a total dosage of 0.001 to 0.01 mg/kg IV may be
sufficient.
Nalmefene
DESCRIPTIoN: An opioid antagonist approximately 4 times as potent as
naloxone
DURATIoN:Naimefene works aS quickly aS naloxone,but its duration of
fore,naimefenemay beadvantageousinpreventingrenarcotizationwhenit
is used to antagonize a bng-acting opioid.
OTHER CoMMENTS:  Dosages for animais have not been weli-estabished,
Naltrexone
DESCRIPTIoN: Another pure opioid antagonist, about 4 times more potent
than najoxone
DURATloN: Duration is about twice that of naloxone (in human beings),
but in dogs, pharmacokinetic studies suggest that naftrexone is not much
longer-actinghannaioxone.
OTHER COMMENTS: Based on these findings, a dose of 0.0025 mg/kg /V
REFERENCES
1. Briggs SL, Sneed K, Sawyer DC: Antinociceptive effects of oxymorphone-
butorphanol-acepromazine combination in cats, Vet Surg 27:466-472,
1998.
*Nalmefene (Revex); Ohmeda (Baxter), Deerfield, Il.
Naltrexone (Trexonil); Wildlife Pharmaceuticals
182PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
2. Lascelles BDX, Robertson SA: Antinociceptive effects of hydromorphone,
butorphanol, or the combination in cats, J Vet Intern Med 18:190-195,
2004.
3. Stiles J, Honda CN, Krohne SG, Kazacos EA: Effect of topical administration
of 1% morphine sulfate solution on signs of pain and corneal wound healing
in dogs,Am f Vet Res 64:813-818, 2003.
SUGGESTEDREADINGS
Hansen B: Pain, Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 12(2):55-142,1997.
Mathews KA: Management of pain, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
30(4):703-970,2000.
Tranquilli WJ, Thurman JC, Grimm KA, editors: Lumb & fones' veterinary
anesthesia and analgesia, ed 4, 2007, Blackwell.
10
NONSTEROIDAL
ANTIINFLAMMATORY
DRUGS
STEVENBUDSBERG
onsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) share therapeutic
 actions including analgesic, antinflammatory, and antipyretic
 capabilities despite differences in chemical structure. Although
chemically related, these compounds vary widely in their structure, and
their classification based on chemical structure still engenders some
controversy.1,2 NSAIDs have a unifying action biochemically in the
inhibition of the cyclooxygenase enzymes. Historically, NSAIDs are one
of the most commonly used classes of drugs in human beings.3 The same
statement is now made about NSAIDs in small animal clinical practice.
Several reasons exist for the dramatic increase in NSAID use in companion
animals. Veterinarians now have a better understanding of the need to
manage acute and chronic pain in small animal medicine. Pain control
is an important mission for the practicing veterinarian. NSAIDs provide
an effective means to accomplish this goal. Furthermore, there is now
the availability of NSAIDs with improved safety and efficacy targeted for
small animals (primarily the dog). For the most part, currently prescribed
NSAIDs are safe drugs; with only a small percentage of patients experi-
encing serious complications. However, these problems have achieved
significant proportions based on the fact that so many patients are taking
them each year; thus a small percentage becomes a large number. Because
these drugs are remarkably effective, yet carry a significant risk potential,
one must closely evaluate and monitor their usage in each patient.
MECHANISM OF ACTION
PROSTAGLANDININHIBITION
● The mechanism of actions of NSAIDs is a continually evolving story
that started in the early 1970s with the publication of two manu
scripts that examined the ability of aspirin to inhibit prostaglandin
production.4,5 Eicosanoids, which include the compounds known
183
184
PART THREE·TherapyfortheAlleviationofPain
as prostaglandins, are derived from arachidonic acid. The ability of
NSAIDs to interfere with eicosanoid synthesis and the subsequent
alteration of different physiological systems is what explains the
numerous effects seen in the body with NSAID administration.6 A
significant portion of the analgesic and antiinflammatory clinical
effects seen with NSAID administration are related to the inhibition
of the cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme isoforms.
 The last15 years have seenthediscovery,identification, and considerable
elucidation of a group of COX enzymes. Two isoforms, COX-1 and
COX-2, are well established, with the presence ofa third isoform, COX-3
(which is an alternative splice variant of COX- 1), currently being hotly
debated. Discovery of the first two isoforms generated a hypothesis
that their functions were mutually exclusive, with COX-1 involved
with normal physiologic functions of various systems and COX-2
involved in pathologic processes. Current data about these enzymes
have shown that this initial paradigm was an oversimplification.7
COX-1 is now primarily considered the constitutive isoform of COX,
and it is responsible for basal prostaglandin production for normal
homeostasis in many tissues. COX-1 normally exists in many tissues
of the body, including the stomach, kidney, platelets, and reproductive
tract, where it catalyzes the synthesis of prostaglandins involved in
the daily "housekeeping" functions.8 COX-1 is expressed at sites of
inflammation, but this is likely a function of basal rather than induced
expression.9 COX-2 is usually thought of as the induced isoform and
is found in sites of inflammation, yet it is expressed constitutively
in several tissues, including the brain, kidney, reproductive system,
and eye.8 Cells that express COX-2 include endothelial cells, smooth
muscle cells, chondrocytes, fibroblasts, monocytes, macrophages, and
synovial cells.9- 1l Various cytokines and growth factors rapidly induce
the formation of COX-2.10
· The COX enzymes initiate a complex cascade that results in
the conversion of polyunsaturated acids to prostaglandins and
thromboxane (Fig. 10-1).12 Briefly, arachidonic acid is transformed
into prostaglandin G, (PGG2) and then PGH, by COX. Further
enzymatic conversion of PGH, leads to the functionally important
prostaglandins (types D, E, F, and I) and thromboxane. Regarding
pain, prostaglandins, primarily PGE2, contribute to the inflammatory
response by causing vasodilation and enhancing the effects of other
cytokines and inflammatory mediators. The production of PGE, at
 d  q  s   ss s
COX-2. Thus when an inflammatory event occurs within the tissue,
COX-2 enzyme production is induced followed by an increase in
CHAPTER 10 •Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
prostaglandin concentrations. The selective inhibition of certain
prostaglandins primarily produced by COX-2 should allow for
the therapeutic analgesic and antiinflammatory effects while
greatly diminishing the unwanted side effects caused with COX-1
inhibition. However, complete COX-2 inhibition is detrimental to
many normal physiologic functions, including the healing of gastric
ulcers. Thus, it is important to assess COX-2 selectivity accurately,
and current methods to make these assessments are not clear-cut.
COX selectivity is a measure of the relative concentrations of a drug
required to inhibit each COX isoenzyme and usually is obtained
in in vitro studies. Current ex vivo and limited in vivo data have
confirmed COX-2 selectivity or COX-1 sparing effects of certain
compounds.13-16 Additionally, recent studies have provided a
model to show the physiologic effects of COX selectivity in target
fissues in dogs with osteoarthritis.13,17,18 Recently, a dual COX and
5-lipoxygenase (LOX) inhibitor (tepoxalin) became available on the
veterinary market. These drugs are able to block the COX and the
nonspecific inhibitors of the COX enzymes, they appear to have the
same gastrointestinal toxicity as the COX- l-selective agents and less
than the nonselective COX inhibitors. The exact mechanism of why
this dual inhibition limits the gastrointestinal toxicity is not well
described.
SITE OF ACTION
Data now support the concept that NSAIDs act on the peripheral tissue
injury site and at the level of the central nervous system. NSAIDs inhibit
the peripheral COX-2 enzyme to block the formation of prostaglandins
such as PGE, and PGI, which function to dilate arterioles and sensitize
peripheral nociceptor terminalsto the actionsofmediators (e.g-, histamine
and bradykinin) that produce localized pain and hypersensitivity.19,20
PGE2, produced by COX-2, plays a pivotal role in sustaining acute pain
which decreases the nociceptor threshold of activation.2l Centrally,
COX-2-mediated prostaglandins such as PGE2 are involved in spinal
nociception22 and central sensitization (Fig. 10-2).23 COX-2 is expressed
in the brain and spinal cord and is up-regulated in response to traumatic
injury24 and peripheral inflammation.24-26 COX-2-activated PGE2
lowers the threshold for neuronal depolarization, increasing the number
of action potentials and repetitive spiking. The actions of COX-2 are
thought to contribute to neuronal plasticity and central sensitization.27,28
186
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
+317 -+017++317 
vascular tone
Eosinophil
recruitmenl
Leukotrienes
Inflammation
Hyperalgesia
Acetylcholine
LTA4
release
t817
 Smooth muscle
proliferation
Monocytes
Recruitment
and activation
ofneutrophils
Phospholipase A2
Inflammation
FIG. 10-1. For legend see opposite page.
 Arachidonic Acid 
Thrombosis
Membrane
PAF<
PMNS
 Platelets
Inflammation
Bone remodeling
EP4
 Platelet aggregation 
Febrile responses
EP3
COX-1 c0x-2 c0x-3
PGl2
Endoperoxidases
Bood pressure control
PGE2
PGD2PGF2α
EP2
Fertilization 
Angiogenesis
Ovulation
TXA2
Gastric cytoprotection
Response to stres5
EP1
      
FlG. 1o-1. The breakdown of membrane phospholipids and arachidonic
acidcascade as influencedby cyclooxygenase andlipoxygenase leads to
receptors to produce a myriad of effects including pain and inflammation. See
text for details.
These insights provide information into the potential value of developing
centrally acting agents that alter receptor-mediated actions of prostanoids
d a  s sas i  i s  
cascade. However, this data should not lead directly to the conclusion
that spinal delivery of NSAIDs is more effective over systemic delivery.29
CLINICAL APPLICATIONS
INDICATIONS
NSAIDs can be used to relieve pain in a variety of clinical settings.
Efficacy of NSAIDs is comparable to opioids in many instances of
musculoskeletal and visceral pain. However, for major pain such as
fractures, data are not available to substantiate the same claim. NSAIDs
can be used for cases of acute pain, traumatic or surgically induced,
and for chronic pain such as osteoarthritis. Efficacy and toxicity
is often individualistic, and individual monitoring is mandatory.
and that are not fully understood, and it is naive to think that all
pathways react the same to different drugs. Second, which in part may
be intertwined with the first, heterogeneity of the patient response to a
given NSAID occurs in terms of efficacy and toxicity. This individual
 n       o  
expression or gene polymorphism of the COX enzymes known as the
"COX continuum" hypothesis put forward recently.30 One must also
remember that in human beings, NSAID therapy has a modest effect
(20% to 30%) in pain reduction, and thus to optimize treatment
programs, nonpharmacologic modalities are needed and have been
emphasized previously.31
CHOOSING AND MONITORING NSAID USAGE
· Use products with a history of clinical experience and good safety
profiles.
● Use only one NSAID at a time and ensure adequate dosing-
● Adapt therapy to suit patient requirements. Begin with the
recommended dose for an extended period (at least 10 to 14 days) in
188
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Peripheral
nenve
Allodynia
Hyperalgesia
Hyperalgesia
Severe Tissue
 Secondary
Primary
Damage
Central Sensitization
160193
FIG. 10-2. For legend see opposite page.
LOX
+Glutamate
PG
Sub P
BDNF
es.00
roof
Aβ input induces pain
Depressed inhibition
Microglia
Astrocytes
mGluR)
(LYIN
Spinal cord
8
TSignaling Molecules
Gene Expression
CNS Plasticity
CHAPTER 10 •Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs 189
FlG. 1o-2. The release of prostaglandins (PGs) from activated microglia and
astrocytes within the central nervous system and spinal cord results in the
facilitation,and hyperalgesia.
animals with chronic pain, and if efficacious, attempt to reduce the
administered dose at regular intervals (e.g-, weekly) until achieving
the lowest dose providing the maximum benefit.
· Review therapy frequently, and change to alternative NSAIDs if there
is a poor response to therapy.
● Avoid NSAIDs in patients with known contraindications to their use.
● Observe for potential toxicity. Increased vigilance and monitoring are
required for at-risk patients. If indicated, establish renal and hepatic
status of the patient before NSAID administration.
CONTRAINDICATIONS
The following recommendations are general guidelines, and the type of
NSAID (e.g-, COX-2 specific) may alter these recommendations as more
data become available.29
● Patients receiving any type of systemic corticosteroids
● Patients receiving NSAIDs concurrently
● Patients with documented renal or hepatic insufficiency or
dysfunction
● Patients with any clinical syndrome that creates a decrease in the
circulating blood volume (e.g-, shock, dehydration, hypotension, or
ascites)
● Patients with active gastrointestinal (GI) disease.
● Trauma patients with known or suspected of having significant active
hemorrhage or blood loss
● Pregnant patients or females attempting to become pregnant
● Patients with significant pulmonary disease (This may be less important
with COX-2-specific drugs.)
may be less important with COX-2-specific drugs.)
SPECIFIC COMPOUNDS
Approved Compounds
Approved NSAIDs vary considerably around the world. Practitioners
          s
individualistic. Dogs may respond favorably to one product and not
190
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
another, so if an NSAID is indicated in a case and the first product used
does not achieve a positive clinical response, do not forsake NSAIDs, but
try a different product (Table 10-1).
 Carprofen. Carprofen is a member of the arylpropionic acid class of
NSAIDs. Carprofen has been shown to be COX-1 sparing (COX-2 selective)
formulations to treat pain and inflammation associated with osteoarthritis
(OA) and postoperative pain associated with surgery in dogs. Carprofen has
been shown to improve limb function in clinical trials of dogs with naturally
Occurring OA.36-39 Carprofen is also effective in providing postoperative
analgesia in orthopedic and soft tissue procedures.40-46 Carprofen does
not appear to affect platelet function or cause excessive bleeding in
surgical procedures.40,47,48 Adverse effects associated with carprofen are
limited, with the majority related to the GI tract.36,37,49,50 Furthermore,
administration of carprofen to healthy dogs undergoing anesthesia has not
been shown to cause alterations in renal function or hemostasis.48,51-53 The
association between carprofen and idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity deserves
special attention (see Potential Side Effects), but the reported incidence of
hepatic adverse events in dogs treated with carprofen is lessthan 0.06%.50,54
d  pe si sino i  a as e s n 
feline patients,55-59 repetitive dosing is not recommended until additional
safety and efficacy data are produced with multiple-dose protocols.60
 Deracoxib. Deracoxib is a member of the coxib class of NSAIDs.
Deracoxib has been shown to be COX-1 sparing (COX-2 selective) in
vitro and in vivo.17,61 Deracoxib is approved in an oral formulation in
dogs for treatment of pain and inflammation associated with OA and
postoperative pain associated with orthopedic surgery. Deracoxib has
been demonstrated to provide effective analgesia for acute postoperative
pain involving cruciate ligament stabilization.6263 Deracoxib has also
been demonstrated to provide effective relief of pain in clinical OA
trials in dogs.64 Although reported adverse effects are few, a recent case
series report documents serious Gl complications.65 In this report,
adverse events seemed to be related to higher (3 to 4 mg/kg) dosages
or concurrent use of corticosteroids or other NSAIDS. Although limited
data on pharmacokinetics are available in cats, safety and efficacy have
not been studied, and use in cats is not advised.66
Etodolac. Etodolac is a member of the pyranocarboxylic acid class
of NSAIDs. In vitro data suggest that etodolac is not COX-2 selective
in dogs.14,34,35 However in vivo data are conflicting with evidence
    e d  
were not inhibited by etodolac in dogs at recommended therapeutic
CHAPTER 10•Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
191
Doses of Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
TABLE 10-1
 in Dogs and Cats
Drug
Dose in Dogs
Dose in Cats
Recommendations
NONSELECTIVE
Acetaminophen
10 mg/kg
Abt for use in
NR in dogs or cats
q12h P0
cats
Aspirin
10-25 mg/kg
10 mg/kg 
Use carefully
q12h P0 with
q48-72h P0
food
with food
Etodolac
10-15 mg/kg
 Nbt established
q24hP0
Ketoprofen
 2 mg/kg once PO
2 mg/kg once
NR
followed by 1
PO followed
mg/kgq24hP0
by 1 mg/kg
q24hP0
Naproxen
2 mg/kg q48h P0
Nbt for usein
NR
cats
SELECTIVE
Carprofen 
2.2 mg/kg q1 2h 
2-4 mg/kg SC
Dosage in cats 
 PO; preopera-
once
remains highly
tive: 4.4 mg/kg
variable
SC
Deracoxib
1-2 mg/kg q24h 
Nbt established
PO; postopera-
tive: 3-4 mg/kg
q24h P0
Frocoxib
 5 mg/kg q24h P0
Funixin
1 mg/kg q24h IV,
0.25mg/kg
NR
meglumine
IM, SC, or PO
q12-24h SC
Meloxicam
 0.2 mg/kg once
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Use lower dosages
PO, IV, or SQ,
 once SC or 
chronically
followed by 0.1
 PO, followed
 mg/kg q24h P0,
by 0.05-0.1
N, or SQ
mg/kg q24h 
SC or PO for
1-3 days,
followed by
0.1 mg per
cat 2-3 times
per week PO
Piroxicam
0.3 mg/kg
Nbt established
q48h P0
 COX/LOX INHIBITORS
Tepoxalin
10 or 20 mg/kg
Nbt established
once PO,
followed by 10
mg/kg q24h P0
NR, Not recommended; italics, use cautiously if at all; COX/LOX, cydooxygenase /lipoxygenase.
192
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pair
doses.l7 Thus, it is difficult to state definitively whether etodolac is
COX-1 sparing in vivo. Etodolac is approved as an oral formulation
for use in managing pain and inflammation associated with canine OA.
Clinically, etodolac has been shown to improve rear limb function in
dogs with chronic OA.67-69 Adverse events are primarily seen in the GI
tract; however, keratoconjunctivitis sicca has also been associated with
etodolac administration.70-72
Firocoxib.Firocoxib is a member of the coxib class of NSAIDs.
In vitro data support firocoxib as a COX-1-sparing (COX-2-selective)
drug; however, in vivo conformation is not yet available.73 Firocoxib is
approved, as an oral formulation, with an indication for the management
  s n  q  o s q s
Clinical trials suggest that firocoxib may have some superiority in owner
and veterinarian subjective evaluations regarding lameness resolution
compared with carprofen and etodolac in dogs with lameness associated
with OA.68,69 Clinical data suggest a low rate of adverse events, limited
primarily to the GI tract.39,68,69,74
 Ketoprofen. Ketoprofen is a member of the arylpropionic acid class
of NSAIDs.75 Ketoprofen inhibits both COX isoenzymes without selectivity
in dogs. Because of this inhibition of both COX enzymes, ketoprofen is
expected to have significant antithromboxane activity.14,29 Indeed, data
show that although ketoprofen effectively manages postoperative pain, there
is a propensity for hemorrhage perioperatively following the administration
of ketoprofen.40 Ketoprofen is approved for use in dogs and cats in Europe
and Canada in oral and parenteral formulations. The only data available
to the clinician regarding clinical use of this product are in an acute pain
model and perioperative pain management.29,40,76,7 Adverse events are the
aforementioned excessive bleeding and GI effects (primarily vomiting).
Meloxicam.Meloxicam is a member of the oxicam family of
NSAIDs. Recent in vivo and in vitro data have shown meloxicam to be
for use in dogs for the control of pain and inflammation associated
with OA and is available in oral and parenteral formulations.
Published efficacy data are available for chronic and perioperative pain
anesthesia has not been shown to cause alterations in renal function
primarily limited to the GI tract.80-82,91,92
Meloxicam is approved for use in cats, but that approval is limited to
surgery, ovariohysterectomy, and castration. Several studies support
CHAPTER 10 •Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
the use of meloxicam for postoperative pain.57,58,93,94 There are reports
of multiple dosing regimens in cats. However, until efficacy and safety
studies with specific dosing programs are performed, chronic use cannot
be recommended.
Tepoxalin. Tepoxalin is a dual COX/LOX inhibitor, which means
that it inhibits both COX isoenzymes and 5-LOX. These dual inhibitor
drugs offer an alternative method of blocking the metabolic pathways in
the management of pain and inflammation. Tepoxalin has been approved
for use in dogs to control pain and inflammation associated with OA and
is available in an oral formulation. In vitro and in vivo data support the
ability of tepoxalin for dual COX/LOX inhibition.79,95 Unfortunately, no
published reports are available to support clinical efficacy and safety beyond
data submitted for government approval. Data are available suggesting that
tepoxalin does not alter hemostasis or hepatic or renal function after a
single-dose surgical model.96 Tepoxalin has also been shown not to alter
inhibitor.97 Adverse events with tepoxalin are low, primarily GI.
Tolfenamic Acid.Tolfenamic acid is an anthranilic acid derivative
and a member of the fenamates class of NSAIDs. Tolfenamic acid is
approved in Canada and Europe in an oral and parenteral formulation for
dogs and cats. In vitro data support COX-1-sparing (COX-2-selective)
activity.98 However, in vivo data to confirm these actions are not available.
Little clinical data are available to support the use of tolfenamic acid.57,81,98
Strict recommendations on limiting the use of this product are apparently
related to its relatively narrow therapeutic range. Most common adverse
events are GI (diarrhea and vomiting) and perioperative bleeding.""
Compounds Used Off-Labe!
Nonapproved NSAIDs that have been recommended for use off-label
include aspirin, piroxicam, and a plethora of human products. Be aware
the vast majority ofthe human products have limited to no data for dogs
or cats for a correct efficacy or safety dosage range.
Aspirin.Aspirin is historically the most commonly used NSAID in dogs
and cats.Aspirin is relativelyeffective, inexpensive, and readilyavailable.Aspirin
is not COX-1 sparing (COX-2 selective). However, with the introduction of
more effective and safer products, aspirin usage hias declined. Adverse events
are primarily Gl and are common. The frequency of GI toxicity increases as
the dose increases. Buffered aspirin has been demonstrated to cause less GI
irritation than plain aspirin when administered to dogs." Aspirin also has
antithromboxane effects and is used as an anticoagulant. A final possible area
of concern is the use of one of the COX-l-sparing NSAIDs concurrently
or immediately after administration of aspirin. Recently, lipoxin Aq and its
194
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
BOX 10-1
Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drug Selectivity
Nonselective
Acetaminophen
Aspirin
Etodolac (?)
Ketoprofen
Ketorolac
Naproxen
COX-2Selective(Cox-1Sparing)
Carprofen
Deracoxib
Etodolac (?)
Firocoxib
 Flunixin meglumine
Meloxicam
Piroxicam
Tolfenamic acid
Cyclooxygenase/Lipoxygenase Inhibitor
Tepoxalin
epimeric counterpart, aspirin-triggered lipoxin (ATL), have been shown to
lipid mediators, and there are multiple synthesis pathways of these lipoxins.
ATLs diminish gastric injury most likely via release of nitric oxide from the
(COX-2-selective; Box 10- 1) drugs results in the complete inhibition of ATLs
should not receive aspirin concurrently with COX-1-sparing NSAIDs, and
Owners must be informed of the potential risks of such concurrent therapy.
One must remember that the formation of ATLs has yet to be proved in the
dog. However, it is surprising to think that ATLs are not formed because they
Piroxicam.Piroxicam is a member of the oxicam family of
NSAIDs. In vitro data suggest that piroxicam is COX-2 selective in
dogs.14,104 However, in vivo data are not available to confirm these
results. Piroxicam has an elimination half-life of approximately 40 hours
in the dog.lo5 Piroxicam has been used as an antineoplastic agent to treat
transitional cell neoplasia in dogs. Although antineoplastic activity has
been linked to COX-2 inhibitory activity, other factors may also play
a role in the antineoplastic activity of piroxicam. Based on clinical
response and this long elimination half-life, once daily or once every
other day dosing has been successfully used in the dog. Piroxicam has
been administered at a dose of 0.3 mg/kg orally once daily for many
CHAPTER 10+Nonsteroidal AntinflammatoryDrugs
195
B0X 10-2
Key Points to Minimize Adverse Reactions
Every effort should be made to prevent rather than treat the adverse reactions
Chronic use is often necessary; the goal should be to decrease the dose after 10-14 days to
Concurrent use of other nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs or corticosteriods
provides no additional therapeutic benefit but does increase the potential for
adverse reactions.
As the patient ages or the addition of medications for nonrelated problems increases,
so the monitoring for potential problems should increase.
months for the treatment of canine transitional cell neoplasia. At this
dose, approximately 18% of patients demonstrated adverse GI signs.106
0.3 mg/kg orally once daily for 28 days failed to demonstrate a difference
in gastroduodenal lesion development between treated and control
dogs.l07 Additional data are needed before sweeping recommendations
  na  q n j d n  
available in cats given single and multiple doses of piroxicam. However,
until efficacy and long-term safety studies are completed in cats,
piroxicam cannot be recommended.i1o8,109
POTENTIAL SIDE EFFECTS
See Box 10-2.
Gastrointestina!
See Boxes 10-3 and 10-4.
The most common problems associated with NSAID administration
in dogs and cats involves the GI tract. Some ofthe GI toxicities associated
with NSAID use are believed to be due to inhibition of endogenous
prostaglandins. Signs may range from vomiting and diarrhea, including
hematemesis and melena, to a silent ulcer that results in perforation
  s         
treated with NSAIDS is unknown. Concurrent administration of other
medications (especially other NSAIDs or corticosteriods), previous GI
bleeding, or the presence of other systemic diseases may contribute to
adverse reactions.* The effect aging has on an individual patient's ability
to metabolize NSAIDs islikelyto be variable.However, given the potential
*References 19, 29, 50, 60, 65, 110, 111.
196
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
BOX 10-3
Toxicity of Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
Gastrointestinal Toxicity
Hepatotoxicity
Clinical Signs
Clinical Signs
Abdominal tensing
Hepatic encephalopathy
Darkened stools (melena)
lcterus
Depression
Lethargy
Diarrhea
Anorexia
Hematochezia
Vomiting
Inappetence or anorexia
Weight loss
Lethargy
Laboratory Findings
Nausea
Vomiting
Increased bile acids
Increased alanine aminotransferase
Laboratory Findings
Increased alkaline phosphatase
Decreased hematocrit and total protein
Increased aspartate aminotransferase
Eevated leukocyte count
Possible hyperbilirubinemia
Increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Possible hypoalbuminemia
caused by gastrointestinal
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
hemorrhage
Nephrotoxicity
Consequences of Bleeding
Dyspnea
Clinical Signs
Excessive bleeding during minor surgical
Oliguria or anuria
procedures
Polyuria and polydypsia
Lethargy
Vomiting and anorexia (as a result of
Pale mucous membranes
uremic toxin production)
Prolonged bleeding at venipuncture sites
Other signs of chronic or acute renal
failure
Laboratory Findings
Cast formation
Decreased urine specific gravity
Increased BUN and creatinine
Proteinuria
toxicity of NSAIDs, for these patients it is appropriate initially to dose
at the low end of the recommended range and to assess the response
critically.lll Various gastroprotectant strategies should be considered
when NSAIDS are prescribed for chronic use (Table 10-2).
Hepatic
See Box 10-3.
Hepatotoxicosis caused by NSAIDs is generally considered to be
idiosyncratic. Administration of carprofen has been associated with an
idiosyncratic cytotoxic hepatocellular reaction.54 Anorexia, vomiting, and
icterus along with increased hepatic enzyme levels have been seen. The
from 3 to 180 days of carprofen administration. Most dogs recovered
CHAPTER 10 + Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
197
BOX 10-4
Gastrointestinal Effects of Nonsteroidal
AntinflammatoryDrugs
PGD, PGE, PGF2a
↑
↓Mucin
↓Neutral mucosal pH
↓Bicarbonate
↓Blood flow
↑Leukocyte adherence
↑Intestinal permeability
Gastric hypermotility
Uncoupling of enterocyte
Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation
↑↑
Gastrointestinal erosions and ulcers
Bleeding and perforation
*PG, Prostaglandin.
with cessation of treatment and supportive care. However, other NSAIDs
  n   n sd    
with the use of all NSAIDs. Because NSAIDS are metabolized by the liver,
they should not be used in animals with liver failure.
Rena!
See Box 10-3.
Renal dysfunction may occur with NSAID administration as a con-
synthesis is very low under normovolemic conditions. When normo-
volemia is challenged, prostaglandin synthesis is increased and functions
to maintain renal perfusion.19,l NSAID use must be considered carefully
in hypovolemic animals. This is especially important to remember with
the increasing use of NSAIDs perioperatively for pain management. It
must be noted that the COX-1-sparing NSAIDs do not infer greater
safety in the kidney.
Cartilage
NSAIDs are used frequently and often chronically in osteoarthritic
patients. Studies have demonstrated a variety of effects on proteoglycan
synthesis when chondrocytes or cartilage explants are incubated with
an NSAID in vitro. The most pronounced effects have been seen
in chondrocytes from OA joints, although a lesser effect has been
demonstrated on normal cartilage. Aspirin is uniformly reported to cause
198
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
 coadministering antacids, administer antacid at least 30 minutes after sucralfate 
Not for use in patients with mechanical gastrointestinal obstruction, Gl hemorrhage, or
 epilepsy. Should not be used in combination with phenothiazines, butyrophenones,
(aoge asop aas apweidopau ym bunuoa pouoo pue od bybu z-) ly uwla japsuupe uonepsuupe piny snouaaenui ubag pue vsn anuusl
or narcotics. Decrease dose in renal failure. Physically incompatible when mixed 
with cephalothin sodium, sodium bicarbonate, chloramphenicol sodium succinate,
 or tetracycline. Side effects: anxiety, agitation, tremors, twitching, and constipation
If coadministering antibiotics, separate administration by at least 2 hours. If
 administration. Use cautiously in renal failure. Side effect: constipation
 *sooh ui paalossip ssalun alnsden jo jalgel leued laslupe pou oa
Doses of Drugs Used for Treatment of NSAID Toxicity in Dogs and Cats
Decrease dose in renal failure
 Side effects: diarrhea, abortion
Recommendations
0.5 mg/kg q12-24h PO, SC, IM, or IV
eating, PO, IM,or SC; or 1-2 mg/kg 
Dogs: 0.5-1.0 g per dog q8-12h PO
every 24 hours given in fluids CRI
Cats: 0.25 g per cat q8-12h P0
Dogs: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg q24h PO
0.7-1.0 mg/kg q24h PO or IV
ats: 0.7 mg/kg q24h PO
 2.5-5.0 mg/kg q24h P0
Cats: Not established
Dose
PAOSTAGLANDIN ANALOG
H2 RECEPTOR BLOCKER
MUCOSAL PROTECTANT
PAOMOTILITY AGENT
TABLE 10-2
HEPATOTHERAPY
Metoclopramide
FLUID THERAPY
Pantoprazole 
Famotidine 
Nizatidine
Sucralfate 
Drug
CHAPTER 10·NonsteroidalAntinflammatoryDrugs
199
Proximal
convoluted
tubule
COX-1,COX-2
-Loop of Henle
 Glomerulus:
Distal
tubule
Thickascending
limb: COX-2
dysfunction, and abnomal tubuloglomerular feedback, resulting in renal failure.
Renin-secreting granular cells
aod
cOX-1,COX-2
Podocytes:
Afferent arteriole:
COX-2
Macula densa:
COX-2
Efferent arteriole:
COX-1,COX-2
tubule
Distal
200
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
inhibition of proteoglycan synthesis, whereas conflicting data exist for
other NSAIDs, such as etodolac, showing potential negative and positive
effects; and there is a final group including meloxicam, piroxicam,
and carprofen in which no effect or even some increased synthesis of
proteoglycan has been noted.l12-119 The significance of these in vitro
findings remains unclear, and there is now experimental data suggesting
that NSAIDs and dual inhibitors can slow the progression of OA in vivo;
however, the clinical significance of this data in the clinical setting with
naturally occurring disease is unknown.120-123
BoneHealing
Pain management is an important component of the care of fracture
patients. Interestingly and importantly, prostaglandins also play
an important role in bone repair and normal bone homeostasis.
Experimental studies support the hypothesis that nonspecific and specific
COX inhibitors (COX-1 sparing) do impair bone healing. With the
Whether COX- 1-sparing drugs have the same effects on fracture healing,
spinal fusions, and bone ingrowth remains controversial, but recent
data support the effects of COX-1-sparing drugs also as dose and time
dependent and as reversible. These statements are based on rabbit, rat,
and mouse induced fracture models that show that COX-l-sparing
agents alter bone healing. However, the most recent data confrm that
following cessation of NSAIDs, fracture healing returns to its normal rate,
and thus judicious use of postoperative NSAIDs can be recommended.
Said another way, any potential adverse effects must be weighed against
potential benefits that include improved analgesia and earlier return to
it is not administered continuous for several weeks.124-133
Cardiovascular
Nonselective NSAIDs inhibit the platelet COX-1 enzyme and cause a
significant decrease in the amount of thromboxane A2 produced by
clotting platelets. Thromboxane is an important activator of platelet
platelet recruitment to the site of vessel injury. Thromboxane is also a
potent vasoconstrictor. A decrease in thromboxane release can result in
prolongations of primary hemostasis. COX-1-sparing (COX-2 selective
inhibitor) drugs do not have this effect on thromboxane production or
primary hemostasis.135 The actions of thromboxane are balanced at the
vessel level by the presence of prostacyclin (PGI), which is produced by
CHAPTER 10 ● Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs  201
COX enzymes in the vascular endothelial cells. PGl, is a strong inhibitor
of platelet aggregation and also results in vasodilation. In the presence of
endothelialinflammation(such as that caused byatherosclerotic plaques),
the expressionofCOX-2 in the endothelial cells increases and mayproduce
the majority of PGI, in that area. 136 When COX-nonselective NSAIDs are
administered, the expression of thromboxane from platelets and PGI2
from endothelial cells is decreased, preserving the balance. In certain
circumstances of endothelial inflammation (e.g., with atherosclerosis),
specific COX-2 inhibitors may decrease the endothelial production of
PGI (mainly from COX-2) without a concomitant decrease in platelet
thromboxane (produced only by COX-1) and consequently may result
in the development of a hypercoagulable state.136
KEFERENCES
1. Scarpinganto C: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: how do they
damage gastroduodenal mucosa, Dig Dis 13:9S-39S, 1995.
2. Humber LG: On the classification of NSAIDs, Drug News & Perspectives
pp102-103,1992.
3. Wolfe MM, Lichtenstein DR, Singh G: Gastrointestinal toxicity of
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs, N Engl J Med 340:1888-1898,
1999.
4. Vane JR: Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis as a possible mechanism of
action of aspirin like drugs, Nature 231:232-235, 1971.
5. Smith JB, Willis AL: Aspirin selectively inhibits prostaglandin production
in human platelets, Nature 231:235-237, 1971.
6. Livingston A: Mechanism of action of nonsteroidal antinflammatory
drugs, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30:773-781, 2000.
7. Patrignani P: Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs, COX-2 and colorectal
cancer,Toxicol Lett112-113:493-498,2000.
8. Jones CJ, Budsberg SC: Physiologic characteristics and clinical importance
of the cyclooxygenase isoforms in dogs and cats, f Am Vet Med Assoc
217:721-729,2000.
9. Crofford LJ,Wilder RL、Ristimaki AP et al: Cyclooxygenase-1 and -2
expression in rheumatoid synovial tissues: effects of interleukin-1β,phorbol
ester, and corticosteroids, J Clin Invest 93:1095-1101, 1994.
10. Smith TJ: Cyclooxygenases as the principal targets for the action of NSAIDs,
Rheum Dis Clin North Am 24:501-521,1998.
11. Masferrer JL, Isakson PC, Seibert K: Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors: a new
class of anti-inflammatory agents that spare the gastrointestinal tract,
Gastroenterol Clin NorthAm 25:363-372、1996.
12. Vane JR, Bakhle YS, Botting RM: Cyclooxygenases 1 and 2, Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol38:97-120,1998.
13. Jones CJ, Streppa HK, Budsberg SC: In vivo effect of a COX-2 selective
and nonselective nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) on gastric
mucosal and synovial fluid prostaglandin synthesis in dogs, f Vet Intern
Med 15:273、2001.
202PART THREE•Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
14. Streppa HK, Jones CJ, Budsberg SC: Differential biochemical inhibition of
specific cyclooxygenases by various non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
in canine whole blood, Am f Vet Res 63:91-94, 2002.
15. Cryer B, Feldman M: Cyclooxygenase-1 and cyclooxygenase-2 selectivity
of widely used nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs、 Am J Med 104:
413-421,1998.
16. Brideau C, Kargaman S, Liu S et al: A human whole blood assay
for clinical evaluation of biochemical efficacy of cyclooxygenase
inhibitors, Irflamm Res 45:68-74,1996.
17. Sessions JK,Agnello KA, Reynolds LR,Budsberg SC: In vivo effects
synovial fluid prostaglandin synthesis in dogs with osteoarthritis, Am f Vet
Res 66:812-817,2005.
18. Agnello KA, Reynolds LR, Budsberg SC: In vivo effects of tepoxalin, a dual
saop ul uojsnpoid auauoxnal pue pioueisad uo dionquu! xol/XOO
with osteoarthritis,Am fVet Res 66:966-972,2005.
19. Bergh MS, Budsberg SC: The coxib NSAIDs: potential clinical and
pharmacological importance in veterinary medicine, J Vet Intern Med
19:633-643,2005
20. Stock JL, Shinjo K, Burkhardt J et al: The prostaglandin E2 EP1 receptor
mediates pain perception and regulates blood pressure, J Clir Invest
107:325-331,2001.
21. Zhang Y, Shaffer A, Portanova J et al: Inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 rapidly
reverses inflammatory hyperalgesia and prostaglandin E2 production,
fPharmacolExpTher283:1069-1075、1997.
22. Vanegas H, Schaible HG: Prostaglandins and cyclooxygenases [correction
of cycloxygenases] in the spinal cord, Prog Neurobiol 64:327-363, 2001.
23. Watkins LR, Hutchinson MR, Ledeboer A et al: Glia as the “bad guys":
implications for improving clinical pain control and the clinical utility of
opioids,Brain Behav Immun 21:131-146,2007.
24. Beiche F, Scheuerer S, Brune K et al: Up-regulation of cyclooxygenase-2
 mRNA in the rat spinal cord following peripheral inflammation, FEBS Lett
390:165-169, 1996.
25. Goppelt-Struebe M, Beiche F: Cyclooxygenase-2 in the spinal cord:
 localization and regulation after a peripheral inflammatory stimulus, Adv
Exp Med Biof 433:213-216, 1997.
26. Willingale HL, Gardiner NJ, McLymont N et al: Prostanoids synthesized by
development of neuronal hyperexcitability, Br / Pharmacol 122:1593-1604,
1997.
27. Yamagata K, Andreasson KI, Kaufmann WE et al: Expression of a mitogen-
inducible cyclooxygenase in brain neurons: regulation by synaptic activity
and glucocorticoids, Neuron 11:371-386, 1993.
28. Kaufmann WE, Worley PF, Taylor CV et al: Cyclooxygenase-2 expression
during rat neocortical development and in Rett syndrome, Brain Dev 19:25-
34, 1997.
29. Mathiews KA: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory analgesics, Vet Clin North
Am Smalf Anim Pract 30:783-804,2000.
30. Warner TD、 Mitchell JA: Cyclooxygenase-3 (COX-3): filling in the
gaps toward a COX continuum? Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:13371-13373,
2002.
31. Brandt KD, Bradley JD: Should the initial drug used to treat osteoarthritis
pain be a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug? J Rheumatol 28:467-473,
2001.
32. Fox SM, Johnston SA: Use of carprofen for the treatment of pain and
inflammation in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1493-1498, 1997.
33. McKellar QA, Pearson T, Gogan JA et al: Pharmacokinetics, tolerance and
serum thromboxane inhibition of carprofen in the dog, / Small Anim Pract
31:443-448, 1999.
34. Kay-Mugford P, Benn SJ, Lamarre J et al: In vitro effects of nonsteroidal
antinflammatory drugs on cyclooxygenases activity in dogs, Am / Vet Res
61:802-810,2000.
35. Ricketts AP, Lundy KM, Seibel SB: Evaluation of selective inhibition of
canine cyclooxygenases 1 and 2 by carprofen and other nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs,Am / Vet Res 59:1441-1446, 1998.
36. Vasseur PB, Johnson AL, Budsberg SC et al: Randomized, controlled
  e s    a g 
the treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 206:807-811,
1995.
37. Holtsinger RH, Parker RB, Beale BS et al: The therapeutic effcacy of
 a  a a o s    
Comp Orthop Iraumatol5:140-144,1992.
38. Moreau M, Dubuis I、 Bonneau NH et al: Clinical evaluation of a
      
osteoarthritis, Vet Rec 152:323-329, 2003.
39. Pollmeier M, Toulemonde C, Fleishman C et al: Clinical evaluation of
frocoxib and carprofen for the treatment of dogs with osteoarthritis, Vet
Rec 159:547-551,2006.
40. Grisneaux E, Pibarot P, Dupuis J et al: Comparison of ketoprofen
and carprofen administered prior to orthopedic surgery for control of
postoperative pain in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1105-1110, 1999.
41. Balmer TV, Irvine D, Jones RS et al: Comparison of carprofen and pethidine
as postoperative analgesics in the cat, J Small Anirm Pract 39:158-164, 1998.
42. Lascelles BDX, Cripps PJ, Jones A et al: Effcacy and kinetics of carprofen,
in dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy, Vet Surg 27:568-582, 1998.
43. Nolan R, Reid J: Comparison of the postoperative analgesic and sedative
effects of carprofen and papaveretum in the dog, Vet Rec 133:240-242,
1993.
44. Lascelles BDX, Butterworth SJ, Waterman AE: Postoperative analgesic and
sedative effects of carprofen and pethidine in dogs, Vet Rec 134:187-191,
1994.
45. Leece EA, Brearley LC、 Harding EF: Comparison of carprofen and
meloxicam for 72 hours following ovariohysterectomy in dogs, Vet Anaesth
Anαlg 32:184-192,2005
204PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
46. Horstman CL、 Conzemius MG, Evans R et al: Assessing the efficacy of
perioperative oral carprofen after cranial cruciate surgery using noninvasive,
objective pressure platform gait analysis, Vet Surg 33:286-292, 2004.
47. Hickford FH, Barr SC, Erb HN: Effect of carprofen on hemostatic variables
in dogs, Am J Vet Res 62: 1642-1645, 2001.
Aiains Suiogiapun ssop u siseisouau pue uoouny [euau uo uayoudies jo
for fracture repair, Am J Vet Res 66:1356-1363, 2005.
49. Raekallio MR, Hielm-Bjorkman AK, Kejonen J et al: Evaluation of adverse
effects of long-term orally administered carprofen in dogs, f Am Vet Med
Assoc228:876-880,2006
50. Hodge TM, Wahlstrom T: Three years (1997-1999) ofUS clinical experience
with Rimadyl@(carprofen),Technical Bulletin Dec 2000.
51. Forsyth SF, Guilford WG, Pfeiffer DU: Effect of NSAID administration on
creatinine clearance in healthy dogs undergoing surgery for fracture repair,
SmallAnim Pract 41:547-550,2000.
52. Crandel DE, Mathews KA, Dyson DH: Effect of meloxicam and carprofen
and painful stimulation, Am f Vet Res 65:1384-1390, 2004
53. Lobetti RG, Joubert KE: Effect of administration of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs before surgery on renal function in clinically normal
dogs, Am f Vet Res 61:1501-1507, 2000.
54. MacPhail CM, Lappin MR, Meyer DJ et al: Hepatocellular toxicosis
associated with administration of carprofen in 21 dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
212:1895-1901,1998.
55. Lascelles BDX, Cripps P, Mirchandani S et al: Carprofen as an analgesic
for postoperative pain in cats: dose titration and assessment of efficacy in
comparison to pethidine hydrochloride, / Small Anim Pract 36:535-541, 1995.
56. Balmer TV, Irvine D, Jones RS et al: Comparison of carprofen and pethidine
as postoperative analgesics in the cat, /Small Anim Pract 39:158-164, 1998.
57. Slingsby LS、 Waterman-Pearson AE: Postoperative analgesia in the cat
after ovariohysterectomy by use of carprofen, ketoprofen, meloxicam or
tolfenamic acid,JSmall Anim Pract 41:447-450,2000.
58. Slingsby LS, Waterman-Pearson AE: Comparison between meloxicam
and carprofen for postoperative analgesia after feline ovariohysterectomy.
/Small Anim Pract 43:286-289,2002.
59. Al-Gizawiy MM, Rude PE: Comparison of preoperative carprofen and
Buoliapun sies ui sisatieue jesiainsisod se loueudronq aneiadoisod
ovariohysterectomy, Vet Anaesth Anaig 31:164-174, 2004.
60. Runk A, Kyles AE, Downs MO: Duodenal perforation in a cat following the
administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication, f Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 35:52-55, 1999.
61. McCann ME, Anderson DR, Zhang D et al: In vitro effects and in vivo
induced synovitis, Am f Vet Res 65:503-512,2004.
62. Millis DL, Buonomo FC: Effect of deracoxib, a new COX-2 inhibitor, on
i    a    
stabilization model in dogs, Vet Surg 30:502, 2001.
63. Millis DL, Conzemius MG, Wells KL et al: A multi-center clinical study
on the effects of deracoxib, a COX-2 selective drug、 on post-operative
analgesia associated with cranial cruciate ligament stabilization in dogs, Vet
Surg 30:502,2001.
64. Johnston SA, Conzemius MG, Cross AR et al: A multi-center clinical study
of the effects of deracoxib, a COX-2 selective drug, on chronic pain in dogs
with osteoarthritis, Vet Surg 30:497, 2001.
65. Lascelles BD, Blikslager AT, Fox SM et al: Gastrointestinal tract perforation
in dogs treated with a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor: 29 cases (2002-
2003), f Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1112-1117, 2005.
66. Gassel AD, Tobias KM, Cox SK: Disposition of deracoxib in cats after oral
administration, / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 42(3):212-217, 2006.
67. Budsberg SC, Johnston SA, Schwarz PD et al: Evaluation of etodolac for the
treatment of osteoarthritis of the hips in dogs: a prospective multicenter
study,J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1-5, 1999.
68. Hanson PD, Brooks KC, Case J et al: Efficacy and safety of frocoxib in
the management of canine osteoarthritis under field conditions, Vet Ther
7:127-140,2006.
69. Gordon WJ, Conzemius MG, Drag M et al: Assessment of the efficacy of
firocoxib and etodolac for the treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs, Vet Surg
33:E9,2004.
70. Sumi N, Uchimoto H,Fujimoto Set al: Three-month oral toxicityofetodolac
in dogs followed by one-month recovery test, Oyo Yakuri/ Pharmacometrics
40:515-560, 1990.
71. Wrenn JM, Inhelder JL, Hemm RD et al: One year chronic toxicity study
 of etodolac, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent, in the beagle dog, Oyo
Yakuri/Pharmacometrics 40:599-646,1990.
72. Hampshire VA, Doddy FM, Post LO et al: Adverse drug event reports at
the United States FDA Center for Veterinary Medicine, JAm Vet Med Assoc
225:533-536,2004.
73. McCann ME, Andersen DR, Zhang D et al: In vitro effects and in vivo
efficacy of a novel cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor in dogs with experimentally
induced synovitis,Am f Vet Res 65:503-512,2004.
74. Ryan WG, Moldave K, Carithers D: Clinical effectiveness and safety of a
new NSAID, firocoxib: a 1000 dog study, Vet Ther 7:119-126, 2006.
changes in established endotoxic shock by ketoprofen, Acta Anesthesiol
Scand 38:33-39,1994.
76. Pibarot P、 Dupuis J、 Grisneaux E et al: Comparison of ketoprofen,
oxymorphone hydrochloride, and butorphanol in the treatment
1997.
77. Hazewinkel HA, van den Brom WE, Pollmeier M et al: Reduced dosage
u uied puno! jo juaeail ual-auol pue an-lous aul roy uajoidoiax jo
dogs, Vet Rec 152:11-14, 2003.
78. Brideau C, Van Staden C, Chan CC: In vitro effects of cyclooxygenase
1755-1760,2001.
206PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
79. Agnello KA, Reynolds LR, Budsberg SC: In vivo effects of tepoxalin,
an inhibitor of cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase, on prostanoid and
leukotriene production in dogs with chronic osteoarthritis, Am ∫ Vet Res
66:966-972,2005.
80. Doig PA, Purbrick KA, Hare JE et al: Clinical efficacy and tolerance of
meloxicam in dogs with chronic osteoarthritis,Can Vet J 41:296-300,
2000.
81. Nell T, Bergman J, Hoeijmakers M et al: Comparison of vedaprofen and
meloxicam in dogs with musculoskeletal pain and inflammation, / Srmal!
Anim Pract 43:208-212、2002.
82. Peterson KD, Keefe TJ: Effects of meloxicam on severity of lameness and
othier clinical signs of osteoarthritis in dogs, f Am Vet Med Assoc 225:1056-
1060,2004.
83. Budsberg SC, Cross AR, Quandt JE et al: Evaluation of intravenous
administration of meloxicam for perioperative pain management following
stifle joint surgery in dogs, Am / Vet Res 63:1557-1563, 2002.
84.Fowler D,Isakow K, Caulkett N et al: An evaluation of the analgesic
effects of meloxicam in addition to epidural morphine/mepivacaine in
dogs undergoing cranial cruciate ligament repair, Can Vet J 44:643-648,
2003.
85. Lafuente MP, Franch J, Durall I et al: Comparison between meloxicam and
e jo juauaseid pue enqy pue eiqi aul jo Amoioaiso suioaiapun shop u
uniplanar external distraction device, f Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1768-1774,
2005.
86. Caulkett N, Read M, Fowler D et al: A comparison of the analgesic effects
 of butorphanol with those of meloxicam after elective ovariohysterectomy
in dogs,Can Vet J 44:565-570, 2003.
87. Mathews KA, Pettifer G, Foster R et al: Safety and efficacy of preoperative
administration of meloxicam, compared with that of ketoprofen and
butorphanol in dogs undergoing abdominal surgery, Arm J Vet Res 62:882-
888,2001.
 88. Laredo FG, Belda E, Murciano J et al: Comparison ofthe analgesic effects of
meloxicam and carprofen administered preoperatively to dogs undergoing
orthopaedic surgery, Vet Rec 155:667-671, 2004.
89. Kazakos GM, Papazoglou LG, Rallis T et al: Effects of meloxicam on the
haemostatic profile of dogs undergoing orthopaedic surgery, Vet Rec
157:444-446,2005.
90. Fresno L, Moll J, Penalba B et al: Effects of preoperative administration
of meloxicam on whole blood platelet aggregation, buccal mucosal
bleeding time, and haematological indices in dogs undergoing elective
ovariohysterectomy, Vet f 170:138-140, 2005.
          1s
associated with a single perforating duodenal ulcer after long-term
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug administration in a dog, Can Vet f
45:507-510,2004.
92. Reed S: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced duodenal ulceration
and perforation in a mature rottweiler, Can Vet J 43:971-972, 2002.
93. Carroll GL,Howe LB,Peterson KD: Analgesic efficacy of preoperative
administration of meloxicam or butorphanol in onychectomized cats, f Am
Vet Med Assoc 226:913-919, 2005.
94. Gassel AD, Tobias KM,Egger CM et al: Comparison oforal and subcutaneous
administration of buprenorphine and meloxicam for preemptive analgesia
in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy,∫Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1937-1944,
2005.
95. Argentieri DC, Ritchie DM, Ferro MP et al: Tepoxalin: a dual
cyclooxygenase/5-lipoxygenase inhibitor of arachidonic acid metabolism
with potent anti-inflammatory activity and a favorable gastrointestinal
profile,f Pharmacol Exp Ther 271:1399-1408, 1994.
96. Kay-Mugford PA, Grimm KA, Weingarten AJ et al: Effect of preoperative
in dogs, Vet Ther 5:120-127, 2004.
97. Fusellier M, Desfontis JC, Madec S et al: Effectof tepoxalin on renal function
Pharmacol Ther 28:581-586,2005.
98. Charette B, Dupuis J, Moreau M et al: Assessing the efficacy of long-tern
administration of tolfenamic acid in dogs undergoing femoral head and
neck excision,Vet Comp OrthopTraumatol16:232-237,2003.
99. Lipowitz A, Boulay J, Klausner J: Serum salicylate concentrations and
endoscopic evaluation ofthe gastric mucosain dogs after oral administration
of aspirin-containing products, Am f Vet Res 47:1586-1589, 1986.
100. Wallace JL, de Lima OM Jr, Fiorucci S: Lipoxins in gastric mucosal health
and disease,Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 73:251-255, 2005.
101. Wallace JL, Zamuner SR, McKnight W et al: Aspirin, but not NO-releasing
aspirin (NCX-4016), interacts with selective COX-2 inhibitors to aggravate
gastric damage and inflammation, Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol
286:G76-G81,2004.
102. Souza MH, de Lima OM Jr, Zamuner SR et al: Gastritis increases resistance to
aspirin-induced mucosal injury via COX-2-mediated lipoxin synthesis, Am ∫
Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 285:G54-G61, 2003 (Epub 2003 Mar 13).
103. Fiorucci S, de Lima OM Jr, Mencarelli A et al: Cyclooxygenase-2-derived
lipoxin A4 increases gastric resistance to aspirin-induced damage.
Gastroenterofogy 123:1598-1606,2002.
104. Wilson JE, Chandrasekharan NV, Westover KD et al: Determination of
an pue sanss aus ul saazost z- pue I-aseuaxooh jo uoissaidxa
differential sensitivity to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Am ∫ Vet
Res 65:810-818,2004.
105. Galbraith EA, McKellar QA: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
piroxicam in dogs, Vet Rec 128:561-565, 1991.
S  u a x e ia i u  ts  d 1
with transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder, f Vet Intern Med
8:273-276、1994.
107. Johnston SA: Personal communication, 1998.
108. Heeb HL, Chun R, Koch DE et al: Multiple dose pharmacokinetics and
acute safety of piroxicam and cimetidine in the cat, f Vet Pharmacof Ther
28:447-452、2005
208PART THREE•Therapyfor theAlleviation ofPain
           
of piroxicam in cats,/Vet Pharmacol Ther 26:259-263,2003.
110. Boston SE, Moens NM, Kruth SA et al: Endoscopic evaluation of the
gastroduodenal mucosa to determine the safety of short-term concurrent
administration of meloxicam and dexamethasone in healthy dogs, Am / Vet
Res 64:1369-1375, 2003.
111. Johnston SA, Budsberg SC: Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs and
corticosteriods for the management of canine osteoarthritis, Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 27:841-862、1997.
1 12. Rainsford KD, Ying C, Smith FC: Effects ofmeloxicam, compared with other
NSAIDs, on cartilage proteoglycan metabolism, synovial prostaglandin E2,
and production of interleukins 1, 6 and 8, in human and porcine explants in
organ culture,JPharm Pharmacol49:991-998,1997.
113. Henrotin Y, Bassleer C, Reginster JY, Franchimont P: Effects of etodolac
 a  a   s  
Rheumatol 8:36-42,1989.
114. Redini F, Mauviel A, Loyau G et al: Modulation of extracellular matrix
metabolism in rabbit articular chondrocytes and human rheumatoid
synovial cell by the non-steroidal antinflammatory drug etodolac. II.
Glycosaminoglycan synthesis, Agents Actions 31:358-367, 1990.
115. Benton HP, Vasseur PB、 Broderick-Villa GA et al: Effect of carprofen
on sulfated glycosaminoglycan metabolism, protein synthesis、 and
prostaglandin release by cultured osteoarthritic canine chondrocytes, Am
Vet Res 58:286-292,1997.
116. Ghosh P: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and chondroprotection,
Drugs 46:834-846,1993.
117. Wilbrink B, Van derVeen MJ, Huber J et al: In vitro influence of ketoprofen
on the proteoglycan metabolism of human normal and osteoarthritis
cartilage, Agents Actions 32:154-159, 1991.
118. Collier S, Ghosh P: Comparison of the effects of non-steroidal anti-
  siss   (sr) s o
cartilage explant and chondrocyte monolayer cultures, Biochem Pharmacol
41:1375-1385, 1991.
119. Dvorak LD、 Cook JL, Kreeger JM et al: Effects of carprofen and
dexamethasone on canine chondrocytes in a three-dimensional culture
model of osteoarthritis, Am ∫ Vet Res 63:1363-1369, 2002.
120. Mastbergen SC, Marijnissen AC, Vianen ME et al: Inhibition of COX-2
by celecoxib in the canine groove model of osteoarthritis,Rheumatology
45:405-413,2006.
121. Pelletier JP, Boileau C, Boily M et al: The protective effect of licofelone on
experimental osteoarthritis is correlated with the downregulation of gene
expression and protein synthesis of several major cartilage catabolic factors:
MMP-13, cathepsin K and aggrecanases, Arthritis Res Ther 7:R1091-R1102,
2005 (Epub 2005 Jul 19).
122. Jovanovic DV, Fernandes JC, Martel-Pelletier J et al: In vivo dual inhibition
Jo uoissaraoid aui saompai 0oog-t Aq aseuaskxod pue aseuaahxoolas jo
experimental osteoarthritis: suppression of collagenase 1 and interleukin-
1beta synthesis,Arthritis Rheum 44:2320-2330,2001.
    
progression of morphological changes in cartilage and subchondral bone in
experimental dog osteoarthnitis, / Rheumatol 27:2893-2902, 2000.
124. Goodman SB, Ma T, Genovese M et al: COX-2 selective inhibitors and
bone,IntfImmunopatholPharmacol 16:201-205,2003.
125. Harder AT, Yuehuei HA: The mechanisms of the inhibitory effects of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on bone healing: a concise review, J
Clin Pharmacol 43:807-815,2003.
126. Seidenberg AB, Yuehuei HA: Is there an inhibitory effect of COX-2
inhibitors on bone healing? Pharm Res 50:151-156, 2004.
127. Goodman SB, Ma T, Mitsunaga L et al: Temporal effects of a COX-2 selective
NSAID on bone ingrowth, J Biomed Mater Res 72A:279-287, 2005.
128. Bergenstock M, Min W, Simon AM et al: A comparison between the effects
of acetaminophen and celecoxib on bone fracture healing in rats, J Orthop
Trauma19:717-723,2005.
129. Virdi AS, De Ranieri A, Sumner DR: Bone regeneration and implant
fixation strength are not adversely influenced by COX-2 inhibition, Trans
50th Ortho Society p 455, 2004.
130. Gerstenfeld LC、 Al-Ghawas M, Alkhiary YM, et al: Selective and non-
reversibility of effects after short-term treatment、 J Bone foint Surg
89(1):114-125,2007.
131. Gajraj NM: The effects of cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors on bone healing, Reg
Anesth Pain Med28:456-465,2005.
132. Macalena JA, Knight RQ, Mollner TJ et al: Selective COX-2 inhibition
delays remodeling of primary bone, Trans 50th Ortho Society p 399, 2004.
133. Einhom TA: The science of fracture healing, /Orthop Trauma 19:S4-S6, 2005.
134. Johnson GJ, Leis LA, Dunlop PC: Thromboxane-insensitive dog platelets
have impaired activation of phospholipase C due to receptor-linked G
protein dysfunction, JClin Invest 92:2469-2479, 2003.
135. Brainard BM, Meredith CP, Callan MB et al: Changes in platelet function,
hemostasis and prostaglandin expression after treatment with nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs with various cyclooxygenase selectivities in dogs,
Am fVet Res 68(3):251-257,2007.
136. Grosser T, Fries S, FitzGerald GA: Biological basis for the cardiovascular
consequences of COX-2 inhibition:
: therapeutic challenges and
opportunities, J Clin Invest 116:4-15, 2006.
11
02-AGONISTS
LEIGHLAMONT
he Q-agonists are a group of sedative-analgesic drugs that exert
their clinical effects by interacting with α2-adrenergic receptors
.in the central nervous system. Although not considered first-
line analgesics like opioids or nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs,
Q2-agonists are commonly used as analgesic adjuvants. In contrast to
other classes of drugs used to mana ge pain, α2-agonists are distinguished
by their significant cardiovascular side effects (Box 1l-1).
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
· 1962: Xylazine was synthesized in Germany for use as an
animals were recognized soon afterward.
● Early 1970s: Xylazine and xylazine/ketamine combinations became
use in small animals soon followed.
● 198l: The sedative, analgesic, and muscle relaxant properties of
xylazine were linked to stimulation of central αz-adrenoceptors.
●Late 1980s: New,more specific
α-agonists (medetomidine,
detomidine, and romifidine) were introduced; drug distribution and
labeling vary widely from country to country.
· 1996: Medetomidine and its specific reversal agent, atipamezole,
became available in the United States (labeled for use in dogs only);
veterinarians began using α-agonists inlower doses, often in combina-
tion with opioids, as anesthetic and analgesic adjuvants.
● Currently, medetomidine is the most commonly used α2-agonist for
analgesia in small animal practice in North America; dexmedetomi
dine is used occasionally, whereas romifidine and xylazine are rarely
used as analgesic adjuvants .
210
CHAPTER 11 + α2-Agonists
211
BOX 11-1
α2-Agonists
Clonidine
Detomidine
Dexmedetomidine
Medetomidine
Romifidine
Xylazine
MOLECULAR PHARMACOLOGY
OF 2-ADRENOCEPTORS
Q2-ADRENOCEPTORSTRUCTURE
●All α-adrenoceptor proteins contain 415 to 480 amino acids.2
● Each protein contains seven transmembrane domains with segments
of lipophilic amino acids separated by segments of hydrophilic amino
acids; these form an extracellular amino terminus and an intracellular
carboxyl terminus with three small extracellular loops and three
intracellular loops
α2-ADRENOCEPTOR SUBTYPES
Q2B, and α2c.3
● A fourth subtype (αzp) has been identified and represents the rodent
homologue of the human QzA-adrenoceptor.4
● The genes for the three human subtypes have been cloned and are
designated αz-C10, α2-C2, and α2-C4 for the α2A, Q2B, and α2c subtypes,
respectively.3
 ss      s  s
rat, mouse, Pig, opossum, and fish; partial complementary DNA
sequences from bovine and avian Qza-receptors have also been
identified.
·Allthree
e α2 subtype genes share a common evolutionary
origin; several key structural and functional domains are well
conserved despite only 50% protein homology at the amino acid
level.
● Most currently available Q-agonists bind with similar affinity to all
three receptor subtypes.
212
PARTTHREE•TherapyfortheAlleviationofPain
TABLE 11-1
Expression and Distribution of α2-Adrenoceptor
Subtypes in Different Species
Brainstem
Spinal Cord
Rodentst
O.2A
α.2A, α.2C
Human beings6
Q.2A
α2A, α.2B
Dogs?
Q.2A
Unknown
Q2-ADRENOCEPTOR EXPRESSION
· Expression is somewhat species-specific, resulting in varied
physiological effects and pharmacologic activity profles and making
extrapolation of data among species diffcult.5
● Distribution of αz-adrenoceptor subtypes in several species is given in
Table 1l-1.
C-ADRENOCEPTOR SUBTYPE FUNCTIONAL
SIGNIFICANCE
●Allclinically
relevant analgesic, sedative-hypnotic,  and
anesthetic-sparing responses appear to be mediated by the Q2A
subtype.6-9
● Hypotensive and bradycardic actions are also mediated by the Q2A
subtype.10
● Initial increase in systemic vascular resistance appears to be mediated
by the Q2e subtype, with lesser contribution of the QzA subtype in
certain vascular compartments.10
● Hypothermic effects and modulation of dopaminergic activity are
mediated by the αzc subtype.6
IMIDAZOLINE RECEPTORS
● Clonidine and romifidine contain an imidazole moiety that binds to
and activates a second class of non-noradrenergic receptors called
imidazoline receptors.1l
● Imidazoline receptors are involved in central control of vasomotor
tone and are located in the nucleus reticularis lateralis of the
ventrolateral region of the medulla.ll
· Central hypotensive effects observed after administration of clonidine
or romifidine result from activation of Cza-adrenoceptors and
imidazoline receptors.
CHAPTER 11·α-Agonists
213
SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION MECHANISMS
OF α2-ADRENOCEPTORS
 The process by which any transmembrane receptor notifies the cell of
receptor occupancy by a ligand is called signal transduction.
dopaminergic, cholinergic, and serotonergic receptor systems that
are coupled to guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins) that
function in signal transduction.
● G proteins link cell membrane receptors to intracellular effector
mechanisms, amplify the signal, and transduce external chemical
stimuli into cellular responses.
· Binding of a specific ligand (neurotransmitter, endogenous
hormone, or exogenous drug) induces a conformational change
in the Q2-adrenoreceptor, which leads to activation of specific
G proteins.3
· Activated G proteins then modulate the synthesis or availability of
intracellular second messenger molecules or directly alter the activity
of transmembrane ion cha nnels.3
●Relevant α2-adrenoceptor effector mechanisms include the following:
   e 
membrane ion channels and a decreased firing rate of excitable
cells in the central nervous system (CNS)3
2. Inhibition of calcium influx through N-type voltage-gated
calcium channels resulting in reduced fusion of synaptic vesicles
with postsynaptic membranes and reduced neurotransmitter
release2
3. Inhibition of the enzyme adenylate cyclase, resulting in
decreased   intracellular    cyclic   adenosine   monophosphate
accumulation and decreased phosphorylation of target regulatory
proteinsl2
MECHANISM OF ANALGESIC ACTION
· Qz-Adrenoceptors within the CNS are found on noradrenergic and
non-noradrenergic neurons.
● Noradrenergic Qz-adrenoceptors are called autoreceptors and are
located at supraspinal sites.
  sdia  e srd- or- 
located in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.13,14
● Both populations of receptors appear to be involved in C-agonist
analgesia.
214
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
ANALGESIAMEDIATEDATTHELEVEL
OF THEDORSALHORN
· α-Heteroceptors are located presynaptically and postsynaptically on
nociceptive neurons in the dorsal horn.
● Activation by norepinephrine or an exogenous Q-agonist produces
analgesia by one of two potential mechanisms:
1. Presynaptic α-heteroceptors found on primary afferent C fibers
bind the agonist. This causes a G protein-mediated decrease in
calcium influx (see previous section), which results in decreased
release of neurotransmitters/neuropeptides such as glutamate,
vasoactive intestinal peptide, calcitonin gene-related peptide,
substance P, and neurotensin.15
2. Postsynaptic αz-heteroceptors found on wide-dynamic-range
projection neurons also bind the agonist. This produces neuronal
hyperpolarization via G protein-coupled potassium channels (see
previous section) and inhibits ascending nociceptive transmission.15
ANALGESIAMEDIATEDATTHELEVELOFTHEBRAINSTEM
● Traditionally, it has been accepted that C2-agonist-induced analgesia
results from activation of dorsal horn αz-heteroceptors, whereas
sedative-hypnotic effects are mediated by activation of supraspinal
(brainstem)α-autoreceptors.
 o       s
indirectly to analgesia.
· Q-Autoreceptors are concentrated in three catecholaminergic nuclei
in the pons: A5, A6, (also called the locus ceruleus), and A7.16,17
● The locus ceruleus (LC) is the most important of these, extending
noradrenergic neurons to all segments of the spinal cord and
modulating noradrenergic input from higher structures such as the
periaqueductal gray matter (PAG) of the midbrain.
● Activation of αz-autoreceptors in the LC by norepinephrine or an
exogenous Q-agonist results in neuronal inhibition and a decreased
release of norepinephrine.
·DampeningofLCactivity disinhibitsactivityinthe adjacent cell bodies
of A5 and A7 nuclei, resulting in increased release of norepinephrine
from their terminals in the dorsal horn, which in turn activates
spinal presynaptic and postsynaptic α-heteroceptors to produce
analgesia.l6
· Higher supraspinal structures may also play a role: the PAG of
      s  
CHAPTER 11·α2-Agonists 215
may lead to C-mediated decreases in LC norepinephrine release,
which indirectly feeds back on spinal αz-adrenoceptors to produce
analgesia.13
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 2-AGONISTS
XYLAZINE
Xylazine is the prototype α2-agonist.
● Xylazine is the least selective α-agonist used clinically with an Q0
binding ratio of only 160:1.18
xylazine, including yohimbine, tolazoline, idazoxan, and more
recently, atipamezole.
● Although still used extensively in large animal practice as a sedative-
o un i sisre ue se pasn iaiei si szex e sisie
and cats.
CLONIDINE
● An Q-agonist approved in the United States in 1997 for use in human
beings as an antihypertensive agent
● Possesses some α effects, with an α2:α binding ratio of 220:118
● Has gained popularity as an analgesic adjuvant for certain types of
 pain symdromes in human beings
●Not currently used clinically in dogs and cats
DEXMEDETOMIDINE
● Dexmedetomidine is the pure S-enantiomer of the racemic Qz-agonist
medetomidine; it is considered to be twice as potent as medetomidine.19
● Dexmedetomidine was approved in the United States in 1999 for
into anesthesia and pain management practice.
● Although not approved for use in dogs or cats, evidence suggests that
equipotent doses of dexmedetomidine and medetomidine induce simi-
lar sedative, analgesic, and cardiovascular effects in these species.19,20
MEDETOMIDINE
● Medetomidine is an equal mixture of two optical enantiomers:
dexmedetomidine (see previous discussion) and levomedetomidine.
216
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
· Dexmedetomidine is the active component, whereas levomedetomi-
dine is considered pharmacologically inactive (though it may play a
role in drug interactions).19
· Racemic medetomidine is lipophilic, facilitating rapid absorption
after intramuscular administration; peak plasma concentrations are
reached in approximately 12 hour.21
● Elimination of medetomidine from plasma is also rapid, with reported
half-lives varying between 0.9619 hour and 1.28 hours.21
 Medetomidine/dexmedetomidine are the most specific αz-agonists
available clinically with an αz:α, binding ratio of 1620:1.18
● A specific α-antagonist, atipamezole, was marketed alongside medeto-
midine and rapidly reverses all sedative, analgesic, and cardiovascular
effects associated with medetomidine administration, if desired.
● Medetomidine is presently the only αz-agonist used routinely as an
analgesic adjuvant in dogs and cats, so further clinical discussions will
focus on this agent.
ROMIFIDINE
Romifidine is an imino-imidazolidine derivative of clonidine.
● Romifidine is a potent and reasonably selective α-agonist, producing
sedative and analgesic effects comparable to those achieved with
medetomidine.22,23
● Romifidine has a αz:α, binding ratio of 340:1.
United States and is not used commonly as an analgesic adjuvant at
this time.
DETOMIDINE
·A weakly basic, lipophilic imidazole derivative
● Also possesses greater α binding compared with medetomidine, with
an αz:α binding ratio of 260:118
● Not commonly used as an analgesic adjuvant in dogs and cats (Box 11-2)
BOX 11-2
Pharmacokinetic Properties of uz-Agonists
Rapid absorption (intramuscular, subcutaneous, oral)
Papid hepatic metabolism/renal excretion
Active metabolites possible
CHAPTER 11 +α2-Agonists
217
BOX 11-3
Clinical Use of α2-Agonists
1. Sedative-analgesic agent for short, noninvasive procedures
2. Adjunct to general anesthesia
a. Component of total injectable anesthesia protocols
b. Preanesthetic sedative-analgesic agent
C. Supplemental continuous infusion during inhalant anesthesia
3. Sedative-analgesic agent in postoperative or intensive care unit patients
 4. Epidural or intrathecal administration
 5. Intaarticular administration
6. Perineural administration
CONSIDERATIONSFORPATIENT SELECTION
Q2-agonists may induce significant alterations in cardiopulmonary
function (see Cardiovascular Effects).
● In most cases, use of αz-agonists should be reserved for young to
middle-aged animals without significant systemic disease.
● As a rule, αz-agonists should be avoided in the following:
1. Patients adversely affected by an increase in cardiac afterload or a
decrease in cardiac output (e.g-, mitral or tricuspid regurgitation
or dilated cardiomyopathy)
2. Patients with cardiac arrhythmias or conduction disturbances
(e.g-, premature ventricular contractions, atrioventricular block,
or other bradyarrhythmias)
3. Patients with preexisting hypertension
4. Patients with an increased potential for arterial hemorrhage (e.g-
traumatic arterial laceration)
5. Patients for whom vomiting could have serious detrimental effects
(e.g-, upper gastrointestinal obstruction or corneal descemetocele)
CLINICAL USE AS ANALGESIC ADJUVANTS
See Box 11-3.
SEDATIONANDANALGESIAFORSHORT,NONINVASIVE
PROCEDURES
● Medetomidine is used extensively for short, noninvasive procedures
in dogs and cats, whereas romifidine is used less frequently.
● Medetomidine can be used alone but is often combined with an opioid
(e.g-, hydromorphone, morphine, buprenorphine, or butorphanol)
218
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
TABLE 11-2
Recommended Doses of Selected u2-Agonists
for Routine Sedation/Analgesia
Drug
Dosage
Medetomidine*f
Dog: 0.01-0.02 mg/kg IM
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV
Cat: 0.015-0.03 mg/kg IM
0.01-0.015 mg/kg IV
Romifidine*f
Dog: 0.02-0.04 mg/kg IM
0.01-0.02 mg/kg Iv
Cat: 0.03-0.06 mg/kg IM
0.015-0.03 mg/kg IV
*Often combined with an opioid to enhance sedation/analgesia.
+May be reversed with atipamezole at end of procedure.
to enhance sedation and provide more intense analgesia; dosing
guidelines are presented in Table 11-2.
· Examples of short, noninvasive procedures include radiographs,
ultrasound examinations, minor laceration repair, wound debride-
ment, bandage placement, ear canal examination and cleaning, skin
biopsy, and oral examination.
● Despite the fact that many animals appear profoundly sedated with
medetomidine/opioid combinations, it is crucial to recognize that they are
not anesthetized and may be acutely aroused by any type of stimulation.
● If general anesthesia is required, an anesthetic agent must be titrated
to effect (see next section)
● For intramuscular (IM) administration, medetomidine and opioid
q s o p      p a
initiation of the procedure.
● For intravenous (IV) administration, lower doses of medetomidine
and opioid can be mixed together in one syringe; onset time is within
minutes of injection.
● Duration of effect is relatively short, ranging from 30 to 90 minutes;
the addition of an opioid prolongs analgesia for anywhere from 1 to
4 hours depending on the opioid chosen, the dose, and the route of
administration.
 Although concurrent use of anticholinergics remains controversial,
this practice is not routinely recommended when administering
medetomidine/opioid combinations.
●Basic hemodynamic parameters should be monitored closely when using
medetomidine/opioid combinations (see Cardiovascular Effects).
· Reversal of all αz-mediated effects can be accomplished by IM
atipamezole administration if desired.
CHAPTER 11 +α2-Agonists
219
Recommended Doses of Selected a2-Agonists
TABLE 11-3
as Adjuncts to General Anesthesia
Preanesthetic Agent*
Supplemental CRI During
Inhalant Anesthesia
Medetomidine
Dog: 0.005-0.01 mg/kg IM
 Dog: 0.001 mg/kg per hour Ivf
0.003-0.005 mg/kg Iv
Cat: 0.01 -0.02 mg/kg IM
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV
Romifidine
Dog: 0.01-0.02 mg/kg IM
0.005-0.01 mg/kg Iv
Cat: 0.02-0.03 mg/kg IM
0.01-0.02 mg/kg Iv
Dexmedetomidine
Dog: 0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV
 Dog: 0.0005 mg/kg per hour Iv25
0.01-0.015 mg/kg IM
Cat: 0.01-0.015 mg/kg IV
0.01-0.02 mg/kg IM
*Often combined with an opioid to enhance sedation/analgesia.
tAnecdotal reports only.
CRI, Constant rate infusion.
ADJUNCT TO GENERALANESTHESIA
Component of Total injectable Anesthesia Protocols
·Medetomidine is often used in combination with injectable anesthetic
agents such as ketamine, tiletamine/zolazepam, and propofol to
produce short-term general anesthesia; opioids and benzodiazepines
are also commonly included in such protocols.
· The addition of medetomidine means that lower doses of anesthetic
agents are required, analgesia is supplemented, and muscle relaxation
is optimized.
● Numerous IM and IV drug combinations involving medetomidine
have been used clinically in dogs and cats, and the reader is referred
elsewhere for a review of these techniques.
Preanesthetic Sedative-Analgesic Agent
● Medetomidine/opioid combinations are commonly administered in
the preanesthetic period before induction and transfer to an inhalant
anesthetic agent.
●Addition of medetomidine in the preanesthetic period greatly reduces
the required dose of induction agent (injectable or inhalant) and
decreases the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) needed for
anestheticmaintenance.24
●Medetomidine/opioid combinations can be administered IM or IV;
dosing guidelines are given in Table 11-3.
220PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
· Routine coadministration of an anticholinergic remains controversial
but is usually not necessary in most cases; if heart rate remains low
after induction of general anesthesia and the patient is hypotensive,
anticholinergic administration at this time is appropriate.
● As with any general anesthesia protocol, hemodynamic monitoring
(including heart rate, rhythm, and blood pressure) is essential (see
Cardiovascular Effects).
● In animals undergoing surgery, routine postoperative reversal of
medetomidine is not recommended because this also reverses any
remaining analgesic effects.
     q  e   
ligher doses of medetomidine have been used and/or when excessive
sedation persists in the recovery period.
Supplemental Continuous Infusion During
InhalantAnesthesia
Microdose medetomidine or dexmedetomidine continuous infusions
 e  s  r   s
maintenance.
● It has been proposed that the use of very low doses administered as
a continuous infusion concurrently with an inhalant anesthetic may
attenuate the adverse cardiovascular effects seen when larger doses are
administered as boluses.
● To date, there is only one report in the literature evaluating this
approach in the dog: dexmedetomidine was infused in isoflurane-
anesthetized dogs at 0.1, 0.5, and 3 μg/kg per hour IV; MAC reductions
of 18% and 59% were noted with the 0.5 and 3 μg/kg per hour infusion
rates; heart rate decreased while arterial blood pressure increased at
these rates, but the clinical significance of these changes at the 0.5 μg/
kg per hour infusion rate was considered minimal.25
· Additional studies are warranted to explore the potential use of
medetomidine and dexmedetomidine as continuous infusions in
inhalant-anesthetized patients, alone or in combination with other
adjunctive agents such as opioids, ketamine, and lidocaine.
SEDATIVE-ANALGESICAGENTINPOSTOPERATIVE
ORINTENSIVECAREUNITPATIENTS
 Low-dose IV bolus injections of medetomidine are useful for short-
term postoperative sedation, and analgesic supplementation in
selected canine and feline patients (Table 11-4)
● Based on experience with dexmedetomidine in human ICU
patients, there is increasing interest in the use of medetomidine and
CHAPTER 11+C2-Agonists
221
Recommended Doses of Selected u2-Agonists
TABLE 11-4
for Sedation/Analgesia in Postoperative
and Intensive Care Unit Patients
Short-Term Sedation/
Extended Sedation
Analgesia
Analgesia as a CRI
Medetomidine
Dog: 0.001-0.003 mg/kg IV
 Dog: 0.001 -0.002 mg/kg
bolus
per hour Iv*
Cat: 0.003-0.005 mg/kg IV
bolus
Dexmedetomidine
Dog: 0.0005-0.002 mg/kg IV
Dog: 0.0005-0.001 mg/kg
bolus*
per hour IV
"Anecdotal reports only.
CRI, Constant rate infusion.
dexmedetomidine administered as microdose continuous infusions in
dogs and cats to provide extended periods of sedation, analgesia, and
anxiolysis.
· Studies with dexmedetomidine infusions in human beings show
significant reductions in benzodiazepine and opioid requirements in
intubated, mechanically ventilated patients without inducing serious
· Also, a significantly improved cumulative nitrogen balance has been
documented in patients receiving αz-agonist infusions after surgery,
probably as a result of stimulation of growth hormone release.28
· To date, only one study has evaluated medetomidine (in combination
with fentanyl) as a continuous infusion without the influence of
concurrent inhalant anesthesia; a dose of 1.5 μg/kg per hour IV was
infused with 15 μg/kg boluses of fentanyl; reductions in heart rate and
cardiac index and increases in pulmonary arterial pressure were noted
in this study.29
·Additional studies are needed to characterize further the cardiovascular
and sedative/analgesic effects of medetomidine and dexmedetomidine
infusions before their routine use can be recommended in ICU patients.
EPIDURAL/INTRATHECALADMINISTRATION
 n n  n s  n  s  
Q2-agonist-induced analgesia.
● This is confirmed by the following observations:
1. Lumbar epidural injection of αz-agonists in human beings and
animals causes more intense analgesia in the skin dermatomes
innervated by the cord segments near the site of spinal
administration.30
222PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
2. Correlation between blood αz-agonist concentration and analgesia is
poor, whereas correlation between cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concen-
tration and analgesia is excellent, implicating a spinal site of action.31
● Stimulation of spinal cord cholinergic interneurons also may
contribute to analgesia after neuraxial α2-agonist administration.31-33
Although intrathecal administration is notroutinely used in veterinary
medicine, epidural administration is common.
● Incorporation ofa low dose of medetomidine into an epidural protocol
produces additive or synergistic analgesic effects when combined with
opioids and/or local anesthetics.34
● Medetomidine may be combined with standard epidural doses of
morphine, oxymorphone, buprenorphine, fentanyl, lidocaine, or
   s a     g
junction.
● The lipophilicity of medetomidine means that it is rapidly cleared from
the CSF in the vicinity of the spinal injection site; this anatomically res-
tricts the action of the drug, resulting in significant systemic absorption.
· When the total dose administered approaches that which would
otherwise be given systemically, the specificity of the regional analgesic
effect may be lost.
● The regional spinal analgesic effects of medetomidine can be optimized
by administering a continuous infusion through an indwelling epidural
catheter using microdoses delivered directly to the desired segment of
spinal cord while minimizing medetomidine plasma levels.
● Clinical use of epidural medetomidine via continuous infusion
remains anecdotal at this time.
INTRAARTICULARADMINISTRATION
terminals of primary afferent nociceptive fibers; they appear to
contribute to analgesia by inhibition of norepinephrine release at
nerve terminals.31
● Studies in human beings have demonstrated a peripheral analgesic
effect after intraarticular administration of α2-agonists to patients
undergoing arthroscopic knee surgery that is unrelated to vascular
uptake of the drug and redistribution to central sites.35
● Additive and synergistic analgesic effects have also been documented
for intraarticular combinations of αz-agonists with local anesthetics
and opioids.36
· Though there are currently no studies evaluating medetomidine
administered intraarticularly, extrapolation from human patients
CHAPTER 11·α-Agonists
223
Recommended Doses of Medetomidine
TABLE 11-5
as an Adjunct to Regional Anesthesia/Analgesia
Techniques
Epidural*
Intraarticular?
Perineural?
Medetomidine
Dog/cat:
Dog/cat:
Dog/cat:
0.001-0.005 mg/kg
10.002-0.005 mg/kg
0.002-0.005
mg/kg
*May be combined with opioids, local anesthetics, or ketamine.
fFor combination with a local anesthetic.
suggests that animals undergoing routine arthrotomy may benefit from
low doses of medetomidine combined with morphine, bupivacaine,
or both injected into the joint at the end of surgery.
PERINEURALADMINISTRATION
● In human patients, clinical evidence suggests that α-agonists enhance
peripheral nerve block intensity and duration when added to local
anesthetics administered perineurally.
● Enhanced perineural blockade with αz-agonists may be a result of the
following:
1. Hyperpolarization of C fibers through blockade of a specific type
of potassium channel31
2. Local vasoconstriction that decreases vascular removal of local
action
● Currently, there are no published studies evaluating the efficacy of
 medetomidine as an adjunct for peripheral nerve blockade in dogs
and cats (Table 11-5).
CLINICAL SIDE EFFECTS OF &2-AGONISTS
See Box 11-4.
A comprehensive review ofthe physiological side effects of αz-agonists
used in veterinary medicine is available elsewhere’7; the following is a
brief summary of relevant points.
SEDATION, MUSCLE RELAXATION, ANXIOLYSIS
· Qz-Agonists consistently produce significant sedative effects in dogs
and cats when administered at clinically relevant dosages.
224
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
BOX 11-4
Central Nervous System Effects of uz-Agonists
Analgesia
Anxiolysis
Muscle relaxation
Sedation
BOX 11-5
Cardiovascular Effects of αz-Agonists
Immediate (Peripheral) Effects
↑ Systemic vascular resistance
↑ Arterial blood pressure
↑ Heart rate (baroreceptor reflex)
↑ Cardiac output
Delayed (Central) Effects
↓ Sympathetic activity
jArterial blood pressure
↓ Cardiac output
● The LC is a major center for control of vigilance and arousal; activation
of αz-autoreceptors produces tonic inhibition of LC adrenergic neurons
and decreased release of norepinephrine, which results in sedation.
higher dosages a ceiling effect is attained and further increases in dose
simply prolong the duration of sedation.38
· Preexisting stress, fear, or excitement can increase circulating endo-
 genous catecholamines and prevent the onset of α2-agonist-induced
sedation.
●Muscle-relaxant properties of αz-agonists are also well recognized; this
is mediated through inhibition of neuronal transmission at the level of
the spinal cord.
 p s  ond n n si sii 
beings, αz-agonists are able to reduce stress and anxiety independent
of their sedative effects.39
CARDIOVASCULAREFFECTS
See Box 11-5.
●Immediately
y after administration, Q-agonists bind vascular
postsynaptic C-adrenoceptors, resulting in smooth muscle contra-
ction and vasoconstriction.40
CHAPTER 11 + α2-Agonists
225
B0X 11-6
Respiratory Effects of oz-Agonists
Low Doses (for Adjunctive Analgesia)
↓ Respiratory rate
↑ Tidal volume
Normal minute ventilation
Normal Paco2, Po2, and pH
High Doses (in Combination)
↓Respiratoryrate
↓ Tidal volume
↓ Minute ventilation 
↑ CO2, ↓ pH, ↓ PVo2, p0ssible ↓ Pa02
*Partial oxygen pressure in mixed venous blood.
· The increase in systemic vascular resistance produces a short-lived
mediated reflex bradycardia.3940
· The magnitude of initial hypertension may be less after IM administra-
tion, likely because of reduced peak plasma levels of the drug.
· Bradyarrhythmias as a result of increased vagal tone are not un-
common, with heart rates decreasing by as much as 50%.39
●Sinus arrhythmia, sinoatrial block, and first-degree and second-degree
atrioventricular block are frequentlyseen; third-degree atrioventricular
block and sinoatrial arrest occur rarely.
· After the transient vascular effects diminish, central α-adrenoceptor
effects predominate; decreased sympathetic tone results in reduced
blood pressure and diminished cardiac output.
● Blood pressure commonly falls by one quarter to one third of baseline
values, and cardiac output decreases by one third to one half of baseline
values.39
● Decreases in heart rate and/or cardiac output may be attenuated
to some degree by coadministration with ketamine or tiletamine/
zolazepam because of their sympathomimetic actions.
RESPIRATORY EFFECTS
See Box 11-6.
Although respiratory rate decreases with administration of α-agonists,
arterial pH, Pao2, and Paco are not significantly altered when using
doses appropriate for adjunctive analgesia.
● The decreased respiration rate is accompanied by an increased tidal
volume, which effectively maintains alveolar ventilation.39
226
PART THREE·Therapyfor theAlleviation ofPain
BOX 11-7
Gastrointestinal Effects of αz-Agonists
↓ Salivation
I Gastric secretions
↓ Gastrointestinal motility
Vomiting
 Swallowing reflex
Predisposition to gastric dilation (large-breed dogs)?
BOX 11-8
Renal and Endocrine Effects of αz-Agonists
Diuresis (↑ water and sodium excretion)
↓ Insulin release (hyperglycemia, glucosuria)
· At higher dosages, especially in combination with other CNS
depressants, minute ventilation may be compromised and decreases in
venous Poz and oxygen content have been noted; venous desaturation
is presumably related to increased tissue oxygen extraction associated
with decreased cardiac output.
GASTROINTESTINAL EFFECTS
See Box 11-7.
● Up to 20% of dogs and up to 90% of cats vomit after medetomidine
administration.41
● Emesis is seen most often after subcutaneous and, less frequently, IM
administration.
● Medetomidine also inhibits small intestinal and colonic motility in
dogs.42
● Xylazine decreases esophageal sphincter pressure in dogs and may
increase the likelihood of gastric reflux; acute abdominal distention
has been reported in large-breed dogs after xylazine administration.39
RENAL EFFECTS
See Box 11-8.
● Significant increases in urine output are seen transiently after
administration of xylazine or medetomidine to dogs and cats.43,44
· Increased urinary output may be due to one or more of the
following:
CHAPTER 11·α2-Agonists227
1. Increased renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate43,44
2. Suppression of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) release centrally43
3. Antagonism of ADH at the level of the renal tubule45
ENDOCRINEEFFECTS
of suppression of insulin secretion.46
● Cortisol and glucagon levels do not appear to change significantly,46
but medetomidine has been shown to attenuate the stress response
induced by other anesthetic agents (opioids and ketamine).47
● Other hormonal changes include transient alterations in growth
hormone, testosterone, prolactin, ADH, and follicle-stimulating
hormone levels.
MISCELLANEOUSEFFECTS
in several species after xylazine administration48-50;medetomidine
and detomidine appear less likely to have this effect.
● Mydriasis has been reported after administration of xylazine and
medetomidine because of central inhibition of parasympathetic
innervation to the iris or direct sympathetic stimulation of α-receptors
located in the iris and CNS.51,52
· Decreased intraocular pressure has been reported in some species
after systemic administration of xylazine and medetomidine
because of dampened sympathetic activity and decreased aqueous
flow.
REFERENCES
1. Hsu WH: Xylazine induced depression and its antagonism by alpha-
adrenergic blocking agents, J Pharmacol Exp Ther 218:188-192, 1981.
2. Daunt DA, Maze M: α-Adrenergic agonist receptors, sites and mechanisms
of action. In Short CE, Van Poznak A,editors: Animal pain, New York, 1992,
Churchill Livingstone.
3. Aanta R, Marjamaki A, Scheinin M: Molecular pharmacology of uz-adreno-
ceptor subtypes, Arn Med 27:439-449, 1995.
4. Blaxall HS, Heck DA, Bylund DB: Molecular determinants of the alpha-2D
adrenergic receptor subtype, Life Sci 53(17):255-259, 1993.
5. Ongioco RRS, Richardson CD, Rudner XL et al: αz-Adrenergic receptors in
human dorsal root ganglia, Anesthesiology 92:968-976, 2000.
6. Maze M, Fujinaga M: αz-Adrenoceptors in pain modulation: which subtype
228PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
7. Schwartz DD, Jones WG, Hedden TP et al: Molecular and pharmacological
characterization ofthe canine brainstem alpha-2A adrenergic receptor, / Vet
Pharmacol Ther 22:380-386,1999.
8. Lakhlani PP, MacMillan LB, Guo TZ et al: Substitution of a mutant αzA-
adrenergic receptor via “hit and run" gene targeting reveals the role of this
subtype in sedative, analgesic, and anesthetic-sparing responses in vivo, Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:9950-9955,1997
9. MacMillan LB、Lakhlani PP, Hein L et al: In vivo mutation of the CA-
adrenergic receptor by homologous recombination reveals the role of this
1998.
10. MacMillan LB, Hein L, Smith MS et al: Central hypotensive effects of the
αA-adrenergic receptor subtype, Science 273(5276):801-803, 1996.
11. Bousquet P: Imidazoline receptors: from basic concepts to recent developments,
JCardiovasc Pharmacol 26(suppl 2):S1-S6, 1995.
12. Schwinn DA: Adrenoceptors as models for G protein-coupled receptors:
structure, function and regulation, Br J Anaesth 71:77-85, 1993.
13. Budai D, Harasawa I, Fields HL: Midbrain periaqueductal gray (PAG)
Qz-adrenergic receptors, / Neurophysiol 80(5):2244-2254, 1998.
14. Millan MJ, Bervoets K, Rivet JM et al: Multiple alphaz-adrenergic receptor
subtypes. I1. Evidence for a role of rat alphaza-adrenergic receptors in control
of nociception, motor behavior and hippocampal synthesis of noradrenaline,
fPharmacolExp Ther270(3):958-972、1994
15. Buerkle H, Yaksh TL: Pharmacologic evidence for different alphaz
adrenergic receptor sites mediating analgesia and sedation in the rat, Br ∫
Anaesth 81:208-215, 1998.
16. Guo T, Jiang J, Butterman AE et al: Dexmedetomidine injection into the
locus ceruleus produces antinociception, Anesthesiology 84(4):873-881,
1996.
17. Peng YB, Lin Q, Willis WD: Involvement of alphaz-adrenoceptors in the
 periaqueductal gray-induced inhibition of dorsal horn cell activity in rats,
JPharmacol Exp Ther 278(1):125-135, 1996.
18. Virtanen R: Pharmacologic profles of medetomidine and its antagonist,
atipamezole,Acta Vet Scand Suppl85:29-37、1989.
19. Kuusela E, Raekallio M, Anttila M et al: Clinical effects and pharmacokinetics
of medetomidine and its enantiomers in dogs, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 23( 1):
15-20,2000.
20. Savola JM, Virtanen R: Central α2-adrenoceptors are highly stereoselective
for dexmedetomidine、 the dextro enantiomer of medetomidine, Eur f
Pharmacol 195:193-199, 1991.
21. Salonen JS:Pharmacokinetics of medetomidine,Acta Vet Scand Suppl 85:
49-54,1989.
22. England GCW, Flack TE, Hollingworth Eet al: Sedative effects of romifidine
in the dog./Small Anim Pract 37:19-25,1996.
23. Lemke KA: Sedative effects in intramuscular administration of a low dose of
romifidine in dogs, Am / Vet Res 60(2):162-168, 1999.
CHAPTER 11 + α2-Agonists
229
24. Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ: Advantages and guidelines for using alphaz
agonists as anesthetic adjuncts, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
22(2):289-292,1992.
25. Pascoe PJ, Raekallio M, Kuusela E et al: Changes in the minimum alveolar
concentration of isoflurane and some cardiopulmonary measurements
during three continuous infusion rates of dexmedetomidine in dogs, Vet
AnaesthAnalg33:97-103,2003.
26. Venn RM, Bradshaw CJ, Spencer R et al: Preliminary UK experience of
dexmedetomidine, a novel agent for postoperative sedation in the intensive
care unit, Anaesthesiα 54(12):1136-1142,1999.
27. Hall JE, Uhrich TD, Barney JA et al: Sedative, amnestic and analgesic
properties of small-dose dexmedetomidine infusions, Anesth Analg
90(3):699-705, 2000.
28. Mertes N, Goeters C, Kuhmann M et al: Postoperative alphaz-adrenergic
stimulation attenuates protein catabolism, Anesth Aralg 82(2):258-263,
1996.
29. Grimm KA, Tranquilli WJ, Gross DR et al: Cardiopulmonary effects of
fentanyl in conscious dogs and dogs sedated with a continuous rate infusion
of medetomidine,Am fVet Res 66(7):1222-1226, 2005.
30. Sabbe MB, Penning JP, Ozaki GT et al: Spinal and systemic action of the
Q-receptor agonist dexmedetomidine in dogs: antinociception and carbon
dioxide response, Anesthesiology 80(5):1057-1061, 1994.
31. Eisenach J, De Kock M, Klimscha W: α2-Adrenergic agonists for regional
anesthesia: a clinical review of clonidine (1984-1995), Anesthesiology 85:
655-674、1996.
32. De Kock M, Eisenach J: Analgesic doses of intrathecal but not intravenous
clonidine increase acetylcholine in cerebrospinal fluid in humans, Anesth
Analg 84:800-803,1997.
33. Eisenach JC, Hood DD, Curry R: Intrathecal, but not intravenous, clonidine
reduces experimental thermal or capsaicin-induced pain and hyperalgesia in
normal volunteers, Anesth Anaig 87(3):591-596,1998.
34. Branson KR, Ko I, Tranquilli WJ et al: Duration of analgesia induced by
epidurally administered morphine and medetomidine in the dog、 J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 16:369-372, 1993.
35. Gentili M, Juhel A, Bonnet F: Peripheral analgesic effect of intra-articular
clonidine, Pain 64(3):593-596,1996
arthroscopic knee surgery with intraarticular clonidine and/or morphine,
Anesth Analg 90(5):1102-1106,2000.
37. Sinclair MD: A review of the physiological effects of αz-agonists related to
the clinical use of medetomidine in small animal practice, Car Vet f 44:
885-897,2003.
38. Tranquilli WJ, Maze M: Clinical pharmacology and use of αz-agonists in
veterinary anesthesia, Anaesthetic Pharmacology Review 1(3):297-309, 1993.
39. Thurman JC, Tranquilli WJ、 Benson GJ: Preanesthetics and anesthetic
adjuncts. In Thurman JC, Tranquilli W], Benson GJ,editors: Lumb & fones
veterinary anesthesia, ed 3, Baltimore,1996,Williams & Wilkins.
230PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
40. Pypendop B, Verstegen JP: Hemodynamic effects of medetomidine in the
dog: a dose titration study, Vet Surg 27:612-622, 1998.
41. Vainio O: Introduction to the clinical pharmacology of medetomidine, Acta
Vet Scand Suppl 85:85-88, 1989.
42. Maugeri S, Ferre JP, Intorre L et al: Effects of medetomidine on intestinal
and colonic motility in the dog, / Vet Pharmacol Ther 17(2): 148-154, 1994.
43. Saleh N, Aoki M, Shimada T et al: Renal effects of medetomidine in
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs with special reference to its diuretic action,
fVet MedSci67(5):461-465,2005.
44. Grimm JB, Grimm KA, Kneller SK et al: The effect of a combination of
medetomidine-butorphanol and medetomidine, butorphanol, atropine
on glomerular filtration rate in dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42(5):458-462,
2001.
45. Gellai M, Edwards RM: Mechanism of αz-adrenoceptor agonist-induced
diuresis,Am /Physiol 255:317-323,1988.
46. Ambrisko TD, Hikasa Y: Neurohormonal and metabolic effectsofmedetomidine
compared with xylazine in beagle dogs, Can f Vet Res 66:42-49, 2002.
47. Ambrisko TD, Hikasa Y,Sato K: Influence of medetomidine on stress-related
neurohormonal and metabolic effects caused by butorphanol, fentanyl, and
ketamine administration in dogs,Am f Vet Res 66(3):406-412, 2005.
48. Wheaton LG, Benson GJ, Tranquilli WJ et al: The oxytocic effect of xylazine
on the canine uterus, Theriogenology 31(4):911-915, 1989.
49. Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, Chapman PL et al: Cardiopulmonary effects of
xylazine and acepromazine in pregnant cows in late gestation, Arm J Vet Res
63(12):1695-1699, 2002.
50. Schatzmann U, Jossfck H, Stauffer JL et al: Effects of alpha 2-agonists on
romifdine and xylazine,Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 41(7):523-529, 1994.
51. Hsu WH, Lee P, Betts DM: Xylazine-induced mydriasis in rats and its
antagonism by alpha-adrenergic blocking agents, J Vet Pharmacol Ther
4(2):97-101, 1981.
52. Hsu WH,Betts DM,Lee P: Xylazine-induced mydriasis: possible involvement
of a central postsynaptic regulation of parasympathetic tone, / Vet Pharmacol
Ther 4(3):209-214, 1981.
12
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
KHURSHEED RMAMA
●Local anesthetics reversibly block transmission of nerve endings or
fibers.
● Autonomic nervous system blockade, anesthesia (analgesia), and/or
muscle paralysis may result.
●A basic understanding of nerve physiology and drug pharmacology
facilitates the appropriate clinical use of local anesthetics.
PERIPHERAL NERVE ANATOMY
NERVEFIBERCLASSIFICATION
● Size and myelination
● Specific associated functions
PERIPHERALNERVES
● Peripheral nerves are individual nerve fbers or axons grouped together
as fascicles within an outer sheath.
● Peripheral nerves may be myelinated or nonmyelinated.
· Schwann cells form multiple myelin layers around each axon
of myelinated nerves and only a single membrane layer around
nonmyelinated axonal fibers.
● In nonmyelinated nerves, ion channels supporting propagation of
the action potential are distributed all along the axon. In myelinated
nerves, these ion channels are concentrated at the nodes of Ranvier,
which are periodic interruptions in the myelin sheath.
231
232
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
PHYSIOLOGY OF NERVE CONDUCTION
ACTIONPOTENTIALS
Nerve signals are conducted by action potentials, which are rapid changes
in the electrical gradients across the nerve membrane.!
● Depolarization is due to the rapid inward passage of sodium ions from
the extracellular to the intracellular space via sodium channels in the
nerve membrane.
· Repolarization results from the outward flow of potassium ions and
resets the nerve membrane potential to resting conditions.
· The action potential moves along the unmyelinated nerve fibel
(conduction of the impulse) until it reaches the end of the fiber. In
myelinated nerves, the impulse jumps from one node of Ranvier to the
next (saltatory conduction).
SITEOFLOCALANESTHETICACTION
● Local anesthetics inhibit the generation and propagation (conduction) of
nerve impulses by blockage of sodium channels in the nerve membrane.
● The most prominent hypothesis is that the anesthetic enters the
lipoprotein membrane and binds to a receptor site in the sodium
channel to impede or prevent sodium ion movement. Sodium-
generated currents are reduced because the drug inhibits channel
conformational changes, and thus drug-bound channels fail to open.
This slows the rate of depolarization of the membrane, preventing
attainment ofthe threshold potential of the membrane.
To a lesser extent, movement through the channelis prevented beca use
ofthe physical blockade ofthe ion-conducting pore by the bound drug.
A sodium channel that is inhibited by a local anesthetic is functionally
similar to an inactivated channel. If the sodium movement is blocked
over a critical length ofthe nerve, propagation across the blocked area
is not possible.2,3
DIFFERENTIALNERVEBLOCK
● Because of size and presence or absence of myelination, nerve
fibers differ substantially in their susceptibility to local anesthetic
blockade. Myelinated fibers are blocked before unmyelinated
fibers of the same diameter. Smaller fibers with higher firing rates
( )  aag a  (    a  
fibers.
CHAPTER 12 +Local Anesthetics
233
BOX 12-1
Priority of Local Anesthetic Blockade
1. Pain
2. Warmth
3.Touch
4. Deep pressure
5. Motor function
· Although individual variation occurs, the disappearance of nervous
function in response to local anesthetic blockade, in order of first to
last, is generally pain, warmth, touch, deep pressure, and finally motor
function. Such variation in neural sensitivity to local anesthetics has
made it possible clinically to block sensory transmission in patients
without accompanying motor paralysis (differential nerve block;
Box 12-1).
 r    r  i si s
trunks where motor nerves are more circumferentially located
and hence exposed to the local anesthetic agent first, allowing for
motor blockade to occur before sensory blockade. Also important
to remember is that in general, the mantle of the peripheral nerve
trunk contains sensory innervation to the proximal aspect of an
extremity, whereas the core contains distal sensory innervation.
Thus, anesthesia develops proximally before distal areas become
desensitized.
PHARMACOLOGY
CHEMICALSTRUCTURE
· The typical local anesthetic molecule consists of an unsaturated
aromatic grouplinked by an intermediate chain to a tertiary amine
end.
· The clinically important local anesthetics are divided into two distinct
chemical groups based on their intermediate chain.
● Aminoamides (e.g-, lidocaine and bupivacaine) have an amide link
between the aromatic and amine ends, and aminoesters (e.g-, procaine
and benzocaine) have an ester link.
● These linkages, in large part, determine drug disposition within the
body. Drug actions are also influenced by chemical substitutions at
the aromatic or amine end of the basic molecule and are discussed in
the following section (Table 12-1).
234
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Physicochemical Properties of Selected Local
TABLE 12-1
Anesthetic Agents
Drug
pKa
Protein
Lipid Solubility
Binding (%)
ESTERS
Procaine
8.9
6
0.6
Tetracaine
8.5
76
80
AMIDES
Lidocaine
7.8
70
2.9
Mepivacaine
7.6
77
1
Bupivacaine
8.1
95
28
Rupivacaine
8.1
94
Less than
 bupivacaine
pK, Negative logarithm of the acid ionization constant.
STRUCTURE-ACTIVITYRELATIONSHIPS
Lipophilic-Hydrophilic Balance
The aromatic portion of a local anesthetic is considered relatively
lipophilic. Alkyl substitution at the aromatic region or amine end of the
basic local anesthetic molecule also imparts lipophilic characteristics to
the molecule that in turn affect the tendency of a compound to associate
with membrane lipids. A longer duration of action and increased
anesthetic potency are correlated with increased lipid solubility.
Hydrogen fon Concentration
Local anesthetics are weak bases with negative logarithm of the acid
ionization constant (pKa) values in the range of 8 to 9. Thus the
predominant form of the compound in solution at physiologic pH
is the ionized or cationic form. Although this form is important for
local anesthetic activity at the receptor site, it is the uncharged base
that is important for rapid penetration and diffusion through biologic
mem branes. Thus the amount of drug in the base form at physiologic
pH strongly influences the onset of drug action and the potency of
the drug.
Protein Binding
The tertiary amine is considered relatively hydrophilic and bears some
positive charge in the physiologic pH range. The degree of ionization has
been positively correlated to protein binding, and in general, the greater
the protein binding, the longer the duration of action.
CHAPTER 12 +Local Anesthetics235
Chirality
two distinctspatialarrangements (mirror images), despite having the same
physicochemical properties. Pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
actions vary as a result of these differences in structure.
DRUG DISPOSITION
Local anesthetic agents are usually injected into a localized area of the
body to block specific nerves or areas. The absorption of drug from the
injection site, distribution within the body, and excretion from the body
are of primary importa nce in determining the systemic disposition of the
drug and potential for side effects.
Absorption
The rate of systemic absorption of local anesthetic agents is inversely
related to the duration of effect at the site of action. In addition to
drug physicochemical and pharmacologic properties, drug dose, site of
injection, and use of a vasoconstrictor influence drug absorption
● The effect on systemic absorption of a change in volume or concentration
(at a constant dose) of local anesthetic is variable and generally not
significant, but if the overall dose is increased, a higher systemic peak
drug concentration is likely.
● The site of injection also significantly influences the peak drug
        n s
levels of drug than if injected into tissue with less blood flow.
Epinephrine (a vasoconstrictor) tends to reduce systemic absorption
by reducing local blood flow. This effect may vary depending on the
nature ofthe local anesthetic (i.e., concurrent use ofa vasoconstrictor
such as epinephrine reduces the peak blood levels of the shorter-
acting drugs but has a less pronounced effect on the more lipophilic
and longer-acting agents).
Distribution
● Because of rapid breakdown by plasma pseudocholinesterase and the
resulting short plasma half-life, distribution of ester anesthetics in
body tissue is limited.
● Conversely, amide local anesthetic agents are widely distributed in the
body after an intravenous bolus injection; a two- or three-compartment
model usually describes their pharmacokinetic properties.
236
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
● Distribution of an amide-type local anesthetic, in particular, may be
further influenced by anatomic and pathophysiologic factors.
1. Hypercapnia and resulting acidosis in the central nervous system
(CNS) likely increase regional blood flow and as a result increase
local anesthetic concentrations in the brain and increase the risk of
toxicity.
2. Conversely, drug reaching the systemic circulation may be reduced
in some circumstances because the lungs are capable ofextracting at
least some amide local anesthetics.4 Protein binding may influence
the free drug available for activity and clearance by the liver and is
inversely related to toxic pla sma concentrations.
Biotransformation and Excretion
A major difference between the aminoamides and aminoesters is the
pattern of metabolism. This has implications for clinical usefulness and
observed toxicity for the two classes of compounds.
· The principal metabolic pathway of local anesthetics with ester
cholinesterases. The rate of plasma hydrolysis varies (chloroprocaine
> procaine > tetracaine) and is inversely related to toxicity.
1. Pregnancy reduces plasma cholinesterase activity and might
prolong the clearance of the ester anesthetics and increase the
potential for toxicity.
2. Because of the lack of significant pseudocholinesterase activity
in the cerebrospinal fluid, subarachnoid administration of ester
anesthetics results in a clinical effect until the drug is systemically
absorbed.
3. Products of hydrolysis can be directly excreted by the kidneys, but
more commonly, they undergo metabolic transformation.
4. Para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) is a breakdown product of the
esters responsible for allergic reactions in some human patients.
5. Cocaine is an atypical ester in that it undergoes significant hepatic
metabolism and urinary excretion.
· Amide local anesthetics are metabolized primarily in the liver.
The order of clearance of amides is as follows: prilocaine (most
bupivacaine (least rapid).
1. A common pathway in biotransformation ofamidelocal anesthetics
is dealkylation of the parent compound to an intermediate
compound. This occurs primarily in the hepatic microsomes.
2. Generally, this intermediate compound is hydrolyzed and excreted
in the urine, but further conjugation (e.g-, with glucuronide) before
CHAPTER 12 + Local Anesthetics  237
excretion is sometimes necessary. Toxicity could occur in species
(e.g-, cat) that have a limited ability to perform this step.
3. Metabolism of certain compounds may also directly result in
toxicity, as in the case of prilocaine, which is metabolized to
o-toluidine, a compound capable of oxidizing hemoglobin to
methemoglobin.
  s         s 
induced with hypotension during regional or general anesthesia and
in certain disease states) prolong the clearance of the local anesthetic
drugs from the body and may increase the potential for side effects.
FACTORSINFLUENCING ANESTHETIC
ACTIVITY
In addition to the chemical structure and physicochemical properties of
local anesthetics that influence anesthetic potency, differential sensitivity,
and onset and duration of anesthetic action, a number of other drug and
patient factors are worthy of consideration. These factors include dose, site
of injection, addition of hyaluronidase or vasoconstrictors to the injectate,
carbonation and pH adjustment, influence of varying baricity, mixture of
 local anesthetics, and the influence of physiologic states such as pregnancy.
DOSEOFANESTHETICAGENT
A more rapid anesthetic onset is facilitated by use of a greater volume
of anesthetic or a more concentrated solution because this increases
the number of agent molecules in the region of the nerve. When a local
anesthetic is injected in the epidural or intrathecal space, increased
volume of the solution also influences the cranial spread of the agent.
SITE OF INJECTION
The shortest duration of action is usually seen after intrathecal administra
tion, and the longest duration, after peripheral nerve blocks (e.g., brachial
plexus and sciatic). This is generally independent of the agent used.
USEOFHYALURONIDASE
the diffusion oflocal anesthetic agents to the site of action (e.g- peripheral
 )        
toxicity) and is currently not believed to be cost-effective.
238
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
USEOFVASOCONSTRICTORS
In vivo, the duration of action is influenced not only bythe intrinsic action
of the drug on nerves but also by the action on local blood vessels. At low
concentrations, local anesthetics tend to cause vasoconstriction, whereas
in clinical doses, vasodilation is usually present. Thus the duration of
block may be shorter in vivo than that determined in vitro. Addition of a
vasoconstrictor to the local anesthetic solution decreases local perfusion,
delays the rate of vascular absorption of local anesthetic, and therefore
prolongs anesthetic action. Epinephrine (5 pg/ml or 1:200,000) is the
agent most commonly added to the local anesthetic. Phenylephrine and
norepinephrine have no substantial clinical advantage over epinephrine.
Lack of clinical benefit from the addition of epinephrine may be related
to the low pH of the epinephrine preparation; this potentially decreases
available free base for diffusion, thius delaying the onset of the local
anesthetic block (Box 12-2).
CARBONATIONAND pH ADJUSTMENT
In the isolated nerve preparation, addition of bicarbonate to the local
anesthetic solution results in a more rapid onset of nerve blockade and at
a reduced anesthetic concentration. This effect is likely due to an increase
in the amount of drug in the uncharged base form. Controversy exists
concerning the merits of this practice under clinical conditions.
BARICITY
Varying the baricity of local anesthetic solutions may influence the
spread within the spinal cord. Hypobaric solutions (i.e., those with
a specific gravity less than that of cerebrospinal fluid [CSF]) tend to
migrate to nondependent areas, whereas hyperbaric solutions (i.e., those
with a specific gravity greater than that of CsF) migrate from the site of
injection to dependent areas. Baricity of a specific drug may vary with
drug concentration or as a result of additives.
B0X 12-2
Effect of Addition of Epinephrine
Addition of epinephrine to lidocaine and bupivacaine delays local anesthetic absorption
and prolongs anesthetic action.
Hyaluronidase is thought to enhance the diffusion of local anesthetic agents to the site
of action
CHAPTER 12 +Local Anesthetics239
MIXTURES OF LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Although the clinical practice of mixing local anesthetics to enhance
onset and prolong the duration of neural blockade is sometimes
useful, it is not universally effective. Potentially beneficial effects are
likely negated by drug interactions. For example, in isolated nerve
studies, it has been suggested that when chloroprocaine (short onset
and duration) and bupivacaine (long onset and duration) are mixed,
metabolites of chloroprocaine may inhibit the binding of bupivacaine
to receptor sites. Thus at present, mixing of local anesthetics remains
controversial.
PREGNANCY
Duration of the ester local anesthetics may be prolonged in
pregnant patients because plasma cholinesterase activity is
reduced. The spread and depth of an epidural or spinal local
Mechanical factors (smaller epidural space) and hormonal changes
(elevations in progesterone levels) associated with pregnancy have
been implicated. Therefore, it is generally recommended that the
dose of spinal or epidural local anesthetics be reduced during
pregnancy.
TOXICITY
When administered at an appropriate dose, local anesthetic agents are
relatively free of harmful side effects. Most potentially harmful reactions
occur after accidental intravenous (IV) administration or following
vascular absorption of large amounts of anesthetic affter regional
administration.
SYSTEMICTOXICITY
Centra! Nervous System
●Low systemic doses of local anesthetic administered to awake,
unmedicated human beings are reported to cause numbness
of the tongue and oral cavity. Low systemic doses also likely
contribute to reduced anesthetic requirement during general
anesthesia.5-7 As the plasma concentration of the drug increases,
local anesthetics produce a predictable pattern of CNS excitement
    q   os e 
cardiovascular collapse.
240
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
B0X 12-3
Caution with Injections
Afways aspirate before injection. Bupivacaine can cause cardiac dysrhythmias and ven-
tricular fibrillation if injected intravenously.
· Plasma concentrations producing the various phases of
overdose are drug-related (and perhaps species-related). For
example, in cats, procaine is least potent in terms of CNS effects
(convulsions at about 35 mg/kg), and bupivacaine is one of the
 (  o   s)  
dogs, the relative CNS toxicity of bupivacaine, etidocaine, and
lidocaine is 4:2:1.9
Cardiovascular System
Local anesthetics can produce direct effects on the heart and peripheral
vascular smooth muscle and indirect effects through influence on
autonomic nervous activity.
       i  
   n       n
cardiac output. Bupivacaine and etidocaine may produce severe
cardiac dysrhythmias, including ventricular fibrillationl0,1l
(Box 12-3)
● The effect of local anesthetics on peripheral vascular smooth muscle
may be biphasic. When low concentrations are used, constriction
may occur, especially in the pulmonary circulation, resulting in
usual clinical response, especially with increasing concentrations, is
relaxation resulting in vasodilation.
● The vasodilation and the decrease in cardiac output result in arterial
hypotension. When a local anesthetic is administered via the
epidural or intrathecal route, cardiovascular collapse may be further
exacerbated by sympathetic nervous system blockade as the agent
spreads cranially.
LOCAL TOXICITY
Neural Toxicity
Although local anesthetics are rarely neurotoxic at clinically administered
concentrations, irreversible conduction blockade in isolated nerves has
epidural or subarachnoid administration of chloroprocaine are now
CHAPTER 12 +Local Anesthetics241
believed to be related to the antioxidant sodium bisulfite and not the
parent drug itself.
Skeletal Muscle Toxicity
When properly used, local anesthetics rarely produce localized tissue
damage. However, some reports indicate that even when clinical doses
are used for local infiltration, skeletal muscle damage may be associated
with the longer-acting agents.12,13
OTHER EFFECTS
Methemoglobinemia
Methemoglobinemia has been reported to develop after exposure to a
number of local anesthetics, most notably prilocaine.14,15 Breakdown
products (e.g., o-toluidine) from the metabolism of the local anesthetic
are likely responsible.
Allergies
Although allergic-type reactions to the amide local anesthetics are rare,
it is possible for the aminoester local anesthetics such as procaine to
cause hypersensitivity or anaphylactic responses. PABA, a product of
ester metabolism, is most commonly implicated. Preservatives (e.g-,
methylparaben) contained in local anesthetic solutions may also result
in allergic reactions.
Addiction
Although cocaine is rarely used in veterinary medicine, abuse directly
(e.g-, by human beings with access to the compound) and indirectly
(e-g-, administration to horses as a stimulant before a race) are
possibilities.
CLINICAL APPLICATION OF LOCAL
ANESTHETICS
Local anesthetics are most often used to produce regional anesthesia
and analgesia (Table 12-2). Regional anesthesia is a term loosely used
to refer to a variety of applications of local anesthetics for anesthetic
purposes. The term implies that a region of the body is affected as
opposed to the entire body as with general anesthesia. The region
affected may be limited or broad. In terms of organization, regional
anesthesia includes the following subcategories. These subcategories
are discussed in depth in Chapter 15:
242
PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Clinical Attributes of Selected Local
TABLE 12-2
Anesthetic Agents
Drug
Onset
Duration
Main Clinical Uses
(Minutes)
ESTERS
Procaine
Slow
45-60
Local and perineural infitration
Tetracaine 
Slow
60-180
 Topical application
AMIDES
Lidocaine
Rapid
60-120
Local and perineural infiltration;
intravenous regional, epidural,
and subarachnoid administration
Mepivacaine
 htermediate
90-180
 Local and perineural infitration
 Bupivacaine 
 htermediate 
180-480
 Local and perineural infitration;
epidural and subarachnoid
 administration
Ropivacaine
htermediate
180-480
Local and perineural infitration; 
epidural and subarachnoid
administration
●Topical anesthesia
● Local infiltration
● Peripheral nerve block
● Intraarticular administration
● IV block
●Epidural block
● Spinal (subarachnoid) block
Local anesthetics may also be used to supplement actions of IV and
inhalation anesthetics, to treat neuropathic pain, or to prevent or treat
cardiac dysrhythmias. In rare cases, lidocaine may be administered in
low doses to suppress grand mal seizures and to prevent or treat increases
in intracranial pressure.
LOCAL ANESTHETIC AGENTS
AMINO-ESTERLOCALANESTHETICS
ProcaineHydrochloride
● Procaine hydrochloride is a weak organic base, with a pKa of 8.9.
Procaine is noniritant and promptly effective when injected
subcutaneously. Procaine provides a relatively brief period of
anesthesia (45 to 60 minutes), which may be prolonged by addition
of a vasoconstrictor.
CHAPTER 12 + Local Anesthetics243
● The drug is rapidly hydrolyzed, in plasma (but not CSF) by nonspecific
pseudocholinesterases. The plasma half-life is about 25 minutes.l16 The
kidneys excrete procaine and PABA, a product of procaine degradation.
· Procaine is used in veterinary medicine for infiltration and nerve block.
A concentration of 1% is used for small patients, and 2% is preferable
for larger animals. Procaine is rarely used for surface anesthesia
because it is not very effective with this route of administration.
Tetracaine Hydrochloride
· Tetracaine is 8 times as potent as procaine and has a pKa of 8.5.
Although the onset of drug action is slow, it is rapidly absorbed from
mucosal surfaces to which it is applied. The duration of effect is
intermediate (60 to 180 minutes).
● Because of rapid absorption and slower metabolism (than that
          
potential for systemic toxicity.
· Tetracaine is used to provide topical anesthesia of the eye, nose, and
throat and for spinal anesthesia when sensory and motor blockade
are desired. Tetracaine is a component of the topical local anesthetic
mixture Cetacaine. Recenly, a patch application system and a gel
preparation have been evaluated as percutaneous analgesia with
favorable results.17
Benzocaine
● Benzocaine is structurally similar to procaine except that it lacks a
terminal diethyl amino group. Benzocaine is available as a dusting
powder or as oil in an ointment for surface application.
it is metabolized to PABA and acetyl PABA. Benzocaine has been
which may limit its widespread use in clinical practice.
● Benzocaine has been used to varying degrees in dentistry to provide
anesthesia of the gums and buccal mucosa and for cutaneous analgesia.
The low solubility of benzocaine allows it to remain localized in wounds
to provide long-term pain relief. Benzocaine is also a component (as is
tetracaine) in a topicallocal anesthetic mixture known as Cetacaine, which
is commonly used as a spray to anesthetize the larynx before intubation.
Proparacaine Hydrochloride
cross-sensitivity.
244
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
· Unlike some topical anesthetics, it produces little or no tissue
instillation into the human eye, it is widely used as an ophthalmic
anesthetic.
AMINO-AMIDELOCALANESTHETICS
Lidocaine Hydrochloride
      s   o   
anesthetics in veterinary medicine. The compound has a pKa of 7.9 and
is considered twice as potent as procaine. The clinical use of lidocaine
is associated with a rapid onset of action and short (60 to 120 minutes)
duration of effect. Lidocaine is available as a sterile aqueous solution
gel preparation in concentrations of 2.5% to 5%.
● Lidocaine is quickly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and
after injection.19 The kinetics and oral absorption rate of lidocaine
have been determined in the dog; 78% of the administered dose
reaches the general circulation.20 Emesis occurs regularly at 2l/ hours
after administration. Mexiletine is an inexpensive and orally active
lidocaine analog that has been used for treatment of ventricular ectopy
has not been evaluated in the dog,it warrants consideration especially
for neuropathic pain where local anesthetics have been shown to have
efficacy. Gastrointestinal side effects include progressive inappetence
and anorexia.
● The rate of systemic absorption after parenteral administration is
slowed, and the duration of action is prolonged when lidocaine is used
with a vasoconstrictor. Lidocaine is metabolized in the liver by mixed-
function oxidases at a rate nearly as rapid as that for procaine. The
metabolites and 10% to 20% of the unchanged form are excreted in
urine of the dog.
· Lidocaine is used for all forms of local anesthesia. The transdermal
(Lidoderm patch) administration of lidocaine produces local tissue
enough to produce clinically effective local analgesia for periods of up
to 24 hours without complete sensory block. The patches have been
used to provide analgesia for skin abrasions, lacerations, and severe
local skin irritation and itching (hot spots). The patch is supplied as a
10 × 14-cm adhesive bandage that may be cut into smaller sizes with a
scissors before removing the protective drug release liner. Care should
be taken to avoid contact with the attendant's skin or eyes to prevent
numbing of the fingers or irritation, respectively.
CHAPTER 12+Local Anesthetics
245
· A rapidly acting lidocaine cream, LMX 5 (anorectal cream),
containing 5% lidocaine is also available for producing fast-acting
local analgesic effects. LMX 5 can be used to relieve pain caused by
minor cuts, minor burns, abrasions, sunburn, and minor surgical
sites. Lidocaine preparations are also commonly used to numb the
skin before performing minor surgery, insertion of IV lines, obtaining
blood specimens, and other such procedures. LMX 5 should only be
used externally.
· In addition to its use as a local anesthetic, lidocaine is used IV as an
antidysrhythmic agent and also as a supplement to general anesthesia
(25 to 50 μg/kg per minute). Lidocaine decreases the requirement for
inhalation and injectable anesthetics.5-7,21
Prilocaine Hydrochloride
Prilocaine hydrochloride has pharmacologic properties resembling those
of lidocaine. However, it causes significantly less vasodilation and hence
may be used without the addition of epinephrine to prolong the duration
of effect. Prilocaine is also reported to be the least toxic of the amide local
anesthetics and thus best suited for IV anesthesia. Methemoglobinemia
is a side effect of overdose and accounts for its declining use, especially
for human patients.
EutecticMixtureofLidocaineandPrilocaine
● Eutectic mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine (EMLA), a l:1 mixture of
lidocaine and prilocaine, is available commercially for transcutaneous
compounds are mixed, oil is formed at temperatures higher than
18°C.22This eutectic mixtureis commercially availableina preparation
containing arlacton as an emulsifier and carbapol as a thickening
agent. Each gram (or milliliter) contains 25 mg of lidocaine and 25 mg
of prilocaine. The reported bioavailability is 3% for lidocaine and 5%
for prilocaine.23 This may, however, vary with the site of application,
skin pigmentation, and condition.
● The toxicity of EMLA is related primarily to the metabolism of
prilocaine to o-toluidine, which can result in methemoglobinemia.
Blanching or hyperemia may be noted in the area of application after
removal of the occlusive bandage and is likely due to the relative
vasoactivity of the two compounds.
· EMLA has been evaluated as a percutaneous analgesic before
venipuncture in dogs, cats, rabbits, and rats.24 The efficacy of EMLA
after a 60-minute application was good in dogs, cats, and rabbits but
questionable in study rats.
246
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Mepivacaine Hydrochloride
· The pharmacologic properties of mepivacaine hydrochloride are
similar to those of lidocaine. Although actual potency figures vary,
mepivacaine is about equal (or slightly less) in local anesthetic potency
to lidocaine. Mepivacaine has a slightly longer duration (90 to 180
minutes) of action, likely because of less intrinsic vasodilator activity
compared with lidocaine.
· Although the use of mepivacaine in clinical practice is similar to that
of lidocaine, mepivacaine is not recommended for obstetric anesthesia
because its actions are greatly prolonged in the fetus. In the adult, the
toxicity of mepivacaine is about 1.5 to 2 times that of procaine but
slightly less than that of lidocaine.
Bupivacaine Hydrochloride
● Bupivacaine is a long-acting local anesthetic chemically related to
mepivacaine and about 4 times more potent than lidocaine. The onset
of action is slow to intermediate, and the duration of action ranges
from 3 to 10 hours.
· Bupivacaine is most commonly used for regional and epidural nerve
blocks and was the first local anesthetic agent to show significant
separation of sensory and motor blockade, making it the drug of
choice for obstetric anesthesia. CNS and cardiac toxicity result from
lower doses and blood levels than those reported for lidocaine.
· Because of the cardiac toxicity associated with bupivacaine,
levobupivacaine, the S-enantiomer was developed for clinical use.
Previous studies of isomers of local anesthetics suggested that the
systemic toxicity of the S-isomer of various compounds may be less
than that of racemic preparations. Although there is no difference in
the efficacy of two compounds, the lethal dose of levobupivacaine has
been shown to be 1.3 to 1.6 times that of bupivacaine, and hence this
 product may offer a clinical advantage.
Ropivacaine Hydrochloride
● Ropivacaine, another long-acting aminoamide local anesthetic, is
structurally related to mepivacaine and bupivacaine but as with
levobupivacaine is an S-isomer, whereas the other agents are racemic
mixtures. The physiochemical properties of ropivacaine are similar
to those of bupivacaine with the exception of its lipid solubility
(ropivacaine is substantiallyless lipid soluble).25 At low concentrations,
ropivacaine has intrinsic vasoconstricting properties, whereas higher
concentrations result in vasodilation.
CHAPTER 12 + Local Anesthetics  247
 n q o r  e   si o 
be less potent. Reports indicate that the motor block after epidural
administration is less dense and of a shorter duration than for
bupivacaine. This, along with the reduced cardiotoxic potential
of ropivacaine compared with bupivacaine, offers advantages for
clinical use when differential blockade is desired.26,27 Ropivacaine
also reportedly caused fewer CNS symptoms in human volunteers
and was at least 25% less toxic than bupivacaine in regard to the dose
tolerated.28,29
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Portions of this chapter are reproduced with modification with permission from
Mama KR, Steffey EP: Local anesthetics. In Richard AH, editor: Veterinary
pharmacology and therapeutics,ed 8、Ames、2oo1,Iowa State University
Press.
REFERENCES
1. Guyton AC, Hall JE: Textbook of medical physiology, ed 9, Philadelphia, 1996,
WB Saunders.
2. Butterworth JF, Strichartz GR: Molecular mechanisms of local anesthesia: a
review, Anesthesiology 72:711-734, 1990.
3. Strichartz GR, Berde CB: Local anesthetics. In Miller RD, editor: Anesthesin,
ed 4, New York, 1994, Churchill Livingstone.
4. Tucker GT: Pharmacokinetics oflocal anesthetics, Br f Anaesth 58:717-731,
1986.
 5. Himes RS Jr, DiFazio CA, Burmey RC: Efects of lidocaine on the anesthetic
requirements of nitrous oxide and halothane, Anesthesiology 47:437-440,
1977.
 6. Himes RS Jr, Munson ES, Embro WJ: Enflurane requirement and ventilatory
response to carbon dioxide during lidocaine infusion in dogs, Anesthesiology
51:131-134, 1979.
7. Doherty TJ、 Frazier DL: Effect of intravenous lidocaine on halothane
minimum alveolar concentration in ponies, Equine Vet J 30:300-303, 1998.
8. Englesson S: The influence of acid-base changes on central nervous system
toxicity of local anesthetic agents. I. An experimental study in cats, Acta
AnaesthesiolScand18:79-87,1974.
9. Liu PL, Feldman HS Giasi R et al: Comparative CNS toxicity of lidocaine,
etidocaine, bupivacaine and tetracaine in awake dogs following rapid IV
administration,Anesth Anaig 62:375-379, 1983.
10. Kotelko DM, Shnider SM, Dailey PA et al: Bupivacaine-induced cardiac
arrhythmias in sheep, Aresthesiofogy 60:10-19, 1984.
11. Bruelle P, Lefrant J-Y, de La CoussayeJE et al: Comparative electrophysi-
ologic and hemodynamic effects of several amide local anesthetic drugs in
anesthetized dogs, Anesth Analg 82:648-656, 1996.
12. Basson MD, Carlson BM: Myotoxicity of single and repeated injections of
mepivacaine (Carbocaine) in the rat, Anesth Anaig 59:275-282, 1980.
248PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
13. Benoit PW, Belt WD: Destruction and regeneration of skeletal muscle after
treatment with a local anesthetic, bupivacaine (Marcaine)、 ∫ Arat 107:547,
1970.
14. Ferraro L, Zeichner SGG, Groeger JS: Cetacaine-induced acute methemo-
globinemia,Anesthesiology 69:614-616,1988.
HCl. In Grandy J, Hildebrand S, McDonell W et al, editors: Proceedings of
the second Intermational Congress of Veterinary Anesthesia, Santa Barbara,
1985, Veterinary Practice Publishing.
16. Tobin T, Blake JW, Tai CY et al: Pharmacology of procaine in the horse: a
preliminary report, Am f Vet Res 37:1107-1110, 1976.
17. McCafferty DF, Woolfson AD: New patch delivery system for percutaneous
local anaesthesia,Br ∫ Araesth 71:370-374, 1993.
18. Ritchie JM, Greene NM: Local anesthetics. In Goodman AG, Goodman
LS,Gilman A,editors: The pharmacological basis of therapeutics,ed 8,
New York, 1990, Pergamon Press.
19. Keenaghan JB, Boyes RN: The tissue distribution, metabolism and excretion
of lidocaine in rats, guinea pigs, dogs and man, J Pharmacol Exp Ther
180:454-463, 1972.
20. Boyes RN, Adams HJ, Duce BR: Oral absorption and deposition kinetics of
lidocaine hydrochloride in dogs, J Pharmacol Exp Ther 174:1-8, 1970.
21. Kissin I, McGee T: Hypnotic effect of thiopental-lidocaine combination in
the rat, Anesthesiofogy 57:311-313,1982.
22. Brodin A, Nyqvist-Mayer A, Wadsten T et al: Phase diagram and aqueous
solubility of the lidocaine-prilocaine binary system, / Pharm Sci 73:481-484,
1984.
23. Klein J、 Fernandes D, Gazarian M et al: Simultaneous determination of
lidocaine, prilocaine and the prilocaine metabolite o-toluidine in plasma by
high-performance liquid chromatography,J Chromatogr B Biomed Sci Appl
655:83-88, 1994.
24. Flecknell PA, Liles JH, Williamson HA: The use oflidocaine-prilocaine local
anesthetic cream for pain-free venepuncture in laboratory animals, Lab
Anim 24:142-146, 1990.
25. Rosenberg PH, Heinonen E: Differential sensitivity of A and C nerve fibres
to long-acting amide local anaesthetics, Br J Anaesth 55: 163-167, 1983.
26. Feldman H, Arthur G, Covino B: Comparative systemic toxicity of convulsant
and supraconvulsant doses of intravenous ropivacaine, bupivacaine, and
lidocaine in the conscious dog, Anesth Analg 69:794-801, 1989.
27. Reiz S, Haggmark S, Johansson G, Nath S: Cardiotoxicity of ropivacaine: a
new amide local anaesthetic agent, Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 33:93-98, 1989.
28. Scott DB, Lee A, Fagan D et al: Acute toxicity of ropivacaine compared with
that of bupivacaine, Anesth Anaig 69:563-569, 1989.
29. Wolfe TM, Muir WW: Local anesthetics: pharmacology and novel applica
tions,Compendium 25:916-927、2003.
13
GLUCOCORTICOIDS
MARY O. SMITH
 lucocorticoids can play a significant role in pain control under
-specific sets of circumstances. An understanding of how the
 varying members of this group differ from each other is impor-
tant so that an individual drug can be used appropriately and safely.
PROTOTYPE1,2
● Cortisol is the major endogenous glucocorticoid in most mammals.
● Cortisol is synthesized from cholesterol in the adrenal gland (zona
fasciculata and zona reticularis).
corticotropin, which is secreted by the pituitary gland.
● Corticotropin secretion is controlled by the hypothalamus through
the action of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH).
● CRH is secreted in response to physiological stress (see Chapter 3).
● Negative feedback control exists at the pituitary and hypothalamic
levels.
● Some studies suggest that there are diurnal variations in circulating
cortisol levels in animals, whereas others do not support this.34
● Plasma cortisol is greater than 90% protein-bound:
● Most is bound to cortisol-binding protein synthesized by the liver.
· A small amount is loosely bound to albumin.
· Ten percent is free in plasma and physiologically active.
· Increased release of cortisol from the adrenal glands produces
higher levels of free cortisol in plasma and greater effects on target
cells.
· Circulating synthetic glucocorticoids are mostly bound to albumin.
· Most cortisol (>80%) is metabolized within and excreted by the
liver: reduction and conjugation to glucuronides and sulfates.
249
250PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
● The half-life of circulating cortisol is approximately 90 minutes
and is increased by stress, hypothyroidism, and hepatic disease.
EFFECTS
GLUCOCORTICOID RECEPTORS
1. Effects of glucocorticoids are mediated by a variety of glucocorticoid
receptors on target cells.
2. Binding to the glucocorticoid receptor induces conformational
changes in the receptor.
cell nucleus, where it binds to glucocorticoid receptor elements, alter
ing the regulation of gene transcription.
4. The precise effect of the hormone within the target cell depends on the
type of receptor to which it binds and the target gene for that receptor.
5. A large number of different glucocorticoid receptors exist.
 6. Target gene expression varies among cell types.
 7. Both of these factors contribute to the wide diversity of action of glu
cocorticoids within target cells.
 8. Activation of glucocorticoid receptors alters protein synthesis within
the cell.
· Adverse effects of glucocorticoid—Many of the effects of glucocor-
ticoids may be adverse when supraphysiologic doses are adminis
tered.
· Increased gluconeogenesis and glycogen synthesis occur.
· Increases in lipolysis and lipogenesis produce a net increase in body
fat.
· Catabolism of fat, muscle, skin, bone, lymphoid tissue, and connec-
tive tissue occurs.
administration is due to a reduction in inflammation.
MECHANISMS OF ACTION
· The main mechanism of the antinflammatory effects of glucocor-
ticoids is the inhibition of phospholipase A2, the precursor of
arachidonic acid.5
dins and leukotrienes.
· Prostaglandins and leukotrienes lower the nociceptive threshold,
and bradykinin.
CHAPTER 13 + Glucocorticoids  251
● Glucocorticoids reduce levels of cyclooxygenase enzymes in inflam-
matory cells, further inhibiting the production of prostaglandins.
· Glucocorticoids have significant effects on leukocyte activity and
distribution.
● Glucocorticoid administration induces neutrophilia and lymphopenia.
· Neutrophils are recruited from the bone marrow into the systemic
circulation.
● Migration of neutrophils from the vascular system into tissues is
decreased, thereby decreasing inflammation.
· Lymphocytes and other circulating leukocytes are recruited into
lymphoid tissues.
· Glucocorticoids inhibit the activity of lymphocytes and tissue mac-
rophages.
● Basal levels of endogenous glucocorticoids appear to be critical for
facilitating certain mechanisms of analgesia, such as those mediated
by endogenous opioids.6
EFFICACY AND USE
See Box 13-1.
Glucocorticoids are most commonly administered by systemic routes,
oral or injectable.
● Many indications for the use of this group of drugs exist, but only
painful conditions are discussed.
· Dosages used for the alleviation of pain should be those that suppress
inflammation and not those that are immunosuppressive.
● Shorter-acting drugs, such as prednisone, prednisolone, or methyl-
prednisolone, are preferred for systemic administration. These drugs
carry a lower risk of toxic side effects compared with drugs with long
half-lives and durations of action.
BOX 13-1
Common Uses of Glucocorticoids
Most glucocorticoid dosage regimens are empirical or have been extrapolated from use in
human beings. Common uses include the following:
● Intervertebral disk disease
●Intraarticular pain
● Lumbar pain via the epidural route
· Otitis externa
· Systemic inflammatory disease
252PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
INTERVERTEBRALDISKDISEASE
         p  
has been used successfully in combination with strict cage rest to treat
mild cases of intervertebral disk disease (pain only or pain and mild
paresis).7
● Successful treatment of animals with severe clinical signs (paraplegia)
has been reported, although surgery is preferred.8
● High-dose methylprednisolone sodium succinate treatment within 8
hours of spinal cord trauma (including acute disk extrusion), although
controversial, is widely used in dogs and cats. The main rationale for
this use is to reduce inflammation and improve neurologic function,
but some analgesic benefits may also be derived. A single dose of 30
mg/kg by slow intravenous injection (over 2 to 5 minutes) should be
followed by a constant infusion of 5.4 mg/kg per hour for 24 to 48
hours.9,10
SYSTEMICINFLAMMATORYDISEASES
● A variety of systemic infla mmatory diseases may cause pain. Examples
include polymyositis, masticatory myositis, polyarthritis, meningitis,
and systemic lupus erythematosus.
· Glucocorticoids are generally used at immunosuppressive doses
(e.g-, prednisone, 1.1 to 2.2 mg/kg twice daily) to treat these
diseases.
● Alleviation of pain is secondary to the main goal of glucocorticoid
therapy, which is to suppress the immune-mediated disorder that
underlies these diseases.
OTITIS EXTERNA11
· Topical or systemic use of glucocorticoids is often indicated for the
treatment of otitis externa to reduce inflammation and edema in the
ear. A decrease in pain is another beneficial effect.
● A wide variety of otic preparations that contain glucocorticoids
are available, including 0.1% dexamethasone, betamethasone, or
triamcinolone and 1.0% to 2.5% hydrocortisone. These drugs are
administered as sole constituents or in combination with other drugs
such as antibiotics.
● Oral prednisone or prednisolone may be indicated when inflammation
is severe, at an antinflammatory dose of 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg once or twice
daily.
CHAPTER13+Glucocorticoids253
INTRAARTICVLARADMINISTRATION
 The major route for intralesional use of glucocorticoids is intraarticular
+ Conflicting data exist on the effects of glucocorticoids on joint cartilage.
One study demonstrated minimal or even beneficial effects, whereas
others have demonstrated evidence of cartilage damage.12-15
● Methylprednisolone (20 to 40 mg) and, particularly, triamcinolone ( 1
to 3 mg) are the preferred drugs for intraarticular administration.16
PERINEURALINJECTION
● Injection of glucocorticoids around spinal nerve roots or peripheral
nerves has been shown to alleviate pain in persons with nerve root
disease or peripheral neuropathies.17
● This use hias not been described in veterinary medicine to date.
EPIDURALADMINISTRATION
as a conservative treatment for lumbar pain.
● The procedure is generally considered safe with minor temporary side
effects such as headache.18,19
● Effcacy is most likely due to reduction in nerve root and meningeal
infla mmation.20
● A recent study showed that wound irrigation with 20 or 40 mg of
triamcinolone substantially reduced postoperative pain in human
beings after lumbar spinal surgery.21
● Beneficial effects of epidural injection of betamethasone have been
demonstrated in a rat model of lumbar nerve root disease.22
● No recommendations or dosages for epidural glucocorticoid
administration have been developed for animals.
● Cervical epidural administration of a corticosteroid has a potential for
severe deleterious effects if the drug is accidentally administered into
the cervical spinal cord parenchyma.23
OTHER USES
● Methylprednisolone has been shown to be effective in controlling
cancer pain in human beings when added to 0.5% bupivacaine and
administered intrapleurally.24
human beings for the treatment of cancer pain or during spinal surgery.25,26
254
PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Characteristics of Glucocorticoids Commonly
TABLE 13-1
Used in Veterinary Medicine
Glucocorticoid
Relative
Duration of
Routes of
Antinflammatory
Action After
Administration
Effect
IV or Dral
Administration
(Hours)27
Hydrocortisone
1
<12
PO, V, IM
Prednisone
4
12-36
PO, v, IM, SC
 Prednisolone
5
12-36
PO, V, IM, SC
Methylprednisolone
5
12-36
PO, V, IM, SC
Triamcinolone
5
12-36 weeks
PO, IM, SC
Betamethasone
25-40
>48
PO, IM
Dexamethasone
30
>48
PO, V, IM, SC
Veterinary-approved products are not necessarily available.
PO, By mouth (per os); IV, intravenous injection; IM, intramuscular injection; SC,
subcutaneous injection.
RELEVANT PHARMACOLOGY
● Synthetic steroids are synthesized from bovine cholic acid or from
plant sapogenins.
●Metabolism and excretion of symthetic glucocorticoids occur primarily
within the liver and are similar to metabolism and excretion of
endogenous glucocorticoids.
●Synthetic glucocorticoids have stronger antinflammatory effects than
do endogenous glucocorticoids (Table 13-1).
● Synthetic glucocorticoids generally have longer half-lives than the
naturally occurring forms.
 Synthetic glucocorticoids have greater affinity for cellular glucocorti
coid receptors than do endogenous glucocorticoids.
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
See Box 13-2.
● Glucocorticoids have a high potential for diverse toxicities because of
their effects on almost every tissue in the body.
+ Toxicity depends on dose and treatment duration.
● Patient-dependent variations in toxicity also exist.
● Toxicity may result not only from systemic use of glucocorticoids but
 also from localized use (e.g-, ophthalmic, intraarticular, or topical).
CHAPTER13+Glucocorticoids
255
BOX13-2
Potential Adverse Effects of Glucocorticoid Therapy
●Delayed wound healing
● Effects on electrolyte and fluid balance
● Gastric ulceration
● Glaucoma and cataracts
●Hypoadrenocorti cism (Addison's disease)
● latrogenic bacterial and fungal infections
●latrogenic hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
●Immunosuppression
●Insulin resistance
●Neuropathy and myopathy
P   d    
antinflammatory agents).
 Some side effects are managed fairlyreadily (e.g-, polyphagia), whereas
others may be life-threatening (e.g-, gastric ulceration).
● Use of glucocorticoids may not slow progression ofthe primary disease
s ad a     iq a si an m s
and development of intercurrent disease.5
ATROGENICHYPERADRENOCORTICISM
[CUSHING'SSYNDROME】
● Administration of glucocorticoids for a medium-term or longer period
(weeks to months) often results in clinical signs that mimic Cushing's
syndrome, including polydipsia, polyuria, skin thinning, and hair loss.
HYPOADRENOCORTICISM(ADDISON'SDISEASE)
· Prolonged use of exogenous glucocorticoids produces atrophy of
the adrenal gland (zona fasciculata and zona reticularis), resulting
in the decreased production of endogenous glucocorticoids. Sudden
withdrawal of exogenous drugs may produce signs of adrenocortical
insufficiency.
NEUROPATHYANDMYOPATHY
● Signs of myopathy and neuropathy may develop, particularly with
chronic glucocorticoid use. Generalized weakness and muscle atrophy
are the major clinical signs.
256PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
POLYPHAGIA
· Increased appetite is a common side effect of glucocorticoid use and
   s    q  s
Obesity can develop when administration is prolonged for more than
a few days to weeks.
EFFECTS ONELECTROLYTEAND FLVIDBALANCE
· Glucocorticoids play a key role in the maintenance of normal fluid
balance and do have some mineralocorticoid activity. Glucocorticoids
promote polydipsia and polyuria as a result ofinhibition ofantidiuretic
hormone release. Glucocorticoid administration also results in
excretion of calcium and potassium, sodium and chloride retention,
and increased extracellular fluid volume. In rare cases, hypokalemia or
lypocalcemia may result from chronic administration.
GLAUCOMAANDCATARACTS
● Chronic use of glucocorticoids in the eye can result in the development
of glaucoma or cataracts.
GASTRICVLCERATION
 Glucocorticoids promote acid secretion inthe stomach and can resultin life-
threatening gastric and intestinal ulceration. Although experimental studies
have suggested that steroid administration alone does not usually cause
ulceration, other factors, such as stress, increased autonomic nervous system
activity, or the concurrent administration of drugs such as nonsteroidal
antinflammatory drugs may collaborate to cause ulceration.28
DELAYEDWOUNDHEALING
● Use of glucocorticoids can result in delayed wound healing-
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
· Prolonged administration of high doses of glucocorticoids can result
in immunosuppression and an increased susceptibility to infections in
almost any organ system.
· The antiinflammatory effects of glucocorticoids may mask the presence
of infections until they are severe.
CHAPTER13·Glucocorticoids257
● Glucocorticoids are contraindicated in the presence of infection,
except when adequate measures (e.g-, antibiotics) are used to control
the infection.
       
glucocorticoid use.
INSULINRESISTANCE
● Glucocorticoids antagonize insulin, resulting in increased gluconeo-
 genesis and often hyperglycemia.
 An appetite increase resulting from prolonged glucocorticoid adminis-
tration results in hyperinsulinism and may lead to diabetes mellitus
HEPATOPATHY
● Prolonged or high-dose glucocorticoid administration in dogs, but not
cats, results in a steroid-induced production of an isoenzyme of alkaline
phosphatase by the liver. High levels ofthis isoenzyme are found in serum
hepatopathy in some animals, even resulting in hepatic failure.
CENTRALNERVOUSSYSTEMEFFECTS
● Glucocorticoids can cause changesin behavior, particularly restlessness
and increased aggression.
●Experimental studies in the rat suggest that glucocorticoids may lower
the seizure threshold in the brain.29
IATROGENIC BACTERIAL AND FUNGAL INFECTIONS
● Glucocorticoids have diverse effects that combine to induce
immunosuppression, making patients susceptible to opportunistic
local or systemic infections.
● Intralesional use of glucocorticoids may result in bacterial infections
caused by contamination introduced during injection. This could become
life-threatening after epidural injections that result in CNS infection.30
OTHERSIDEEFFECTSANDTOXICITIES
steroid injection.31
258
PART THREE·Therapy for the Alleviation ofPain
CONCLUSIONS
· Glucocorticoids reduce pain by decreasing inflammation.
● Glucocorticoids have diverse and often deleterious effects on many
tissues. Glucocorticoid administration can mask progression of the
specific disease being treated and can also mask the development of
new diseases (e-g-, opportunistic infections).
● Although glucocorticoids may play a role in the control of pain in
some patients, they should be used sparingly and with caution.
· The role of glucocorticoids for adjunctive analgesia and their use
by novel routes (e.g-, epidural administration) has not yet been
thoroughly investigated in veterinary medicine.
KEFERENCES
1. Goldfen A: Adrenoglucocorticoids and adrenocortical antagonists. In
Katzung BG, editor: Basic and clinical pharmacology, Stamford, Conn, 1998,
Appleton & Lange.
2. Ferguson D, Hoenig M: Glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and steroid
synthesis inhibitors. In Adam HR, editor: Veterinary pharmacology and
therapeutics, ed 7,Ames, 1995, Iowa State University Press.
3. Kempainnen RJ: Principles of glucocorticoid therapy in nonendocrine disease.
In Kirk RW,editor: Current veterinary therapy IX,Philadelphia,1986,WB
Saunders.
4.Feldman EC,Nelson RW:Canine and feline endocrinology and reproduction,
Philadelphia, 1987,WB Saunders.
for the treatment of osteoarthritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1486-1492, 1997.
6. Sutton LC, Fleshner M, Mazzeo R et al: A permissive role of corticosterone
in an opioid form of stress-induced analgesia: blockade of opiate analgesia is
not due to stress-induced hormone release, Brain Res 663:19-29, 1994.
7. Coates JR: Intervertebral disc disease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
30:77-110,2000.
8. Hoerlein BF: Furtherevaluation ofthe treatment ofdisc protrusion paraplegia
in the dog,J Am Vet Med Assoc 129:495-502, 1956.
9. Bracken MB, Shephard MJ, Collins WF Jr et al: A randomized controlled
study of methylprednisolone or naloxone in the treatment of acute spinal
cord injury, N Engl J Med 322:1045, 1990.
10. Siemering GB: High dose methylprednisolone sodium succinate: an adjunct
to surgery for canine intervertebral disc herniation, Vet Surg 21:406, 1992.
11. Logas D: Appropriate use of glucocorticoids in otitis externa. In Bonagura
JD,editor: Kirk's current veterinary therapy: small animal practice, ed 13,
Philadelphia,2000,WB Saunders.
12. Pelletier JP, Martel-Pelletier J: Protective effects of glucocorticoids on cartilage
lesions and osteophyte formation in the Pond-Nuki model of osteoarthritis,
Arthritis Rheum 32:181-193,1989
CHAPTER13·Glucocorticoids259
13. Chunekamrai S, Krook LP, Lust G et al: Changes in articular cartilage after
intra-lesional injections of methylprednisolone acetate in horses, Am f Vet
Res 50:1733-1741,1989.
14. Behrens F, Shepard N, Mitchell N: Alterations of rabbit articular cartilage by
intra-articular injections of glucocorticoids,J Bone foint Surg Am 57:70-76
1975.
15. Miller SL, Wertheimer SJ: A comparison of the efficacy of injectable dexa-
analgesia,fFoot Ankle Surg 37:223-226、1998.
16. Caldwell JR: Intra-articular corticosteroids: guide to selection and indications
for use, Drugs 52:507-514, 1996.
17. Abram SE: Neural blockade for neuropathic pain, Clin / Pain 16:S56-S61, 2000.
18. Botwin KP,Gruber RD, Bouchlas CG,et al: Complications offluoroscopically
guided transforaminal lumbar epidural injections, Arch Phys Med Rehabil
81:1045-1050,2000.
19. Reale C, Turkiewicz AM, Reale CA, et al: Epidural steroids as a pharmaco-
logical approach, Clin Exp Rheumatol 18:S65-S66, 2000.
20. Cannon DT, Aprill CN: Lumbosacral epidural steroid injections, Arch Phys
MedRehabi181:S87-S98,2000.
21. Pobereskin LH, Sneyd JR: Does wound irrigation with triamcinolone reduce
22. Hayashi N, Weinstein JN, Meller ST et al: The effect of epidural injection
 of betamethasone or bupivacaine in a rat model of lumbar radiculopathy.
Spine 23:877-885,1998.
23. Hodges SD, Castleberg RL, Miller T et al: Cervical epidural steroid injection
with intrinsic spinal cord damage: two case reports, Spine 23:2137-2142,
1998.
24. Klein DS, Klein PW: Intermittent interpleural injection of bupivacaine and
methylprednisolone for analgesia in metastatic thoracic neoplasm, Clin f
Pain 7:232-236, 1991.
25. Twycross R: The risks and benefits of corticosteroids in advanced cancer,
Drug Saf 11:163-178, 1994.
26. Korman B, MacKay RJ: Steroids and postoperative analgesia, Anaesth Intensive
Care 13:395-398, 1985.
27. Plumb DC, editor: Veterinary drug handbook, ed 3,Ames,1999, Iowa State
University Press.
28. Hanson SM, Bostwick DR, Twedt DC et al: Clinical evaluation of cimetidine,
sucralfate, and misoprostol for prevention of gastrointestinal tract bleeding
in dogs undergoing spinal surgery, Am J Vet Res 58:1320-1323, 1997.
29. Lee PH, Grimes L, Hong JS: Glucocorticoids potentiate kainic acid-induced
seizures and wet dog shakes, Brain Res 480:322-325,1989.
30. Cooper AB, Sharpe MD: Bacterial meningitis and cauda equina syndrome
after epidural steroid injections, Can ∫ Anaesth 43:471-474, 1996.
31. Victory RA, Hassett P, Morrison G: Transient blindness following epidural
analgesia, Araesthesiα 46:940-941, 1991.
14
OTHER DRUGS USED
TO TREAT PAIN
JAMESS.GAYNOR
Ahis section outlines drugs that have demonstrated or have
perceived analgesic efficacy but are not in the mainstream of
 veterinary practice. Many of these drugs are commonly used in
management of human pain. Much of the evidence substantiating their
use comes from laboratory animal research, clinical trials in humans, or
anecdotal reports in humans and animals.
INJECTABLE DRUGS
KETAMINE
Microdoses of ketamine intraoperatively can decrease analgesia requirements
postoperatively.
Mechanism of Action
Ketamine has traditionally been considered a dissociative anesthetic.
Recently, ketamine has been characterized as a nonspecific N-methyl-
D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist.
Efficacy/Use
NMDA receptor stimulation has been associated with central neuronal
sensitization, the windup phenomenon. Blockade of the NMDA receptor
results in the ability to provide analgesia with potentially lower doses
u ydiay osie si wsuog ee van z'enoudshp ssal pue spioido jo
preventing severe acute pain and potentially chronic pain.
● Microdoses of ketamine, much lower than those used for anesthesia or
chemical restraint, are used as an adjunct to analgesia protocols.
260
CHAPTER 14 ● Other Drugs Used to Treat Pain  261
● Initial dosing of ketamine is 0.5 mg/kg IV before surgical stimulation.
An infusion, 10 μg/kg per minute, is administered during the procedure
until the end of stimulation.
●A lower infusion rate, 2 μg/kg per minute, is administered for the next
24 hours.
● Some studies have advocated an additional lower infusion rate, 1l μg/
kg per minute, for the next 24 hours postoperatively.
● In the absence of an infusion pump, 0.6 ml (60 mg) of ketamine can
be added to a l-L bag of crystalloid solutions to be administered at 10
ml/kg per hour to achieve the intraoperative dosing rate, 10 μg/kg per
minute.
● For administration of ketamine at 2 μg/kg per minute without a
syringe pump postoperatively, 0.6 ml (60 mg) of ketamine for every
20 kg of body mass can be added to a l-L bag of crystalloid solutions
maintenance fluid rate for an awake patient.
Pharmacology
The pharmacology of microdose ketamine dosing has not been well
established. Even with the low dosing, it has been demonstrated that
ketamine actually binds NMDA receptors in dogs.
SideEffects andToxicity
The microdose ketamine appears to have few if any side effects.
Anecdotal accounts indicate that small numbers of patients develop
tachycardia.
Special issues
One must remember that microdose ketamine by itself does not induce
analgesia. Ketamine must be used in conjunction with an analgesic such
as an opioid.
MAGNESIUM
Mechanism of Action
Central sensitization, or windup, is mediated by a cascade of events,
including neuronal depolarization and NMDA receptor phosphorylation,
resulting in an increase in the excitability of a cell. Activation of the
NMDA receptor involves removal of a magnesium block. Presumably,
administration of magnesium may decrease  windup and act
independently to suppress calcium currents and neuronal excitability.
Intrathecal magnesium administration may also potentiate the effect of
morphine and delay the onset of opioid tolerance.4
262PART THREE ·Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Efficacy/Use
● Very little information is available concerning magnesium use or
efficacy for animal pain. Magnesium has been used intravenously
 d sd  ro   s 
neuropathic pain and subarachnoidally for allodymia and as an adjunct
to intrathecal morphine administration.56
● A dose of 5 to 15 mg/kg IV has been extrapolated from humans.
This dose is used for refractory cardiac dysrhythmias in dogs with no
apparent side effects.
● Humans have been administered a 50 mg/kg IV bolus followed by 8
mg/kg per hour as an adjuvant to perioperative analgesia ma nagement
with fentanyl.7
Pharmacology
Magnesium is predominantly an intracellular ion. The pharmacology of
magnesium is under investigation in animals.
Side Effects and Toxicity
In humans, minor side effects include headache and internal heat
sensation. Vasodilation may cause, or predispose to, hypotension
Special issues
Measurement of plasma magnesium may be misleading because it may
not reflect the intracellular component.
KETOROLAC (TORADOL)
Mechanism of Action
Ketorolac is a potent nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID)
that produces analgesia similar to an opioid μ-agonist such as
morphine or oxymorphone for some types of pain. Ketorolac is
available in oral and parenteral formulations. The mechanism of
action is similar to other NSAlDs (see Chapter 1o), and ketorolac
should be used with caution because there may be a high incidence
of side effects.
Efficacy/Use
Ketorolac is indicated for the management of moderate to severe pain
and is synergistic with opioids.
● Although the use of ketorolac is limited to 5 days in humans, dogs and
cats should not receive more than two treatments because of the side
effects.8
CHAPTER 14 + Other Drugs Used to Treat Pain
263
Ketorolac should be used with caution because of its high likelihood of inducing
gastrointestinal adverse effects.
·Dogs
1. Postsurgical pain: 0.3 to 0.6 mg/kg IV or IM every 8 to 12
hours8,9
2. 0.6 mg/kg IM apparently equipotent to oxymorphone 0.1 mg/kg
IM10
3. Nonsurgical orthopedic pain: dogs greater than 30 kg, 10 mg/dog
orally once daily for 2 to 3 days
● Cats: Postsurgical pain—0.25 mg/kg IM every 12 to 24 hours
· Misoprostol (2 to 5 μg/kg orally every 8 hours) can be used as pro-
phylaxis against gastrointestinal ulcer in dogs receiving ketorolac
(see Chapter 10).
Pharmacology
Ketorolac, like other NSAIDs, is metabolized by the liver. The
pharmacology in dogs is similar to that in humans. Ketorolac has an
elimination half-life of 41/2 hours.ll The pharmacology in cats is not well
described.
Side Effects and Toxicity
● In humans ketorolac is not used for more than 5 days because of the
high likelihood of developing severe side effects such as gastrointestinal
bleeding, perforating ulcers, and coagulation disorders. Similar side
effects can be expected in dogs.
● Ketorolac should not be used in conjunction with other NSAIDs,
corticosteroids, or aspirin.
Special issues
● Ketorolac should not be used as a preemptive analgesic because of
the unpredictability of hypotension under anesthesia and the greater
increased risk of renal damage.
● Ketorolac should not be used intraoperatively in patients that may
hemorrhage because of the likelihood of inhibition of normal clotting
function.
● Ketorolac is contraindicated in patients with renal disease and those at
risk for renal impairment due to hypovolemia and hypotension.
264   PART THREE ● Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
CLONIDINE
Mechanism ofAction
Clonidine is an α2-agonist that produces analgesia independently and
when administered in combination with opioids. Clonidine blocks the
conduction of nerve fibers and has also been demonstrated to induce
enkephalin-like substance release at peripheral sites.
Efficacy/Use
+ Clonidine has been administered intrathecally in dogs, cats, and humans.
● Studies conducted in humans have shown clonidine to provide
analgesia for postoperative pain.
● Clonidine could have potential use as an alternative to opioids for
chronic pain in animals that have developed a tolerance to opioids or
that experience pain unresponsive to opioid treatment.
Pharmacology
A study conducted in humans found the followingl2:
● Clonidine had an elimination half-life of 20 to 2512 hours, which
remained constant after single and multiple doses.
● Approximately 62% of a dose was excreted unchanged in the urine,
regardless of dose, formulation, or route of administration.
No overshoot was observed after stopping administration.
SideEffectsand Toxicity
Bradycardia and hypotension are likely to occur after clonidine
administration. Bradyarrhythmias and sedation have also been noted in
administration.
Specia! Issues
Clonidine is not antagonized by naloxone. Doses in dogs and cats are
unclear.
ZICONOTIDE
Mechanism of Action
Ziconotide blocks neurotransmission by blocking calcium channels.
Efficacy/Use
that is unresponsive to opioid treatment.
CHAPTER 14 ● Other Drugs Used to Treat Pain265
Pharmacology
 In humans, the clearance is 0.38 ml/min.
● Ziconotide maintains its analgesic efficacy over months and does not
cause tolerance, dependence, or respiratory depression in humans.
Side Effects and Toxicity
Side effects reported in humans include bradycardia, dizziness, nausea,
and confusion. These side effects are mild to moderate in severity and
resolve over time and reverse after drug discontinuation.
Special issves
Ziconotide should be used with caution in dogs and cats because
are unclear.
ORAL DRUGS
TRAMADOL
Mechanism of Action
Tramadol is a synthetic, centrally acting analgesic that is not related to
opioids.13
● Tramadol binds to μ-opioid receptors.
1. The parent compound has weak binding affinity.
2. The metabolites have 200 times the binding affinity for the
μ-receptor.
● Tramadol inhibits reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin, thus
acting like an c.2-agonist.
● The mixed mechanism of action helps explain why naloxone (an
opioid antagonist) only partially reverses the analgesia.
Efficacy/Use
           
 analgesic potency similar to meperidine.14
● In humans, tramadol has been used to alleviate pain associated with
conjunction with a nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug.
266PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
● Tramadol may also be useful in patients with allodynia.15
pain seem to experience good analgesia.
● Clinically, dogs respond to doses of 3 to 5 mg/kg PO bid to qid.
● Cats respond to doses of tramadol similar to dogs. Larger cats
can be given portions of a tramadol tablet. If tramadol needs to be
compounded, it may be difficult to mask the bitterness without
compounding it into a capsule.
● Tramadol can be administered to dogs and cats at 2 to 4 mg/kg IV.
Pharmacology
● Oral dosing of tramadol in dogs results in rapid absorption with
approximately 75% bioavailability. Dosing with or without food
seems to make no difference.
· The biotransformation of tramadol is qualitatively similar between
whereas humans metabolize about 30%. The balance of the drug
appears to be excreted unchanged by the kidneys.16
Side Effects and Toxicity
   s s   n 
other anesthetics, although this has not been documented in dogs
and cats.
  s     n  
yomiting, although this is unlikely at recommended doses.
● Long-term administration may cause constipation or diarrhea. This
occurs infrequently in dogs. The likelihood is unknown in cats.
· A small percentage of humans anecdotally have related seizures
when taking tramadol. This has not been documented in dogs or
cats.
Specia! Issues
Tramadol is less likely to induce tolerance in animals and humans
compared with morphine because of its nonopioid mechanism of
action.17
AMANTADINE
Amantadine was originally developed as an antiviral drug for use in
humans. Amantadine has been shown to have efficacy for treatment
of drug-induced extrapyramidal effects and for Parkinson's
disease.
CHAPTER 14 + Other Drugs Used to Treat Pain
267
Amantadine may help with allodynia and opioid tolerance in patients with chronic
pain.
Mechanism of Action
Amantadine has antagonist effects at the NMDA receptor.
Efficacy/Use
● In humans, amantadine has been used for neuropathic pain.18,19
● Amantadine is used in animals suffering from windup, allodynia,
and opioid tolerance. Amantadine use may permit a lower dose of
with problem osteoarthritis often demonstrate increased efficacy of
 r       a 
as needed. Amantadine also appears to be helpful in maintaining
comfort in dogs with osteosarcoma.
● The dose for dogs and cats is approximately 3 to 5 mg/kg PO once
daily. Amantadine is available in 100-mg capsules and a 10-mg/ml
liquid.
Pharmacology
The pharmacology of amantadine in dogs and cats has not been well
established, although the pharmacology of rimantadine, a similar drug,
metabolized, and is excreted in the urine.
Side Effects and Toxicity
●The feline toxic dose is 30 mg/kg.19
● Dogs may develop high anxiety, restlessness, and dry mouth as the
daily dose approaches 6 mg/kg or if there is impaired renal excretion.
●Behavioral effects in dogs and cats!0 begin at 15 mg/kg orally.
Special Issues
The duration of action of amantadine may be prolonged in patients with
renal insufficiency.
GABAPENTIN
Gabapentin is a structural analog of y-aminobutyric acid (GABA).20
268 PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Mechanism of Action
The mechanism of action of gabapentin is unclear and elusive.
● Although gabapentin is related to GABA, it does not appear to have
any analgesic effect at GABA receptors.
S        s
analgesic effects are likely unrelated to blockade of sodium
channels, binding of opioid receptors, alteration of cyclooxygenase
activity, or inhibition of dopamine, serotonin, or norepinephrine
uptake.
Efficacy/Use
Gabapentin is useful for helping control pain related to neuropathic conditions,
osteoarthritis, and cancer.
● A number of rat studies have investigated the effects of gabapentin on
signs of neuropathic pain, such as hyperalgesia and allodymia. Other
studies indicate a role for gabapentin in decreasing incisional pain and
arthritis.21
+ Gabapentin appears to be best suited for pain of nonnociceptive origin.
        s  
determined.
● Most information related to pain and gabapentin has been derived
from anecdotal case reports in humans:
1. Neuralgia has occurred following herpes zoster infection.
2. Diabetic neuropathy: Whether veterinary patients develop this
problem is unclear.
3. Neuropathic cancer pain: When gabapentin is added to an opioid
regimen for patients who are only partially opioid responsive, the
patients experience significantly better analgesia. These patients
also experience less allodynia.
 sn on an  sn d  p  1
gabapentin compared with dull, aching pain.
 generate more specific information regarding the uses for and effects
of gabapentin.
1. Gabapentin does not alter nociceptive/pain thresholds; therefore,
it does not produce analgesia when administered alone but assists
other drugs in producing analgesia (adjunctive analgesic).
CHAPTER 14 ● Other Drugs Used to Treat Pain  269
2. Gabapentin has different effects in normal patients compared with
those with inflammatory pain states.
a. In the absence of any pathologic pain, gabapentin may actually
facilitate nociceptive responses in spinal cord dorsal horn
neurons.
b. Gabapentin dose-dependently inhibits dorsal horn responses to
inflammation-induced pain.
3. Gabapentin decreases allodynia related to mechanical pressure and
cold but does not affect nociceptive thresholds.
4. Gabapentin reduces hyperalgesia when given systemically or
intrathecally.
5. Gabapentin, given prophylactically, can inhibit hyperalgesia
related to incisional, peripheral nerve, and thermal injury.
Dosing
1. Although dosing has not been established in dogs or cats, the
following recommendations are extrapolations from humans. One
must remember that there are no controlled or evidence-based
studies in dogs and cats using gabapentin. Gabapentin has been
investigated as an antiepileptic drug in dogs, with dosing between
800 and 1500 mg daily.
2. Initial doses range from 2.5 to 10 mg/kg PO bid.
"p ot piq Od 8y/a 0s on dn paseaioui aq 0i aqe aq Ae sasoa "9
Anecdotally, some practitioners have used even higher doses more
frequently.
Pharmacology
Gabapentin is highly bioavailable in dogs. Gabapentin is metabolized
by the liver and almost exclusively excreted by the kidneys. The
       o s
The half-life is about 3 to 4 hours.
Side Effects
            
patients:
● Sleepiness
·Fatigue
● Weight gain with chronic administration
Special issves
The use of gabapentin for analgesia has only been anecdotally reported in
to NSAIDs for the control of problem osteoarthritis pain. Gabapentin has
270 PART THREE ● Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
also been used effectively as part of a multimodal approach for control
of cancer pain.
PREGABALIN
MechanismofAction
· Pregabalin binds with high affinity to the c2-delta site in the central
nervous system. The exact mechanism of action is unclear, but this
binding affinity is likely related to the antinociceptive and antiseizure
effects of pregabalin in animal models.
● Pregabalin does not block sodium channels, bind opioid receptors,
or alter cyclooxygenase activity, and it does not inhibit dopamine,
serotonin, or norepinephrine uptake.
Efficacy/Use
Pregabalin is indicated for the relief of neuropathic pain related to
diabetic neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia, in addition to the
control of epilepsy in huma ns.
 Pregabalin is likely useful for similar conditions in animals. A similar
compound, PD-0200347, has been shown to decrease cartilage lesions
in experimental studies of canine osteoarthritis.22
● The appropriate dose of pregabalin in domestic species is unknown.
Extrapolating from humans, the dog dose would range from 0.3 to 4.0
mg/kg PO bid to tid. Caution should be exercised in dosing domestic
animals because of the lack of information.
Pharmacology
Pregabalin is excreted almost entirely unchanged by the kidneys in
humans, rats, and monkeys. The pharmacology in domestic species is
unclear at this time.
Side Effects and Toxicity
The most common side effects of pregabalin in humans seem to be
dizziness and somnolence. The side effect profle in dogs and cats is
unknown.
Special issues
Pregabalin is classified as schedule V controlled substance and should be
handled with the appropriate considerations.
MEXILETINE
Mechanism of Action
Mexiletine inhibits nerve conduction by blocking sodium channels.
CHAPTER 14 ●Other Drugs Used to Treat Pain271
Efficacy/Use
Mexiletine has been used in humans for the treatment of peripheral
neuropathic pain.
Pharmacology
● Mexiletine reduces the rate of rise of the action potential by inhibiting
the inward sodium current.
● Mexiletine is relatively well absorbed from the gut and has a low first-
pass effect.
● Mexiletine can be dosed in dogs at 5 to 8 mg/kg PO bid to tid.
Mexiletine is contraindicated in cats.
SideEffectsandToxicity
Gastrointestinal disturbances are the most likely effect in animals. Central
nervous system effects (tremors, dizziness), shortness of breath, premature
Seizures, agranulocytosis, and thrombocytopenia are rare but may occur.
Special issues
Use with caution in animals with liver disease or heart dysfunction.
ALENDRONATE
Mechanism of Action
Alendronate is a bisphosphonate that inhibits osteoclast-mediated bone
resorption.
Efficacy/Use
In human patients with osteosarcoma-related pain, alendronate has been
used to reduce pain and pathologic fractures.
Pharmacology
Alendronate is excreted unchanged in humans and has a long half-life
(measured in weeks).
● Alendronate should not be given with food. Feeding should be delayed
for a minimum of 30 minutes after administration.
● Alendronate should not be administered with other medications that
may contain calcium.
Dosing
Dogs can be administered 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg orally once daily. No dose has
been described in cats.
272 PART THREE ·Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Side Effects and Toxicity
In humans, gastrointestinal effects are most common. Osteonecrosis of
the jaw has also been reported.
Specia! Issves
Alendronate should not be used in patients with severe kidney disease
NIMODIPINE
Mechanism of Action
Nimodipine enhances the antinociceptive properties of morphine by
blocking calcium channels.
Efficacy/Use
Nimodipine has been administered perioperatively in humans to decrease
Pharmacology
Nimodipine is an L-type dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker with
relatively high blood-brain-barrier penetration.
SideEffects andToxicity
Hypotension has been reported in humans.
Specia! issues
Research of the use of nimodipine in dogs and cats is lacking.
NIFEDIPINE
Mechanism of Action
Nifedipine is a calcium channel blocker.
Efficacy/Use
Nifedipine has been administered sublingually with epidural morphine
administration in humans to decrease morphine requirements and
improve analgesia.
Pharmacology
A study conducted in rats showed that nifedipine has an inhibitory effect
on morphine-induced corticosterone secretion.23
Side Effects and Toxicity
Hypotension has been reported in humans.
CHAPTER 14+OtherDrugsUsed toTreatPain
273
Specia! issues
Research of the use of nifedipine in dogs and cats is lacking. Therefore,
no good doses can be recommended.
NUTRACEUTICALS
Multiple nutraceuticals are available over the counter for use in animals. These
include glucosamine sulfate, glucosamine hydrochloride, chondroitin sulfate,
Perna canaliculus, methylsulfonylmethane, microlactin, and buffered vitamin
C. Some doses and potential side effects have been determined (Table 14-1).
Nutraceutical formulations are not controlled by the Food and Drug
Administration. Therefore, there is no oversight of quality or qua ntity in
the various products available.
 Glucosamine/chondroitin
· Many glucosamine/chondroitin supplements are available for hu-
mans and animals. There seem to be few formulations for which
there are data for efficacy in pets.
1. The combination of glucosamine hydrochloride, low-molecu-
lar-weight chondroitin, and manganese has been shown to in-
duce biosynthetic activity in canine cartilage.
2. This combination also has a protective effect when administered
before an acute joint injury. Patients receiving this combination
before joint injury heal more quickly than those administered
the combination after injury.24
● Data support the supplementation of P. canaliculus based on the
effects in a rat mode125 and in humans with arthritis.26
● No clinical data support the use of methylsulfonamethane or buff-
ered vitamin C in animals in the relief of pain. These products may
be beneficial, but well-controlled studies have not been performed to
document this.
● Emerging data indicate that the combination of glucosamine hydrochlo-
ride, P. canaliculus, methylsulfonylmethane, and manganese may be ef-
fective at ameliorating the clinical signs of osteoarthritis in dogs.27
Microlactin is thought to be a potent inhibitor of neutrophil adherence,
migration, and participation in the immune response to musculoskel-
etal conditions including arthritis. Unpublished data show efficacy for
pain relief in dogs with osteoarthritis.
 Buffered vitamin C is believed to have chondroprotective, antinflam
matory, and immunoresponsive effects that may provide pain control
for animals with osteoarthritis. No documented evidence exists for its
efficacy in veterinary patients.
274
PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Concerns and Dosages Associated with
TABLE 14-1
Commonly Administered Nutraceuticals
Dosage
Nutraceutical
Concerns
Dogs
Cats
Gucosamine
 Minor gastroin-
Large dogs: up to
250 mg P0 bid
sulfate
testinal (Gl)
750 mg P0 bid
Gucosamine 
disturbance
hydrochloride
Gucosamine +
Minor Gl distur-
13-15 mg/kg chon-
15-20 mg/kg chon-
chondroitin
bance
droitin PO sid
droitin PO sid
sulfate
Pema canaliculus
Allergic reactions,
1-20 kg: loading
fluid retention,
dose (10 days):
skin rash, and
2 tablets per day;
upset stomach.
maintenance
 In addition,
dose: 1 tablet
Perna mussel
per day
supplements 
21-40 kg:loading
should not be 
dose:3 tablets per
 given to persons
day; maintenance 
or animals with
dose: 2 tablets
allergies to fish 
per day
 or shellfish.
40 kg and over:
loading dose: 4
tablets per day;
maintenance
dose: 3 tablets
per day
(1 tablet = 600 mg)
Methylsulfonyl-
 Sulfur toxicity
Large dogs: up to 2 g 100-250 mg P0 bid
methane
at extreme
PO bid
doses
Microlactin 
Vomiting, diarrhea
Less than 40 b:500
Up to 12 ib: 200 mg
mg PO bid
PO bid
40-80 ib: 1000 mg
 Over 12 Ib:300 mg
PO bid
PO bid
81-120 ib:1500 mg
PO bid
Buffered vitamin C
 Minor Gl distur-
Gradually increase
Gradually increase
bance at high
dose to 250-1000
dose to 250 mg
doses; should
mg PO bid
PO bid
not be admin-
istered with 
 anesthetics
CHAPTER 14 + Other Drugs Used to Treat Pain 275
REFERENCES
1. Felsby S, Nielsen J, Arendt-Nielsen L et al: NMDA receptor blockade in
chronic neuropathic pain: a comparison of ketamine and magnesium
chloride,Pain 64:283-291,1996.
2. Wilder-Smith OH, Arendt-Nielsen L, Gaumann D et al: Sensory changes
and pain after abdominal hysterectomy: a comparison of anesthetic
Anaig 86:95-101,1998.
3. Mama KR, Golden AE, Monnet E et al: Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid
concentrations and NMDA receptor binding activity associated with
intraoperative administration of low-dose ketamine. In Proceedings 7th
World Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia, Berne 2000 p 78,2000 (abstract).
 id  d s s   raa   
Orofac Pain 13:155-163, 1999 (review; 68 refs; discussion, pp 164-171).
5. Crosby V, Wilcock A, Corcoran R: The safety and effcacy of a single dose
d dna u as msa sho jo ( 1 ro  oo)
Symptom Manage19:35-39,2000.
6. Kroin JS, McCarthy RJ, Von Roenn N et al: Magnesium sulfate potentiates
morphine antinociception at the spinal level, Anesth Anaig 90:913-917, 2000.
7. Koinig H, Wallner T, Marhofer P et al: Magnesium sulfate reduces intra-
and postoperative analgesic requirements, Anesth Anaig 87:206-210, 1998.
8. Mathews KA: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics: indications and
contraindications for pain management in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 30:783-804, 2000.
9. Mathews KA, Paley DM, Foster RA et al: A comparison of ketorolac with
flunixin, butorphanol, and oxymorphone in controlling postoperative pain
in dogs,Can Vet f37:557-567、1996
10. Popilskis S, Jordan D, Laurent L et al: Comparison of ketorolac and
oxymorphone on postoperative pain relief and neuroendocrine response in
dogs, 6th ICVA p 107, 1997.
11. Pasloske K, Renaud R, Burger J et al: Pharmacokinetics of ketorolac after
intravenous and oral single dose administration in dogs, J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 22:314-319,1999.
12. De Kock M, Crochet B, Morimont C,Scholtes JL: Intravenous or epidural
clonidine for intra- and postoperative analgesia, Anesthesiology 79:525-531,
1993 .
13. Minto CF, Power I: New opioid analgesics: an update, Int Anesthesiol Clin
35:49-65 1997 (review; 95 refs).
14. Lehmann KA: Tramadol for the management of acute pain, Drugs 47(suppl
1):19-32,1994 (review; 71 refs).
15. Sindrup SH, Anderson G, Madsen C et al: Tramadol relieves pain and
allodynia in polyneuropathy: a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial,
Pain 83:85-90, 1999.
16. Lintz W, Erlacin S, Frankus E et al: [Biotransformation of tramadol in man
and animal] (author's translation from German)、 Arzneimittelforschung
31:1932-1943, 1981.
276PART THREE ●Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
17. Miranda HF, Pinardi G: Antinociception,tolerance,and physical dependence
comparison between morphine and tramadol, Pharmacol Biochem Behav
61:357-360, 1998.
18. Pud D, Eisenberg E, Spitzer A et al: The NMDA receptor antagonist
blind, randomized, placebo controlled trial, Pain 75:349-354, 1998.
19. Eisenberg E, Pud D: Can patients with chronic neuropathic pain be cured
by acute administration ofthe NMDA receptor antagonist amantidine, Pain
74:337-339,1988.
20. Radulovic LL, Turck D, von Hodenberg A et al: Disposition of gabapentin
(neurontin) in mice, rats, dogs, and monkeys,Drug Metab Dispos 23:441-
448, 1995.
21. Mao I, Chen LL: Gabapentin in pain management, Anesth Anaig 91:680-687,
2000.
22. Boileau C, Martel-Pelletier J、 Brunet J et al: Oral treatment with PD-
0200347, an alpha2delta ligand, reduces the development of experimental
osteoarthritis by inhibiting metalloproteinases and inducible nitric oxide
synthase gene expression and synthesis in cartilage chondrocytes, Arthritis
Rheum52:488-500,2005.
23. Mahani SE, Motamedi F、Ahmadiani A: Involvement of hypothalamic
adrenal axis on the nifedipine-induced antinociception and tolerance in
rats,PharmacolBiochem Behav85:422-427,2006
24. Canapp SO, McLaughlin RM, Hoskinson JI et al: Scintigraphic evaluation of
glucosamine hydrochloride and chondroitin sulfate as a treatment for acute
synovitis in dogs, Am f Vet Res 60: 1552-1557, 1999.
25. Lawson BR, Belkowski SM, Whitesides JF et al: Immunomodulation of
murine collagen-induced arthritis by N, N-dimethylglycine and apreparation
ofPerna canaliculus,BMC Complement Altern Med 7:20,2007.
26. Hurley L: New research and clinical report on the use of Perna canaliculus
in the management of arthritis, Townsend Letter for Doctors and Patients
pp 99-111,2000.
27. Martinez SA, McCormick DJ, Powers MY et al: The effect of Glyco-Flex IHI
on a stable stifle osteoarthritis model in dogs: a pilot study. Presented at
Idaho, 2007.
15
LOCAL AND REGIONAL
ANESTHETIC TECHNIQUES
FOR ALLEVIATION
OF PERIOPERATIVE PAIN
JAMES S. GAYNOR AND KHURSHEED R MAMA
R
egional anesthesia implies that a region of the body is desensitized
 as opposed to the entire body, as occurs with general anesthesia.
The region affected maybe limitedor broad. Unlike most instances
of general anesthesia, during which it is mainly the “perception of pain'
that is blocked (by virtue of unconsciousness), local anesthetics block the
“transmission of noxious impulses." Because the analgesic effects of local
anesthetics do not depend on central depression (anesthesia), regional
analgesic techniques may be used in a conscious patient.
TOPICAL ANESTHESIA
● Surface, or topical, anesthesia results when the drug is applied to the
skin or mucous membrane to cause loss of sensation by paralyzing
sensory nerve endings.
● Local anesthetics are widely used on the mucous membranes of the
eye, nose, and mouth. Most are ineffective if used on unbroken skin
because cornified epidermis limits penetration.
· The introduction of a combination of lidocaine and prilocaine in a
eutectic mixture has overcome this problem and is now commonly
used to provide dermal analgesia for venipuncture and catheterization.
This drug combination may cause methemoglobinemia in cats and
has decreased in popularity since its introduction.
●A rapidly acting lidocaine cream, LMX 5 (anorectal cream), containing
5% lidocaine, is also available for producing fast-acting local analgesic
effects. LMX 5 can be used to relieve pain caused by minor cuts, minor
burns, abrasions, sunburn, and minor surgical sites. Lidocaine prepara-
tions are also commonly used to numb the skin before performing minor
surgery, insertion of intravenous (IV) lines, obtaining blood specimens,
and other such procedures. LMX 5 should only be used externally.
277
278PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
· The 5% lidocaine patch preparation (Lidoderm patch) produces
local tissue concentrations far below those capable of producing
toxicity but high enough to produce clinically effective local analgesia
for periods of up to 24 hours without complete sensory block. The
patches have been used to provide analgesia for skin abrasions,
lacerations, and severe local skin irritation and itching (hot spots).
The patch is supplied as a 10 x 14-cm adhesive bandage that may be
cut into smaller sizes with a scissors before removing the protective
drug release liner. Care should be taken to avoid contact with the
or irritation, respectively.
TECHNIQUE
1. Clip the fur over the site to be desensitized.
2. Liberally apply the cream, and cover it with an occlusive bandage.
3. Apply the lidocaine patch, or cut it to the appropriate size and use it
as a bandage (Fig. 15-1).
ANESTHESIABYINFILTRATION
 Infiltration anesthesia is perhaps the most common method ofregional
anesthesia and consists of making numerous subcutaneous injections
of small volumes of local anesthetic solution into the tissues.
CAUTIONWITHLOCALANESTHETIC
Always aspirate for blood before injecting any local anesthetic.
· The drug diffuses into surrounding tissue from the site of injection
and anesthetizes nerve fibers and endings. Large amounts of relatively
dilute solutions are often infiltrated into operative sites.
● Epinephrine ( 1:200,000) may be used in combination with infiltration
of local anesthetic to reduce systemic absorption of the anesthetic
agent and prolong the duration of analgesia.
EPINEPHRINEANDLOCALANESTHETIC
s
that are not on the distal extremities. This prevents distal ischemia.
· Acute pain therapy can be continued by infiltration anesthesia for
        
Pain Relief System; I-Flow Corp, Lake Forest, California). The local
CHAPTER 15·Local andRegional Anesthetic Techniques
279
FIG. 15-1. Lidocaine patch applied to a dog
filled with local anesthetic (e.g., lidocaine). The pump is attached to
delivery tubing and a sterile multipore catheter that is placed at the
surgical site. The elastomeric reservoir bulb delivers local anesthetic at
a constant rate (0.5 to 5 ml/h) for up to 5 days (Fig. 15-2).
INCISIONAL LINE bLOCK
● Incisional line block is used before surgical incision or after the surgery
before complete closure.
LINe bLOCK bEFOrE INCISION
Needle
● 25-gauge, 2.5-cm (1-inch) or longer hypodermic or spinal needle
Technique
1. Insert the needle subcutaneously after a sterile prep.
2.Aspirate.
3. Inject enough local anesthetic to produce a noticeable bleb.
280
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Filter
Local
anesthetic
(lidocaine)
Catheter
Fill
port
Tubing
A
PainBusterpump
FlG. 15-2. A,Anesthesia by continuous infiltration of local anesthetic after total
earcanal ablation.B,Anesthesia by continuous infiltration of localanesthetic of
a large incision.
4. Remove the needle, and reinsert at the edge of the bleb.
5. After aspiration, inject more local anesthetic to extend the bleb.
6. Repeat the process until the length of the incision has been blocked.
· Bupivacaine (0.5% = 5 mg/ml) with or without epinephrine or
lidocaine (2% = 20 mg/ml) with or without epinephrine is often
used at a dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg. This solution is then diluted
with an equal amount of 0.9% saline to increase the injectate
volume.
INCISIONAL BLOCK BEFORE CLOSING INCISION
Needle
● 25-gauge, 2.5-cm (1-inch) or longer hypodermic or spinal needle
CHAPTER 15·Local andRegional AnestheticTechniques
281
FIG. 15-3. Incisional block.
Technique (Fig. 15-3)
1. Incisional block is done in a sterile manner by the surgeon. Someone
ad oi os a on ndas ss pe aaa al ssd i
contamination.
2. Insert the needle at one end on the midline of the incision before clos-
ing the skin.
3. After aspiration for blood, inject local anesthetic in a fanlike man-
ner to block subcutaneous and muscular tissues. If this is being per-
formed on the abdominal body wall, inject local anesthetic down to
the peritoneum.
4. Remove the needle and reinsert a slight distance away, reinjecting
local anesthetic in a fanlike manner.
5. Repeat until the area under the whole incision has been infil-
trated.
PERIPHERALNERVEBLOCK
 The peripheral nerve block isa conduction block produced byinjection
of local anesthetic in the immediate vicinity of individual peripheral
nerves or a nerve plexus.
Paravertebral nerve blocksin cattle and horses, intercostal nerve blocks,
and the brachial plexus block in dogs and cats may be considered
alternative to multiple intercostal nerve blocks and may be considered
a regional peripheral nerve block.
INTERPLEURALBLOCK
● The interpleural block is used to provide analgesia and anesthesia
related to thoracic and cranial abdominal pain, especially pain related
to pancreatitis.
282
PART THREE ● Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Needles
· 22-gauge butterfly catheter
● 20-gauge, 5-cm (2-inch) through-the-needle catheter
● Preexisting chest tube
Technique (Fig. 15-4)
1. Aseptically prepare the site of catheter insertion.
2. Place the catheter in the ninth intercostal space on the midlateral as-
pect of the thorax.
3. Aspirate.
4. Inject lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) first. The patient may momentarily vo-
block is rapid.
 5. Inject the bupivacaine (1.5 mg/kg) next. If bupivacaine is injected
first, the patient will vocalize for 15 to 25 minutes, the amount oftime
it takes for onset.
6. This procedure can be repeated every 3 to 6 hours.
 7. If injecting through a chest tube, a small amount of saline can be used
to flush the local anesthetic into the chest.
8. The local anesthetic may be buffered with a small volume of sodium
bicarbonate to minimize the initial stinging sensation. A volume of
0.3 ml per 9.7 ml of local anesthetic solution has been suggested.
9. Correct positioning of the patient after injection is unclear. There are
several options:
Artery
Nerve
Vein.
gth Intercostal
space
FIG. 15-4. Interpleural block.
CHAPTER 15 ● Local and Regional Anesthetic Techniques
283
        n     as
paravertebral gutters to block nerves before entering the spinal
cord. This is most common in patients under anesthesia because
they are easily moved.
· Place the patient in an upright position. This is most common in
awake patients.
· Position the patient onto the affected side.
· Position the patient on the unaffected side.
· If interpleural anesthesia does not seem to work, attempt to
alter the patient's position to change the distribution of the local
anesthetic.
INTERCOSTAL BLOCK
● The intercostal block is useful for providing analgesia after intercostal
thoracotomy and for desensitizing the area around isolated broken
ribs.
Needle
● 22- to 25-gauge hypodermic needle
Technique
· This technique can be performed intraoperatively before closing
the skin from an intercostal thoracotomy or percutaneously in a
nonsurgical patient (Fig. 15-5).
FlG.15-5. Intercostal block.
284 PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
1. Perform a sterile prep if performing the intercostal block
percutaneously.
 2. Blocks are performed two to three spaces cranial and caudal to the
affected area.
 3. The nerves are located on the caudal aspect of the rib behind the vein
and artery.
4. Place the needle just caudal to the rib.
5. Aspirate for blood.
6. Inject local anesthetic.
7. Awake patients should be given a combination of lidocaine (1.5 mg/
kg) combined with bupivacaine (1.5 mg/kg) to ensure a rapid onset of
a block that should last 4 to 6 hours.
8. Patients who are receiving this block intraoperatively may receive
only bupivacaine.
9. For chronic administration, a soaker catheter may be tunneled
subcutaneously to facilitate continuous or intermittent delivery of
local anesthetic.
INFRAORBITAL NERVE BLOCK
● The infraorbital block is used to provide anesthesia/analgesia to the
upper lip and nose, dorsal aspect of the nasal cavity, and skin ventral
to the infraorbital foramen.
Needle
· A 25-gauge, 2.5-cm (1-inch) hypodermic needle is adequate in
virtually all dogs and cats.
Technique (Fig. 15-6)
1. Palpate the infraorbital foramen rostral and distal to the medial can-
thus of the eye.
 2. Insert the needle into the foramen.
3. Aspirate for blood.
4. Deposit a small amount of local anesthetic (usually less than
1 ml).
MAXILLARYNERVEBLOCK
● The maxillary nerve block is used to provide anesthesia/analgesia to
the ipsilateral maxilla, including the teeth, hard and soft palate, and
nasal passage.
CHAPTER 15 + Local and Regional Anesthetic Techniques
285
Infraorbital
nerve
Mental
nerve
FlG. 15-6. Infraorbital and mental nerve blocks.
Needle
· A 25-gauge, 2.5-cm (1-inch) hypodermic needle is adequate in
virtually all dogs and cats.
Technique (Figs. 15-7 and 15-8)
1. With the mouth open, palpate the edge of the hard palate just medial
to the last cheek tooth on the desired side.
2. Insert the needle at this location.
3. Aspirate for blood.
4. Deposit a small amount of local anesthetic (usually less than 1 ml).
MENTAL NERVE BLOCK
● The mental nerve block provides analgesia to the lower lip and incisors
on the ipsilateral side (see Fig. 15-6).
Needle
   au ou (-n) -i -  
virtually all dogs and cats.
Technique (see Fig. 15-6)
1. Palpate the mental foramen on the lateral aspect of the mandible just
caudal to the canine tooth.
2. Insert the needle into the mental foramen.
3. Aspirate for blood.
4. Inject a small amount of local anesthetic (usually less than 1 ml).
286
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
FlG. 15-7. Maxillary nerve block.
FlG. 15-8. Foramina (arow) through which maxillary nerve passes.
MANDIBULAR NERVE BLOCK
● The mandibular nerve block provides anesthesia of the ipsilateral
incisors, canine tooth, premolars, molars, and skin and mucosa of the
chin and lower lip.
CHAPTER 15 + Local and Regional Anesthetic Techniques
287
Needle
● 22-gauge, 2.5-cm (1-inch) hypodermic needle. Large dogs may require
a 3.75-cm needle.
Technique (Fig. 15-9)
1. Aseptically prepare the site medial to the mandible.
2. Place an index finger in the patient's mouth. Palpate the mucosa on
the medial aspect of the cheek for the mandibular nerve, which feels
like a thin fibrous band.
3. Insert the needle with the other hand from the ventral-medial aspect
of the mandible.
4. The index finger in the mouth guides the needle to placement next to
the nerve.
5. Aspirate for blood.
6. Inject a small amount of local anesthetic (usually less than 1 ml).
FOREFOOT BLOCK
● This block is useful for declawing procedures in cats, toe amputations,
or any surgery of the foot distal to the carpus.
●A combination of lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) and bupivacaine (1.5 mg/kg) for
dogs or cats is used. The total dose should be split between areas to be
desensitized. This dose may be diluted if additional volume is necessary.
Needle
●25-gauge hypodermic needle
Rostrum
Mandibular
nerve
FlG. 15-9. Mandibular nerve block; canine head in right lateral position.
288
PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Technique (Fig. 15-10)
1. Insert the needle just distal to the carpus on the proximal-medial as-
pect of the metacarpus.
2. Always aspirate before injection.
 3. Inject a small amount of the combined local anesthetics to produce a
small bleb.
4. Insert needle and repeat injections, continuing across the dorsum of
the foot to the lateral aspect.
5. Complete the block by inserting the needle in the depression just distal
to the accessory carpal pad, aspirating, and injecting a small amount
oflocal anesthetic, ensuring a continuous infltration from the medial
aspect to the lateral aspect.
Ulnar nerve,
palmarbranch
Mediannerve
Radial nerve
Injection site
A
B
FlG. 15-10. A, Forefoot block, dorsal aspect. B, Forefoot block, palmar aspect.
CHAPTER 15·Local and Regional Anesthetic Techniques
289
BRACHIALPLEXUSBLOCK
● A brachial plexus block is used to provide anesthesia distal to the elbow.
Needles
● 22-gauge and up to a 7.5-cm (3-inch) spinal needle for blind technique
● 22-gauge and up to a 7.5-cm (3-inch) insulated needle for guided
technique
Nerve Locator-Guided Technique (Fig. 15-11)
● The guided technique is much more accurate and successful in obtaining
a good brachial plexus block with a minimum of local anesthetic.
1. Aseptically prepare the area medial to the scapulohumeral joint.
2. Attach one electrode from the nerve locator to the skin; attach the
other to the proximal portion of the needle.
 3. Insert the needle medial to the scapulohumeral joint, advancing
toward the costochondral junction of the first palpable rib, medial
to the scapula but outside the thorax.
4. As the needle is inserted, turn on the nerve locator to the highest
current setting.
5. As the paw begins to twitch, precisely place the needle to obtain
a maximal twitch with as little current as possible (0.3 mA is
recommended, 0.1 millisecond and 2 Hz.
6. Aspirate for blood.
7. Inject a small amount of local anesthetic until the twitch
disappears.
8. Because the brachial plexus is diffuse, perform this technique two
more times, fanning the needle dorsal and ventral from the initial
placement.
9. Inject a maximum of lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg or bupivacaine 1.5 mg/kg-
Typically, considerably less drug is necessary because the local
anesthetic is deposited directly on the nerves.
10. Alternate application: When using the nerve locator, this block
may also be done as a “paravertebral block" at C6, C7, and T1.
This should effectively block the lower limb below the shoulder
joint.
Blind Technique (Fig. 15-12)
● The blind technique only has a variable success rate even when using
large volumes of local anesthetic.
1. Aseptically prepare the area medial to the scapulohumeral joint.
2. Insert the needle medial to the scapulohumeral joint, advancing
290
PART THREE ·Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
NEAYE
Tracer
Brachial
plexus
-Scapula
Site of
injection
Humerus
B
FlG. 15-11. A, Nerve locator. B, Brachial plexus.
toward the costochondral junction of the first palpable rib, medial
to the scapula but outside the thorax.
3. Aspirate for blood.
4. Inject local anesthetic while withdrawing the needle 75% of the
distance inserted.
5. Reinsert the needle two more times, approximately 30 degrees
dorsal and 30 degrees ventral.
CHAPTER 15·Local and Regional Anesthetic Techniques
291
FlG. 15-12. Brachial plexus block.
6. Aspirate for blood after each insertion, and then inject local
anesthetic while withdrawing.
7. Local anesthetic dose can be as high as lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg or
bupivacaine 1.5 mg/kg.
FEMORAL (SAPHENOUS) NERVE BLOCK
● The femoral nerve block provides anesthesia of the medial part of the
thigh, tibia, and tarsus and akinesia of quadriceps femoris muscle.
Needle
● 22-gauge insulated or 22-gauge, 1-inch hypodermic needle
Technique: Inguinal Approach
1. Aseptically prep site.
2. Insert needle just cranial to the femoral artery and below the inguinal
ligament in a craniodorsal direction superficially.
3. Use of nerve locator induces a distal twitch to help ensure appropriate
needle placement.
4. Insertion can also be performed in a blind manner without a nerve
locator based on palpation.
 5. Inject a small amount of local anesthetic. One should be able to use
less than the calculated dose because the local anesthetic is being de-
posited directly over the nerve.
292PART THREE ●Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
SCIATICNERVEBLOCK
· The sciatic nerve block provides anesthesia of the caudal muscles of
the thigh and surrounding tissues and skin.
Needle
● 22-gauge insulated or 22-gauge, 1-inch hypodermic needle
Technique
1. Aseptically prep site.
2. Draw a line between the greater trochanter and ischiatic tuberosity.
3. Introduce a 22-gauge needle directed cranially at about one third the
distance between the two, and look for plantar dorsiflexion if using a
nerve locator.
4. Insertion can also be performed in a blind manner.
5. Inject a small amount of local anesthetic. One should be able to use
less than the calculated dose because the local anesthetic is being de-
posited directly over the nerve (Box 15-1).
INTRAARTICULARADMINISTRATION
The intraarticular route may be used to facilitate diagnosis of lameness
as is commonly done in the horse. The technique may also be used to
P  r      
surgical intervention (e.g-, arthroscopy). In small animals the stifle joint is
most commonly injected, but this technique may be similarly applied to
other joints, most commonly the hip, shoulder, and elbow.
STIFLEJOINT
Needle
●22-gauge, 2.5-cm (1-inch) hypodermic needle
BOX 15-1
Joint Injections
Joints can be injected with a variety of substances, each for a different purpose:
● Local anesthetics for lameness diagnosis or perioperative anesthesia
●Morphine for analgesia of 18 to 24 hours' duration
● Corticosteroids for pain relief of severe osteoarthritis (This may last days to months.)
●Hyaluronic acid for increased joint lubrication in the presence of severe osteoarthritis
(This effect may last days to months.)
·Autologous stem cells for potential cartilage regeneration and analgesia
CHAPTER 15 + Local and Regional Anesthetic Techniques
293
Patellar
ligament
FIG. 15-13. Stifle joint, intraarticular injection.
Technique (Fig. 15-13)
1. Clip and aseptically prepare the joint.
 2. Insert the needle lateral to the patellar ligament.
3. Aspirate to ensure that the needle is not in tissue. Joint fluid is likely
to be aspirated in the stifle.
4. Inject local anesthetic:
·Lidocaine 1 to 2 mg/kg
●Bupivacaine 1 to 2 mg/kg
● The stifle joint of most medium to large dogs holds approximately
5 ml of fluid.
5. Morphine 0.1 mg/kg can be injected into joints postoperatively to
provide analgesia.
6. Alternative substances for injection:
· Corticosteroids, such as methylprednisolone or triamcinolone can
be injected to provide analgesia in the presence of severe arthritis.
Caution should be taken with mild to moderate disease because
corticosteroids hasten the degradation of cartilage within the joint.
· Autologous stem cells, extracted from the patient's own adipose
tissue, can be injected to help regenerate cartilage. These cells may
also have antinflammatory and pain-relieving effects.
ELBOW JOINT
Needle
● 22-gauge, 2.5-cm (1-inch) hypodermic needle
294
PART THREE ●Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Technique (Fig. 15-14)
1. Clip and aseptically prepare the joint.
2. Use a medial approach.
3. Palpate the medial epicondyle of the humerus.
4. Slide a finger distal to the epicondyle to the approximate level of the
joint.
5. Insert needle at that point or just caudal.
6. Aspirate for synovial fluid, which is not always possible.
7. Inject local anesthetic, about 0.5 to 1 ml.
 8. Alternatively, corticosteroids, morphine,
, or autologous stem cells
may be injected based on the indication.
HIP JOINT
Needle
● 20- to 22-gauge, 112- to 312-inch spinal needle with stylet
Technique
1. Clip and aseptically prepare the joint.
 2. Flex hip slightly and position femur parallel to table to open up joint 
space.
 3. Flex knee and use tibia as a handle to place traction on hip.
4. Palpate hip joint.
5. Insert needle at the midpoint of the proximal edge of the greater
trochanter.
Humerus
Joint space
Cranial
Caudal
Radius/ulna
FIG. 15-14. 日bow injection.
CHAPTER 15 +Local and Regional Anesthetic Techniques
295
6. Withdraw stylet.
 7. Aspirate for synovial fluid, which is not always possible.
8. Inject local anesthetic, about 0.5 to 1 ml.
9. Alternative substances for injection:
· Corticosteroids, such as methylprednisolone or triamcinolone can
be injected to provide analgesia in the presence of severe arthritis.
Caution should be taken with mild to moderate disease because
corticosteroids hasten the degradation of cartilage within the joint.
· Autologous stem cells, extracted from the patient's own adipose tis-
sue, can be injected to help regenerate cartilage. These cells may also
have antinflammatory and pain-relieving effects.
INTRAVENOUS LOCAL OR REGIONAL
ANESTHESIA
Local or regional anesthesia is also accomplished by IV injection of large
volumes of dilute local anesthetic into an extremity isolated from the
rest of the circulation by a tourniquet. The tissue distal to the tourniquet
is blocked. This technique is also called a Bier block. The apparent
mechanism of action is by diffusion of local anesthetic across blood
vessels to local nerves. Normal nervous and muscle function returns
quickly upon release ofthe tourniquet, which allows blood flow to dilute
the regional local anesthetic concentration.
FORELIMBBLOCK
Needle
●22-gauge, 2.5-cm (1-inch) hypodermic needle
Technique(Fig.15-15)
1. Apply an occlusive bandage in a distal-to-proximal manner to remove
blood from the limb.
2. Place a tourniquet proximal or distal to the elbow.
3. Remove the occlusive bandage.
4. Inject lidocaine into the cephalic vein. Onset of block is fast. Between
1 and 2 ml of 2% lidocaine can be diluted with an equal amount of
0.9% saline (producing 1% lidocaine). Of the dilute lidocaine, 2 to
4 ml can be injected.
distal to the first tourniquet. Remove the first tourniquet. This de-
creases tourniquet-induced pain.
6. The tourniquet must be removed within 90 minutes to avoid shock,
endotoxemia, and potential death on tourniquet release.
296
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
FIG. 15-15. Forelimb Bier block.
REaR LIMb BLOCK
Technique
1. This technique is performed similar to that of the IV regional fore
limb block.
2. Apply an occlusive bandage in a distal-to-proximal manner to remove
blood from the limb.
3. Apply a tourniquet proximal to the tarsus.
4. Remove the occlusive bandage.
5. Inject lidocaine into the saphenous vein. Onset of block is fast. Be-
tween 1 and 2 ml of 2% lidocaine can be diluted with an equal amount
of 0.9% saline (producing 1% lidocaine). Of the dilute lidocaine, 2 to
4 ml can be injected.
6. Apply a second tourniquet (preferably pneumatic) in the blocked area
distal to the first tourniquet. Remove the first tourniquet. This de-
creases tourniquet-induced pain.
7. The tourniquet must be removed within 90 minutes to avoid shock,
endotoxemia, and potential death on tourniquet release.
EPIDURAL ANESTHESIA AND ANALGESIA
Injecting local anesthetic solution into the epidural space generally
at the lumbosacral space (for dogs and pigs) or the first or second
intercoccygeal space (for horses and cows; sometimes referred to as
CHAPTER 15 ● Local and Regional Anesthetic Techniques  297
caudal anesthesia) produces epidural or extradural anesthesia. The
          
vertebral column. The extent of anesthetic action depends on the spread
of the drug and diffusion to neural tissues from the site of injection.
Long-term administration of drugs is facilitated by placement of an
epidural catheter. This technique also facilitates craniad distribution of
the drug. Anesthesia can be produced by using a local anesthetic such
motor function with the use of an opioid such as morphine (Box 15-2)-
Regardless of the desired effect, the technique of epidural injection is
LS space. The spinal cord usually ends at the last lumbar vertebra (L7)
in dogs; thus there is less chance of obtaining cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
at this space. The spinal cord usually ends at the first sacral vertebra in
cats, making it likely to obtain CSF if attempting an epidural injection
at the LS space.
B0X 15-2
Epidural and Spinal Injections
The epidural and spinal (subarachnoid) spaces can be injected with a variety of
substances, each for a different purpose:
● Local anesthetics for regional anesthesia (This will result in lack of sensation and motor
paralysis.)
● Opioids, such as morphine, for analgesia of various durations (Motor function is still
present, but the patient can have significant pain control.)
EPIDURAL INJECTION
Needles
● 18-, 20-, and 22-gauge beveled spinal needles of various lengths are
commonly used.
· An alternative is an 18- or 20-gauge blunt-pointed Tuohy epidural
needle.
Single Epidura!Injection Technique
1. Place the patient in lateral or sternal recumbency.
2. Patients with rear limb trauma may not easily be placed in sternal
recumbency because of the potential for worsening a fracture. An ad-
vantage of the sternal position is the ability to use the hanging drop
technique (Fig. 15-16, A).
298
PART THREE·Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Site of
injection
A
17
S3
S2
S1
B
Epidural space
FIG. 15-16. A, Dorsal view of lumbosacral area of a dog. B, Lateral view of
lumbosacral area of a dog.
 3. Virtually all patients can be placed in lateral recumbency for this pro-
cedure (Fig. 15-16, B).
4. Clip and aseptically prepare an area of fur just cranial to wings of the
ilium, caudal to the second sacral vertebra, and as wide as the lateral
aspects of the ilium wings.
 5. Locate the LS space by placing the thumb and smallest finger on op-
posite wings of the ilium. Palpating between these fingers, on mid-
line, is the dorsal spinous process of the sixth lumbar vertebra (L6). A
significant space can be felt just caudal to L6. Directly caudal to that
 e st r  r o s ss a n  s
palpable depression, the LS space.
CHAPTER 15 ·Local and Regional Anesthetic Techniques299
6. Place the needle perpendicular to the skin on midline in the middle
         s
beneficial.
7. Insert the needle slowly. Often, resistance can be felt as the needle
passes through the ligamentum flavum at the top of the vertebral ca-
nal. At this point, the needle is in the epidural space.
· Remove the stylet of the needle. If blood comes from the needle
the needle should be removed. If CSF is encountered, use half the
dose of local anesthetic. Opioid doses, in general, do not need to be
changed.
● Inject l ml of air with a glass syringe (or other epidural loss-of-
resistance syringe) to verify placement. Minimal resistance occurs
with a glass syringe plunger on a glass barrel. Ifthe air stays in the space
without pushing the syringe plunger back, the needle is likely to be
in the correct place. If injection of air leads to resistance and pushing
back of the plunger, the needle is not in the desired location.
Alternative Hanging Drop Technique
1. Place the patient in sternal recumbency.
2. Remove the stylet before puncturing the ligamentum flavum.
3. Place a drop of sterile saline in the hub of the needle.
4. As the needle passes through the ligamentum flavum into the epidu-
ral space, the negative pressure in the space sucks in the saline. This
is a definitive sign of proper needle placement. Sometimes the move-
ment of saline does not occur because of blockage of the needle from
passing through tissue without the stylet in place.
5. Stabilize the needle and administer the drug slowly over a l-minute
 period. Minimal resistance should be encountered on injection.
PLACEMENT OF AN EPIDURAL CATHETER
Technique
1. The technique is identical to placement of an epidural injection de-
scribed previously except that a Tuohy needle is used.
2. Insert the catheter through the needle a distance that will stay in the
epidural space and is equal to the depth of the needle in the skin plus
approximately 1 to3inches.
3. Remove the needle by securing the catheter and needle together and
withdrawing from the skin. This helps prevent shearing off the cath-
eter in the epidural space.
4. The advantage of epidural catheter placement is the ability to provide
epidural anesthesia or analgesia for days without the trauma of re-
peated epidural punctures.
300 PART THREE · Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
DILUTIONANDADMINISTRATION OFMORPHINE
ANDBUPIVACAINEFORCONTINUOUSEPIDURAL
ADMINISTRATION
Technique
1. Dilute preservative-free morphine ( 1 mg/ml) with sterile preservative-
free 0.9% saline to a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml by adding equal
amounts of saline to the morphine.
2. Add 1 ml of bupivacaine (0.75%) to 5 ml of the dilute preservative-
free morphine. This produces a solution of bupivacaine (1.25 mg/ml)
and morphine (0.42 mg/ml).
3. The solution is administered at a rate of 0.03 to 0.05 ml/kg per hour.
This delivers morphine at a rate of 0.3 to 0.5 mg/kg per 24 hours.
4. If rear limb motor paralysis occurs, the bupivacaine should be diluted
into 1l ml of dilute morphine solution and administered at the rate
described previously to deliver the same morphine dose but a consid-
erablylowerbupivacaine dose.
SPINALANESTHESIA
subarachnoid space. This can be accomplished at the LS space in cats
or at L5 to L6 or L6 to L7 vertebral spaces in dogs. Because the vertebral
level of termination of the spinal cord varies among animal species, this
form of anesthesia is technically more difficult than epidural injection in
other veterinary species.
· Local anesthetic doses for subarachnoid injection are usually 50% of
doses for epidural injection.
● Opioid doses do not need to change for subarachnoid injection.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Muir WW, Hubbell JAE, Skarda RT et al: Handbook of veterinary anesthesia.
ed 3, St Louis, 2000, Mosby.
Thurman JC,Tranquilli WJ,Benson GJ: Lumb  fones’veterinary anesthesia
ed 3, Baltimore, 1996, Williams & Wilkins.
16
COMPLEMENTARY AND
ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE
FOR PAIN MANAGEMENT
IN VETERINARY PATIENTS
NARDAG.ROBINSON
Mruly effective, long-lasting pain relief often requires an integrated,
s d po s  n i s
 equally to one complementary and alternative medicine (CAM)
approach. For example, certain physical ailments such as back pain
may respond more quickly to those modalities (i.e., acupuncture and
massage) that target the musculature as opposed to those focused on
joints (i.e., chiropractic).
As evidence accumulates to justify the inclusion of CAM procedures
in the management of animal pain, the matter of not informing clients
about CAM options becomesless acceptable. However, treating an animal
by CAM without adequate consideration of its risks and unknowns
could lessen the value and relevance of CAM for a given animal in pain
and even endanger the life and well-being of a patient.2,3 Furthermore,
care but also could open one to medical malpractice liability.24
Thus, veterinarians considering CAM should apprise themselves of
the latest evidence and scientifically based information pertaining to the
modality in question. Although clients have ready access to the endless
supply of Web-based (and usually profit-driven) health information, the
responsibility of directing clients to meaningful and legitimate practices
rests with the veterinarian.5 Metaphysical or metaphorical explanations
such as “releasing stuck energy” do little to inform clients or colleagues
about the actual nature of the mechanism of action of a treatment and
are usually inaccurate. Additional concerns arise when “holistic"
practitioners offer consultations online, without ever seeing or examining
the patient. This practice violates the requirement of securing a valid
With contributions from Roman T. Skarda, Dr.Medvet, PhD, DACVA (1944-2005).
LOE
302
PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
veterinarian-client-patient relationship before treatment and exposes the
patient to potentially needless and harmful herbs or supplements.
The following pages provide a general overview of various techniques
within the CAM domain that address pain. Unless otherwise specified,
the CAM treatment applies to a wide variety of painful conditions, acute
and chronic. The mechanisms of action, contraindications, and risks for
each technique are provided when available. However, one should keep
in mind that in addition to the treatment method itself, the education
and proficiency of the practitioner factor into the relative safety and
analgesic value of each CAM treatment.6 Practitioner qualifications that
and experience. At the time of this writing, all CAM certification
American Veterinary Medical Association as legitimate and/or specialty
certifications.
ACUPUNCTURE
Acupuncture ranks readily as the most deeply scrutinized and well-
researched of all CAM modalities.7 Scientific investigations have unveiled
many of its mechanisms of action. This research allows veterinarians to
provide acupuncture-based pain relief and to tailor treatment strategies
built on a solid understanding of the nervous system and the generation
of pain rather than to extract point prescriptions from the dim shadows
of mystery and metaphor.
Acupuncture for Pain
● Acupuncture treats pain by inducing neuromodulation along peripheral, central,
and autonomic pathways.
● Successful acupuncture neuromodulation and acupuncture analgesia depends
adequate stimulation of these structures.
means: needling, electroacupuncture, low-level laser, and manual pressure.
Acupuncture usually involves the insertion of thin, sterile needles
into specific anatomic sites richly supplied with nerve endings
(Figs. 16-1 to 16-3). Other forms of acupuncture point stimulation exist,
such as low-level laser therapy (Fig. 16-4), heat, and electroacupuncture.
Adding electrical stimulation to the acupuncture treatment (known as
CHAPTER 16 + Complementary and Alternative Medicine
303
FlG. 16-1. Demonstration of an acupuncture needle at a calming point on the
vertexofthescalp.
Alternating2and100Hz
D
FlG. 16-2. A, Bichon Frise (11 years old) with relief from severe chronic neck
pain during percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (PENS). B, Myelographic
radiograph of the lateral projection of the caudal cervical spine of the dog,
cervical vertebrae C5/C6. C, Axial computed tomographic image at the level of
the C6 vertebra, indicating calcified disk material (arrow) displacing the spinal
cord dorsally at the right side of the spine. The defect of vertebral body after
vertebral decompression is visible. D, Biphasic stimulation with alternating 2-Hz
and 100-Hz frequencies. Recorded at 25 mm/s and 5 mv/cm.
304
PART THREE•Therapy for theAlleviation ofPain
FlG. 16-3. Percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (PENS) of an unrestrained
horse (wwarmblood mare, 610 kg, 5 years old, with fracture of transverse process of
third cervical vertebra) in its stall. Acupuncture needles are placed at BL 18, BL 23, BL
25, and BL 28 bilaterally and are connected via paired leads to the electroacupuncture
"electroacupuncture") often augments analgesia conferred by acupuncture.
As such, this form of stimulation provides the basis for much ofthe existing
treatments, clips attach the electrode leads to the needles, which then
bring the electrical impulses deep into the tissues, bypassing the formidable
electrical resistance of the skin. The term for electroacupuncture treat-
ments in which the needle acts as an electrode, penetrating the skin, is
“percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation,”or“PENS."This contrasts with
the electricity to surface electrode pads. In this case, the electrical stimulus
must overcome the skin resistance that limits its access to underlying nerve
of reduced electrical resistance) and also deliver stimulation. Although
location, these machines are unreliable in human patients for whom they
were designed and in non-humans (Fig. 16-5, C).
MECHANISM OF ACTION
Acupuncture works through neuromodulation; that is, introducing the
needle into tissue at an acupuncture point incites a series ofresponses and
reflexes within the peripheral, autonomic, and central nervous systems,
some of which are involved in providing analgesia.8 Neurohumoral and
CHAPTER 16 + Complementary and Alternative Medicine
305
ASE
FIG. 16-4. Everlase medical laser (M.E.D. Servi-Systems Canada Ltd, Sittsville,
protective eyeglasses.
 d sna u d  p pro s  
The reduction in central nervous system excitation helps dampen pain
flow, which benefits patients with chronic pain.ll Sustained stimulation
from manual acupuncture reduces muscle tension by reducing
α-motoneuron excitability.12,13
306
PART THREE•Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
A
B
C
D
FlG. 16-5. A, Package with 10 sterile acupuncture needles (Hwato, size 0.3 x
25 mm) for single use. B, CEPES-laser Combi-Plus-Soft-Laser. C, Pointer-Plus
handheld unit for locating and stimulating acupuncture points transcutaneously
(transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, TENS).D,Acu-Vethandheld unit for
locating and stimulating acupuncture points transcutaneously (TENS). E, Electro-
Acupuncture Unit IC-4107 for locating and stimulating acupuncturepoints
can be found in the text.
CHAPTER16·ComplementaryandAlternativeMedicine
307
Brain centers that participate in nociception and antinociception
may become deactivated or activated as a consequence of acupuncture.8
One can also target the frequency and location of stimulation delivered
through electroacupuncture to the specific analgesic needs ofthe patient. A
practitioner mayselect a low (2-Hz) or high ( 100-Hz) frequency, depending
on whether a patient requires rapid-onset pain relief as in a postoperative
state, long-lasting relief as for chronic conditions, or a mixture of both.14
Furthermore, lead placement should follow neuroanatomic pathways
involved in the production and perpetuation of the pain being addressed.
As opposed to what many claim, acupuncture does not work
by moving invisible energy through invisible meridians. Although
traditional Chinese medicine practitioners commonly explain its
mechanisms in metaphorical and metaphysical terms, the ancient
acupuncture doctors actually had a far greater appreciation of the
anatomic and physiological aspects of acupuncture than many persons
realize and even a more relevant conceptualization of its mechanisms
of action than many practitioners hold today.15,16 Furthermore,
requiring practitioners to adopt an irrational belief system about
acupuncture does little to teach veterinarian acupuncturists how to
address animal pain successfully. What is required is a sophisticated
understanding of the neurophysiological influences of acupuncture,
highly developed myofascial palpation skills, and a cogent method of
effectively providing analgesia based on the anatomic distribution of
the pain and the most efficient and long-lasting delivery of acupuncture
analgesia.
ACUPUNCTURE POINTS FOR PAIN
Acupuncture works best for the treatment of pain when carefully
tailored to the patient's presentation. In other words, although point
"recipes" for pain can provide the novice with a starting point (Figs. 16-6
to 16-8; Box 16-1), more refined and effective interventions require
a comprehensive understanding of the sources of pain (i.e., muscle,
 bone, joint, and visceral) and the neuroanatomic pathways involved
in mediating that pain and resultant analgesia. For example, see
Tables 16-1 and 16-2.
INDICATIONS
Acupuncture works for a wide variety of acute and chronic painful
conditions of somatic and visceral origin. See Table 16-1 for evidence
related to the treatment of pain.
80E
PART THREE•Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
BL23
GB34
ST 36
13
SP
BL 60
H
In Ko Ten
FIG. 16-6. Locations of various acupuncture points to induce analgesia in
dogs.
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Few contraindications to acupuncture exist. Contraindications include
excessive patient movement or aggression that prohibit safe and effective
treatment, pregnancy, sepsis, severe bleeding abnormalities, spinal or
joint instability local to the treatment site, and tumor or infection at the
site of desired needling.
ADVERSEEFFECTS
Negative outcomes from acupuncture relate to the effects of inserting
a long, sharp object into the body and include bleeding, inadvertent
organ puncture, or infection, though severe adverse effects are
rare.30
GOLD BEAD IMPLANTS
An odd technique of implanting tiny pieces of gold or other metals into
periarticular or soft tissue locations has arisen within the veterinary
profession.31 Long abandoned in human acupuncture, this variant of
needle fragment implantation has enjoyed a resurgence in veterinary
CHAPTER 16·Complementary and Alternative Medicine
600
Bai Hui
Wei Gan
GV 3a
Tian Ping
2hd coccygeal
!LUS
GV 11
intervertebralspace
Thoracolumbar
SI10
TH8
PC
FIG. 16-7. Locations of various acupuncture points to induce analgesia in
horses.
spheres. Although gold bead enthusiasts claim an 80% or greater
blinded studies evaluating the technique found that gold bead
implantation was no more successful at relieving pain than a control
 method that differed by not leaving behind metal.3,34 In addition,
  d     d 
viscera, nervous tissue, or the vasculature represents a significant risk
factor.35-37 Imaging artifacts on computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging scans may severely 1
lessen the diagnostic value of
Thus, because the mechanisms of action proposed for gold bead
implantation (i.e., ongoing energy release or long-term ionization
potentials) lack rationality or proof and because the procedure itself has
310
PART THREE•Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Wei Gan
Bai Hui
2ndcoCCYQBal
GV 3a
TianPing
San Tai
GV 11
Thorz
FlG. 16-8. Locations of various acupuncture points to induce analgesia in
cattle.
been shown to be no better than a control procedure, the documented
risks associated with needle implantation appear to outweigh the elusive
benefits.
SPECIFIC ACUPUNCTURE APPROACHES
FOR PAIN CONTROL
Spinal Pain
Controlled trials and systematic reviews in human research provide
increasingly stronger evidence that acupuncture effectively treats chronic
 acupuncture improves spinal pain of various causes in dogs and horses.47-53
According to Adrian R. White, MD, the author of several systematic
reviews on acupuncture,“Acupuncture treatment should be considered
for anyone who has nonspecific mechanical back pain that has persisted
O s u toa ua pies asp ar no sam g n
sessions of needle body acupuncture produced stable, long-term effects
lasting at least 6 months according to a recently published prospective
CHAPTER16·Complementary andAlternativeMedicine
311
BOX 16-1
Abbreviations and Anatomic Locations of Acupuncture
Points in the Dog
1. Ll 4 (Large Intestine point 4): Approximately midway along the shaft of second metacarpal
bone on the radial side.
ebow flexed.
3. PC 6 (Pericardium point 6): Two rib-widths above the carpal joint, between the tendons of
the flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor carpi radialis.
4. TH 5 (Triple Heater 5): Two rib-widths above the carpus, on the cranial aspect of the
interosseous space between the radius and ulna.
5.In Ko Ten: Between metacarpalbones 2 and 3.
6. BL 23 (Bladder point 23): One and a half rib-widths lateral to midline, level with the caudal
border of spinous process of the second lumbar vertebra.
7. ST 36 (Stomach point 36): One finger-breadth from the anterior crest of the tibia, in the
belly of the cranial tibialis muscle.
8. GB 34 (Galbladder point 34): In the depression cranial and distal to the fibular head.
9. BL 40 (Bladder point 40): In the center of the popliteal crease.
10. SP 6 (Spleen point 6): Three rib-widths directly above the tip of the medial malleolus, on
the caudal border of the tibia.
11. BL 60 (Bladder point 60): In the depression between the lateral malleolus and calcaneal
tendon, level with the tip of the lateral malleolus.
12. Bo Ko Ku: Between metatarsal bones 2 and 3.
cohort study.55 A 2005 paper systematically reviewing acupuncture for
chronic low back pain echoed the findings ofearlier work, concluding that
adding acupuncture to conventional treatment produced better analgesia
and functional improvement than conventional treatments alone.17,56
However, not all acupuncture treatments are equal. Deeper acupuncture
stimulation in humans with lumbar myofascial pain provides greater
spinal structures.60,6l Stimulation of paravertebral somatic afferent
nociceptive neurons.62
A commonly overlooked source of spinal pain resides within the
musculature itself and its enveloping fascia. Myofascial pain syndrome
can sometimes mimic radicular pain or internal organ disease.63
Identifying this type of pain entails palpating for taut bands and trigger
 points encased within the myofascial fabric. Once identified, myofascial
  s  d     
acupuncture, even after medication has failed.64,65
312
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
TABLE 16-1
Studies Concerning Acupuncture for Pain
Condition Studied
Outcome
Low back pain
Acupuncture done with dry needling is useful for
chronic low back pain.17-20
Knee osteoarthritis
Acupuncture improves pain and function in patients
with knee osteoarthritis.21
Chronic visceral
Bectroacupuncture effectively treats visceral pain in
hyperalgesia
rats subjected to colorectal distention as an irritable
bowel syndrome model.22
Perioperative analgesia
Acupuncture was found to be a useful adjunct to
conventional anesthesia for patients receiving
maxillofacial surgery and helped stabilize pulse rate
 and blood pressure during surgery.23
Lateral epicondyle pain
Acupuncture provides short-term relief for lateral
epicondyle pain.24
Chronic orofacial pain
Acupuncture provides significant short-term relief for
 patients with chronic orofacial pain.25
Migraine
Real and sham acupuncture benefited patients with
migraines more than a waiting list control, raising
the issue that the question about proper selection
of sham points because both demonstrated
 physiological impact and benefit.26
Ear acupuncture to tender points in the ear-aborted
migraines.27
 Pain during shock wave
Bectroacupuncture provided analgesia comparable to
lithotripsy
sedoanalgesics during shock wave lithotripsy.28
Pain after knee arthroscopy
Auricular acupuncture reduced postoperative
analgesic requirements after ambulatory knee
arthroscopy.29
Table 16-2 lists various structures pertaining to the spine that can
generate back or neck pain in small animals.6 Inflammation, compres-
sion, developmental anomalies, or degeneration of these tissues can lead
to spinal discomfort. The table includes mention of particular acupunc-
ture point groupings that most directly influence pain transmission in
the affected nerves.
Treatmentof OtherPain Problems with Acupuncture
Table 16-3 provides acupuncture point suggestions for additional regional
pain problems. As with spine-related pain, one should first palpate the
body for areas of tension, taut bands, tissue warmth, and tenderness.
s
matters little when isolating “local" points for needling, that is, involved
Additional points to consider are those that influence autonomic function
CHAPTER 16 ·Complementary and Alternative Medicine
313
TABLE 16-2
Potential Sources of Neck and Back Pain
in Dogs and Cats
Structural Source
Related Neural Elements
Acupuncture
of Back Pain
Points Influencing
Nerves Related
to the Pain Source
htervertebral disk
The periphery of intervertebral disks
 Huatojiaji points,
in dogs contains nociceptors
"facet joint points"
and mechanoreceptors; the
sinuvertebral nerve supplies
sensory innervation.
Facet joint capsule
 The joint capsule is richly
Huatojiaji points,
innervated by proprioceptors and 
"facet joint points"
nociceptors.
 Dorsal root ganglion
 Mechanically sensitive nociceptors
Points along the
(DRG)
(.e., mechanonociceptors) in the 
 inner Bladder
nervi nervorum of the epineuria
channel
surrounding the DRG may
contribute to pain if compression
or tension affects the DRG.
Spinal ligaments:
 These ligaments contain free
 Points along the
(1) Dorsal longitudinal
nerve endings that have
Governor Vessel
ligament
been implicated as potential
channel
(2) Supraspinal
contributors to back pain.
ligaments 
(3) Interspinous
ligaments
Vertebral periosteum
The periosteum contains an
Huatojiaji points or
extensive plexus of nerve fibers
points along the 
that exhibits the lowest pain
Governor Vessel
threshold of any of the deep
channel
tissues.
Meninges
The dura is sensitive to mechanical
Points along the
and noxious stimulation;
Blad der channel
meningeal irritation may
contribute to back and neck pain
in dogs and cats.
Muscles attaching
Myofascial pain is characterized by
Local, direct needling
or referring to the
palpable, taut bands occurring
into the taut band or
back or neck
lengthwise along muscles
trigger point 
that contain exquisitely tender
regions. Myofascial pain is often
mistaken for radicular pain and 
 may be accompanied by visceral
pain syndromes including bowel
irritability and cystitis.
Continued
314
PART THREE •Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
TABLE 16-2
Potential Sources of Neck and Back Pain
in Dogs and Cats-cont'd
Structural Source
Related Neural Elements
Acupuncture
of Back Pain
Points Influencing
Nerves Related
to the Pain Source
Thoracolumbar fascia
Cutaneous branches from dorsal
 Points along
rami of lumbar spinal nerves
the Governor
innervate the thoracolumbar
Vessel, Bladder,
 fascia. Nerves supplying the
 or Gallblad der 
thoracolumbar fascia in humans
channels, depending
with chronic mechanical back
on the area
pain may undergo degeneration 
affected by pain,
because of ischemia or
 as determined by 
inflammation.
palpation 
Data from Wong IY: A manual of reuro-anatomical acupuncthre, vol 1, Musculo-skeletal
2003.
Acupuncture Points to Consider for Pain
TABLE 16-3
 on the Head
Painful Region
Acupuncture Points
 General head pain
Palpate for myofascial restrictions in the neck (especially
the suboccipital region) and the head (especially the
temporalis muscle).
GB 14, GB 20
BL 7, BL 8, BL 10
GV 14, GV 20
U 4, ST 44
Eye
TH 23, BL 2, LR 3
GB 2, GB 14, GB 20, BL 10
Yintang (GV 24.5), GV 14
Nose
 20, LI 4, LU 7
ST 2, ST 3, ST 4
Yintang (GV 24.5)
Mouth, teeth
 4, LU 7
ST 2, ST 4, ST 6
S18, SI19
Neck
Palpate for myofascial restrictions in the neck (especially
the suboccipital, cervicothoracic, and lateral regions).
CHAPTER 16 ● Complementary and Alternative Medicine   315
(especially sympathetic pathways) and thereby counteract windup.
These points include LI 4, ST 36, LR 3, GV 20, and all of the midline and
paravertebral points along the thoracolumbar region on the back.
ACUPUNCTURECOURSESANDSUPPLY COMPANIES
 xid  sadde sanns paa e po st 
HERBS
Some phytopharmaceuticals, as the predecessors to many modern
medications for pain, possess potent analgesic activity. In addition,
certain herbs confer antinflammatory effects. Herbs such as yucca
(-g1 i) ud og sug sdns u ba rde
However, unlike synthetic drugs, certain botanical pain relievers provide
significant benefits without dangerous side effects, at least in humans.
Because many ofthese products lack the centuries of empirical evidence
in nonhuman species, extrapolating aspects of safety and effectiveness
from humans to dogs and cats may be risky. Species- and breed-specific
metabolic idiosyncrasies may turn an otherwise safe herbal product
FIG. 16-9. Fresh yucca root. Yucca often appears in antipain arthritis
formulations.
316
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Contraindications, Drug-Herb Interactions,
 psychoactive medications and platelet inhibitors 
Theoretically, may confer additive sedating effects 
 Side effects are usually minor and involve minor
exhibit strong allergic responses to chamomile.
 gastrointestinal changes such as diarrhea or
 combined with anticoagulants may increase 
Those allergic to plants in the daisy family may
Internal usage may lead to gastric irritation.
Generally regarded as safe, but large doses
nteracts with antihypertensive medication
 when combined with benzodiazepines
May accentuate the effects of sedating
 antihypertensive medication 
taken internally 
Toxic if injected.
flatulence74
bleeding risk
 May be effective for osteoarthritis?0
Effective for dogs with arthritis73
 May ameliorate skin and mucosal 
Topical application for analgesia
 irritations and inflammation 
 and effective in humans.
Pain-Related Use
 and Advantages
IL-1 α) induced prostaglandin synthesis 
May alter with neuropeptide metabolism
 and infuence nociceptive affeents68
The antinflammatory effect of apigenin,
regulation in human endothelial cells.
Apigenin also inhibits interleukin-1c.
and tumor necrosis factor-α-induced 
 one of the flavonoids in chamomile,
nvolves interfering with leukocyte
 -dn yiano.d uoisaupe pue uoisaupe
Inhibits leukotrene synthesis71.72
 Sesquiterpene lactones provide
IL-6 and IL-8 formation.75
Mechanism of Action 
 Herbs for Pain
Topical counterirritant
TABLE 16-4
Arnica gel
 Chamomile 
Boswellia
Capsaicin
Herb
CHAPTER 16·Complementary andAlternative Medicine
317
 application; eugenol can cause tissue irritation 
Hepatotoxicity is due to pyrrolizidine alkaloids.79
Cultivars devoid of alkaloids in aerial parts may
 antidiabetic, antacid, and cardiac medication;
May cause aphthouslike ulcers in the area of
 adasns u sheap rua a pea a
Theoretical interactions with anticoagulant,
Hypoglycemic effects in diabetic persons
ym suaed u uonanpod ag saowod
 otherwise, generally regarded as safe
Unsafe for cats because of salicylates
 individuals applying it often 
and cardiac medications
Has antiplatelet activity
cholelithiasis
None found
None found 
 Shown to be equal to benzocaine
 Possible benefits for inflammation
 in effectiveness as a topical
Effective in treating pain from
Possible pain-relieving benefits 
 Possible effectiveness for pain
Topical anesthetic, especially
 Pain and inflammation from 
before dental procedures
May reduce local anesthetic
Less expensive than topical
 requirements
anesthetics
 and pain81
for arthritis
arthritis85
agent76
 The oily liquid eugenol, contained in clove, 
 COX-1 inhibitor, similar to aspirin because
Reduces the synthesis of two inducible,
Yucca polyphenols have potent antioxi-
dant, antiplatelet aggregation, and
 antinflammatory effects: allantoin,
 proinflammatory enzymes: cyclo-
Various constituents contribute to 
 confers analgesic properties.
nitric oxide synthase82
of salicylate content
COX-1 inhibition83 
COX-2 inhibition84
White willow bark
Yucca (Fig. 16-2)
Devil's claw
Clove gel
Comfrey
Corydalis
Ginger
PART THREE + Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
Herbs for Pain
●Botanical compounds are appearing with increasing regularity in supplement formulae
for pain and arthritis.
●Many plant compounds offer effective and proven antinflammatory and analgesic
benefits, alone or in combination.
● Despite the promising results from research and anecdotal evidence, concerns with
enforced manufacturing guidelines, underreporting of adverse effects, contaminants,
metabolism of these products between human and nonhuman animals.
into an unsafe approach. Table 16-4 provides a short overview of
various herbs with putative analgesic properties; their mechanisms of
action, if known; and their analgesic applications, contraindications,
interactions, and side effects. When introducing herbs into an animal's
pain-reduction plan, one should consider additive or counteractive
properties when mixing herbs with drugs. For example, psychoactive
botanicals such as kava kava, St. John's wort, and valerian can cause
excessive sedation and confusion, especially whien combined with
pharmaceuticals.67
VETERINARYMANUAL THERAPY
  n   n ss  r 
disciplines, including animal or veterinary chiropractic, manipulative
approaches derived from osteopathic medicine, and massage therapy.
Essentially, any healing modality performed with the hands by a
veterinarian qualifies as veterinary manual therapy.
VeterinaryManual Therapy
veterinary manual therapy includes a variety of manipulative techniques, ranging from
high-velocity, low-amplitude chiropractic thrusts to less invasive measures such as
massage and soft tissue therapy.
● Evidence concerning the safety and effectiveness of manual therapy approaches for
non-humans is largely lacking. However, the literature on humans offers substantial
evidence for the benefits of manipulative therapy for certain types of pain, most notably for
functional spinal pain.
CHAPTER 16 · Complementary and Alternative Medicine
FlG. 16-10. A handheld device known as an"Activator."
MECHANISM OF ACTION
High-velocity, low-amplitude thrusting techniques work to promote
restoration of healthy joint motion and mechanical functions. High
m  a e iq  o aon n
the aid of an instrument called an “Activator" (Fig. 16-10). Low-
force techniques may also focus on joint mobility or instead on the
musculature and fascia itself, by stretching and lengthening the soft
tissues.
INDICATIONS
Evidence suggests that manual therapy delivers a certain degree of relief
the benefits of manual therapy for other types of pain, although there is
practically no research indicating long-lasting and clinically meaningful
320
PART THREE·Therapy for the Alleviation ofPain
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Several contraindications exist for veterinary manual therapy, including
lack of a clear diagnosis to justify treatment, evidence of spinal cord
compression, joint instability, and lack of evidence of clear advantages
from its inclusion that outweigh the potential risks.3
ADVERSEEFFECTS
concerning the frequency and clinical predictors of adverse reactions to
chiropractic manipulation in human patients with neck pain revealed
that 25% of participants reported increased pain and stiffness after
treatment.88 High-velocity treatments caused more problems than less
forceful techniques.
Injuries following chiropractic in humans include paraplegia, vertebral
artery dissection and cerebellar infarction, and spinal fluid leak.89-91
MAGNET THERAPY
d, o os,    s on n  ss
frequently contains iron, steel, rare-earth elements, or alloys. Its magnetic
field remains constant. Static magnets must touch or be near the body to
deliver maximal effects because even though the gauss (strength) ratings
of a static magnet may range in the hundreds, the magnetic field strength
merely an inch away may fall into the low double digits. The other type of
magnet requires electricity to generate the magnetic field that pulses on
and off. This latter version creates a pulsed electromagnetic field.
Research on magnet therapy yields mixed results; some suggest that
the hype surrounding ma gnets far outweighs the evidence.92 Others insist
that the true potential of magnets is as yet untapped.93
MECHANISM OF ACTION
Static magnet suppliers may claim that their products are uniquely
effective because of a certain arrangement of magnetic polarity, that is,
in concentric circles, checkerboard patterns, or stripes. If one accepts
the idea that magnets improve circulation maximally when placed
perpendicular to vessels, then when polarities lay in varying directions,
the resultant fields will be perpendicular to at least some vessels.
Research shows that magnets affect circulation in a bidirectional
fashion; that is, researchers evaluating cutaneous microcirculation in
CHAPTER16·ComplementaryandAlternativeMedicine
321
FIG. 16-11. A pulsed electromagnetic field generator designed for animals.
rabbits have shown that static magnetic fields not only cause vasodilation
but also can promote vasoconstriction. The outcome depends on the
pretreatment neurotransmitter-driven tone of the vessels.
More research is available for pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF)
therapy than for static magnets (Fig. 16-1l). PEMF instruments create
magnetic fields as electrical current flows through coils of metal wire; more
turns of the coil or number of coils can create stronger magnetic felds.
Unlike static magnets that produce a permanent magnetic field, PEMF
generators only establish a magnetic field when current flows through
the coils. The on-off frequency of the PEMF generator determines the
rate of pulsation.
Magnet Therapy for Pain
● Magnet therapy devices come in two types: static magnets and pulse electromagnetic
field (PEMF) generators.
● Research suggests that PEMF provides analgesia largely through opioid-mediated
effects, although other mechanisms are likely involved as well, which may include
changes in blood flow to the affected area.
322
INDICATIONS
The main application of PEMF therapy is for the treatment of pain,
including neuropathic pain. PEMF increases pain thresholds in a manner
consistent with an analgesic response. In part, these analgesic effects are
opioid-mediated, for naloxone attenuates, but does not ablate, PEMF-
induced analgesia. Although critics claim that the pain-relieving effects
of magnets are placebo-driven, evidence from well-designed studies
demonstrating analgesia benefits is beginning to appear. Furthermore,
magnets appear to deliver statistically significant benefits for chronic skin
ulcer healing, which broadens the potential for the inclusion of magnets
in chronic disability cases.94
ADVERSEEFFECTS
 If an animal ingests multiple magnets, and if these pass beyond the
stomach, they may attract each other across thin- walled intestinal loops,
leading to ischemia, necrosis, and perforation.95
HOMEOPATHY
MECHANISM OF ACTION
The diluted substances in homeopathic remedies supposedly improve
the ability of the body to recover from or stave off illness or pain in an
unknown and unproven manner. The idea underlying homeopathy
rests on the premise that administering a small quantity of an illness
or symptom-producing substance causes the body to fight this illness or
concept resembles vaccination, the dilutions of homeopathic remedies are
extremely small and may consist of plant, animal, or mineral substances.
Homeopathy is conceptually difficult  for scientifically oriented
Homeopathy for Pain
● The evidence of effectiveness of homeopathic medicine for pain is mixed. The most
commonly recommended homeopathic remedy for pain is arnica, which is usually
healing.
● Safety concerns with homeopathic remedies are limited because of their diluted
contents.
CHAPTER 16 ● Complementary and Alternative Medicine   323
FlG. 16-12. Homeopathic pellets.
another premise of homeopathy is that more dilute remedies confer
stronger healing properties and must be used carefully.
As difficult as homeopathic theory is to swallow, the remedies are as
d a   n  sd s s s  
are just that: lactose tablets impregnated on the outer surface with the
diluted homeopathic mixture (Fig. 16-12).
INDICATIONS
Homeopathic use of arnica is one of the most common remedies for
pain. However, evidence is mixed regarding its value for muscle soreness
The lack of sufficient evidence in support of homeopathy in the
published literature--across the board and specifically for cancer pain-
suggests that homeopathy cannot, and should not, replace standard or
other effective analgesic measures.98
ADVERSEEFFECTS
Homeopathy maintains a low-risk profile because of the dilute nature
of most homeopathic products. However, injectable homeopathic
as anaphylaxis, feverish symptoms, and asthma.99
324
CONCLUSION
Many CAM options exist that putatively lessen veterinary patients
pain. Ascertaining the source of pain (musculoskeletal, neuropathic,
inflammatory) helps determine which, if any, of the CAM modalities
would be most suitable for a given patient and which should be avoided
(such as chiropractic for an unstable spine).
KEFERENCES
1. Ernst E: Musculoskeletal conditions and complementary/alternative
medicine,Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatof 18(4):539-556,2004.
2. Cohen MH: Legal and ethical issues relating to use of complementary
therapies in pediatric hematology/oncology. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
28(3):190-193, 2006.
3. Ernst E: The complexity of complementary medicine: chiropractic for back
pain,ClinRheumatol 24:445-446,2005.
4. Hektoen L: Review of the current involvement of homeopathy in veterinary
practice and research, Vet Rec 157:224-229, 2005.
5. Suarez-Almazor ME, Kendall CJ, Dorgan M: Surfing the Net: information
a ase  sd  q aim   m
or patient deceit?f Rheumatol 28:185-191, 2001.
 n as i ss  s i   s i
of acupuncture practice, Acupunct Med 22(3):134-136, 2004.
7. Pascoe PJ: Alternative methods for the control of pain, J Am Vet Med Assoc
221(2):222-229,2002.
8. Staud R, Price DD: Mechanisms of acupuncture analgesia for clinical and
experimental pain,Expert Rev Neurother 6(5):661-667,2006.
9. Zhang R-X, Lao L、 Wang X et al: Electroacupuncture attenuates
inflammation in a rat model, fAltern Complement Med 11(1):135-142,2005.
10. Han J-S: Acupuncture and endorphins, Neurosci Lett 361:258-261, 2004.
11. Sandberg M, Larsson B、Lindberg L-G,Gerdle B: Different patterns of
blood flow response in the trapezius muscle following needle stimulation
(acupuncture) between healthy subjects and patients with fibromyalgia and
work-related trapezius myalgia, Eur f Pain 9:497-510, 2005.
12. Chan AK, Vujnovich A, Bradnam-Roberts L: The effect of acupuncture
on alpha-motoneuron excitability, Acupunct Electrother Res 29(1-2):53-72,
2004.
13. Yu YH, Wang HC, Wang ZJ: The effect of acupuncture on spinal motor
neuron excitability in stroke patients, Zhongua Yi Xue Za Zhi 56(4):258-263,
1995.
14. Somers DL, Clemente FR: Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation for
the management of neuropathic pain: the effects of frequency and electrode
syndrome type II, Phys Ther 86(5):698-709, 2006
15. Xie H: How to use acupuncture for treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs and
cats. In Proceedings ofthe North American Veterinary Conference, Orlando,
Fla Jan 17-21, 2004.
16. Kendall DE: Early understanding of physiology. In Dao of Chinese medicine:
understanding an ancient healing art, Hong Kong,2002, Oxford University
Press.
17. Furlan AD, van Tulder M, Cherkin D et al: Acupuncture and dry-needling
for low back pain: an updated systematic review within the framework of the
Cochrane Collaboration,Spine 30:944-963, 2005.
18. Furlan AD, van Tulder MW, Cherkin DCet al: Acupuncture and dry-needling
for low back pain,Cochrane Database Syst Rev Jan 25,2005; 1:CD-1351.
19. Molsberger AF, Mau J, Pawalec DB, Winkler J: Does acupuncture improve
the orthopedic management of chronic low back pain: a randomized,
blinded, controlled trial with 3 months follow up, Pain 99:579-587, 2002.
20. Manheimer E, White A, Berman B et al: Meta-analysis: acupuncture for low
back pain,Ann Intern Med 142:651-663, 2005.
21. Berman BM, Lao L, Langenberg P et al: Effectiveness of acupuncture as
adjunctive therapy in osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomized, controlled
trial, Ann Intern Med 141:901-910, 2004.
22. Cui KM, Li WM, Gao X et al: Electro-acupuncture relieves chronic visceral
hyperalgesia in rats, Neurosci Lett 376:20-23, 2005.
23. Pohodneko-Chudakova IO: Acupuncture analgesia and its application
in cranio-maxillofacial surgical procedures、 J Craniomaxillofac Surg
33:118-122,2005.
24. Trinh KV, Phillips SD, Ho E, Damsma K: Acupuncture for the alleviation
of lateral epicondyle pain: a systematic review, Rheumatology 43:1085-1090,
2004.
25. Goddard G: Short term pain reduction with acupuncture treatment for
chronic orofacial pain patients, Med Sci Monit 11(2):CR71-CR74, 2005.
26. Linde K, Streng A, Jirgens S et al: Acupuncture for patients with migraine: a
randomized controlled trial, JAMA 293(17):2118-2125,2005.
27. Romoli M, Allais G, Airola G, Benedetto C: Ear acupuncture in the control
sat ieiuos aaa, aui aq siuiodnse iui aui suaas :uied auieni jo
Neurol Sci 26:S158-S161,2005.
28. Resim S, Gumusalan Y, Ekerbicer HC et al: Effectiveness of electro-
lithotripsy, Urol Res 33(4):285-290,2005 (Epub June 22, 2005).
           
pain relief after ambulatory knee arthroscopy: a pilot study, Evid Based
Complement Altern Med 2(2):185-189,2005.
30. Ernst E: Acupuncture: a critical analysis, / Intern Med 259:125-137,2006.
31. Durkes TE: Gold bead implants, Probl Vet Med 4(1):207-211, 1992.
32. Durkes TE: Gold bead implants. In Schoen AM, editor: Veterinary
acupuncture: ancient art to modern medicine, St Louis, 2001, Mosby.
33. Hielm-Bjorkman A, Raekallio M, Kuusela E et al: Double-blind evaluation
of implants of gold wire at acupuncture points in the dog as a treatment
for osteoarthritis induced by hip dysplasia, Vet Rec 149(15):452-456,
2001.
34. Bolliger C, DeCamp CE, Stajich M et al: Gait analysis of dogs with hip
dysplasia treated with gold bead implantation acupuncture, Vet Comp
OrthopTraumatof15(2):116-122,2002.
326PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
35. Hama Y, Kaji T: A migrated acupuncture needle in the medulla oblongata,
Arch Neurol 61(10):1608,2004.
36. Patrick BS: Acupuncture complication: a case report, J Miss State Med Assoc
46(7):195-197,2005
37. Vassiou K, Kelekis NL, Fezoulidis IV: Multiple retained acupuncture needle
fragments, Eur Radiol 13:1188-1189,2003 (letter).
38. Gerard PS, Wilck E, Schiano T: Imaging implications in the evaluation of
permanent needle acupuncture, Clin Imaging 17(1):36-40, 1993.
39. Ernst E,White AR: Acupuncture for back pain, Arch Intern Med 158:
2235-2241,1998.
40. Irnich D, Behrens J, Gleditsch JM et al: Immediate effects of dry needling and
acupuncture at distant points in chronic neck pain: results of a randomized,
double-blind, sham-controlled crossover trial, Pain 99:83-89, 2002.
41. Irnich D, Behrens N, Molzen H et al: Randomised trial of acupuncture
compared with conventional massage and “sham" laser acupuncture for
treatment of chronic neck pain, BMf 322:1574-1578, 2001.
42. Ghoname EA, Craig WF, White PF et al: Percutaneous electrical nerve
 s s   d  o r s
281(9):818-823, 1999.
43. Carlsson CPO, Sjolund BH: Acupuncture for chronic low back pain: a
randomized placebo-controlled study with long-term follow-up, Clin f Pain
17:296-305, 2001.
44. White P,Lewith G、 Prescott P,Conway J: Acupuncture versus placebo
for the treatment of chronic mechanical neck pain, Arn Intern Med 141:
911-919, 2004.
45. Blossfeldt P: Acupuncture for chronic neck pain: a cohort study in an NHS
pain clinic, Acupunct Med 22(3): 146-151,2004.
46. Leibing E, Leonhardt U, Koster G et al: Acupuncture treatment of chronic
low-back pain: a randomized,blinded,placebo-controlled trial with
9-month follow-up,Pain 96:189-196, 2002.
47. Han HJ, Jeong SW, Kim JY et al: The effect of conservative therapy on
thoracolumbar intervertebral disc disease on 15 dogs, fournal of Veterinary
Clinics20(10):52-58,2003.
48. Graw U: Acupuncture as the standard therapy for discopathy with ataxia of
the hind legs, Ganzheitliche Tiermedizin 17(1):9-13, 2003.
49. Kim MS, Kim SY, Seo KM, Nam TC: Acupuncture treatment for acute
torticollis (wry neck) in a dog. fournal of Veterinary Clinics 21(4):395-397,
2004.
50. Jeong SM, Park SW: Application of traditional acupuncture on canine
intervertebral disc disease, fournal of Veterinary Clinics 21(1):49-51, 2004.
51. Janssens LAA: Trigger points in 48 dogs with myofascial pain syndromes,
Vet Surg 20(4):274-278, 1991.
52. Kim M-S, Xie H, Seo K-M, Nam T-C: The effect of electro-acupuncture
treatment for chronic back pain in horses, Journal of Veterinary Clinics
22(2):144-147,2005.
53. Klide AM, Martin BB: Methods of stimulating acupuncture points for
treatment of chronic back pain in horses, f Am Vet Med Assoc 195(10):
1375-1379,1989.
54. White AR: Interview, Mod Med 67:46, 1999.
  s       
my sd sis e d y do ud ui uan
body needle acupuncture: a prospective cohort study、 Eur J Med Res
10:263-272、2005.
56. Longworth W, McCarthy PW: A review of research on acupuncture for
the treatment of lumbar disk protrusions and associated neurological
symptomatology. JAltern Complerment Med 3(1):55-76, 1997.
57. Ceccherelli F,Rigoni MT, Gagliardi G, Ruzzante L: Comparison of superficial
and deep acupuncture in the treatment of lumbar myofascial pain: a double-
blind randomized controlled study,Clin f Pain 18(3):149-153, 2002.
 n ae d a    i   
chronic low back pain in elderly patients: a blinded RCT, Acupunct Med
22(4):170-177,2004.
59. Baldry P: Superficial versus deep dry needling, Acupunct Med 20(2-3):78-81,
2002.
60. Wong IY: A manual of neuro-anatomical acupuncture, vol 1, Musculo-skeletal
disorders, Toronto, 1999, Toronto Pain and Stress Clinic.
61. Gunn CC, Milbrandt WE, Little AS, Mason KE: Dry needing of muscle
follow-up, Spine 5(3):279-291, 1980.
62. Gillette RG, Kramis RC, Roberts WJ: Suppression of activity in spinal
nocireceptive low back' neurons by paravertebral somatic stimuli in the cat,
Neurosci Lett 241:45-48,1998.
63. Facco E, Ceccherelli F: Myofascial pain mimicking radicular syndromes,
Acta Neurochir Suppl 92:147-150,2005.
64. Gerwin RD: A review of myofascial pain and fbromyalgia: factors that
promote their persistence, Acupunct Med 23(3):121-134, 2005.
65. Lundeberg T, Hurtig T, Lundeberg S, Thomas M: Long-term results of
acupuncture in chronic head and neck pain, Pain Clinic 2(1):15-31, 1988.
 s  u d     so g  a 
dogs and cats: a review, Vet / 165(3):193-213, 2003.
67. Rubin D, McGovern B, Kopelman RI: Back to basics,Am f Med 119:482-
483,2006
68. Wirth JH, Hudgins JC, Paice JA: Use of herbal therapies to relieve pain:
a review of efficacy and adverse effects, Pain Manag Nurs 6(4):145-167,
2005.
69. Wagner S, Suter A, Merfort I: Skin penetration studies of Arnica preparations
and of their sesquiterpene lactones, Planta Med 70(10):897-903, 2004.
70. Knuesel O, Weber M, Suter A: Armica montana gel in osteoarthritis of the
knee: an open, multicenter clinical trial, Adv Ther 19(5):209-218, 2002.
71. Hostanska K, Daum G, Saller R: Cytostatic and apoptosis-inducing activity
of boswellic acids toward malignant cell lines in vitro, Anticancer Res
22(5):2853-2862,2002.
72. Roy S, Khanna S, Krishnaraju AV et al: Regulation of vascular responses to
inflammation: inducible matrix metalloproteinase-3 expression in human
AntioxidRedoxSignal8(3-4):653-660,2006
328PART THREE • Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
73. Reichling J, Schmokel H, Fitzi J et al: Dietary support with Boswellia resin
in canine inflammatory joint and spinal disease, Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd
146(2):71-79,2004.
74. Kimmatkar N, Thawani V, Hingorani L et al: Effcacy and tolerability of
Boswellia serrata extract in treatment of osteoarthritis of knee: a randomized
double-blind placebo controlled trial, Phytomedicine 10:3-7, 2003.
75. McKay DL, Blumberg JB: A review of the bioactivity and potential health
benefits of chamomile tea (Matricaria recutita L.)、Phytother Res 2o(7):
519-530,2006.
76. Alqareer A, Alyahya A, Andersson L: The effect of clove and benzocaine
versus placebo as topical anesthetics, f Dent 34( 10):747-750, 2006.
77. Kucera M, Barna M, Horacek O et al: Effcacy and safety oftopically applied
Syrnphyturm herb extract cream in the treatment of ankle distortion: results of
a randomized controlled clinical double blind study, Wien Med Wochenschr
154(21-22):498-507,2004.
78. Kucera M, Barna M, Horacek O et al: Topical Symphytum herb concentrate
cream against myalgia: a randomized controlled double-blind clinical study.
Adv Ther22(6):681-692,2005.
79. Stickel F, Seitz HK: The effcacy and safety of comfrey, Public Health Nutr
3(4A):501-508,2000.
80. Kubo M, Matsuda H, Tokuoka K et al: Anti-inflammatory activities of
methanolic extract and alkaloidal components from Corydalis tuber, Biol
Pharm Bull 17(2):262-265,1994.
81. Wei F, Zou S, Young A et al: Efects of four herbal extracts on adjuvant-
induced inflammation and hyperalgesia in rats, J Altern Complement Med
5(5):429-436, 1999.
82. Huang TH-W, Tran VH, Duke RK et al: Harpagoside suppresses
lipopolysaccharide-induced iNOS and COX-2 expression through inhibition
of NK-kappaB activation,fEthnopharmacol 104:149-155,2006.
83. Nurtjahja-Tjendraputra E、 Ammit AJ, Roufogalis BE et al: Effective anti-
Thromb Res 111:259-265,2003
84. Tjendraputra E, Tran VH, Liu-Brennan D et al: Efect of ginger constituents
and synthetic analogues on cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme in intact cells, Bioorg
Chem 29:156-163, 2001.
85. Cheeke PR,Piacente S, Oleszek W: Anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic
effects of Yucca schidigera: a review, J Inflamm 3:6, 2006.
86. Hurwitz EL, Morgenstern H, Kominski GR et al: A randomized trial
of chiropractic and medical care for patients with low back pain, Spine
31(6):611-621,2006.
87. Santilli V, Beghi E, Finucci S: Chiropractic manipulation in the treatment
of acute back pain and sciatica with disc protrusion: a randomized double-
blind clinical trial of active and simulated spinal manipulations, Spine ∫
6:131-137, 2006.
88. Hurwitz EL, Morgenstern H, Vassilaki M et al: Frequency and clinical
predictors of adverse reactions to chiropractic care in the UCLA neck pain
study,Spine 30(13):1477-1484,2005.
CHAPTER 16 · Complementary and Alternative Medicine329
89. Wang C-C, Kuo J-R, Chio C-Cet al: Acute paraplegia following chiropractic
therapy, J Clin Neurosci 13:578-581, 2006.
90. Chen W-L, Chern C-H, Wu Y-L et al: Vertebral artery dissection and
cerebellar infarction following chiropractic manipulation, Emerg Med J
23:e1,2006.
91. Mathews MK, Frohman L, Lee H-J et al: Spinal fluid leak after chiropractic
manipulation of the cervical spine, Arch Ophthalmol 124:283, 2006.
92. Finegold L, Flamm BL: Magnet therapy, BMf 332(7532):4, 2006.
93. Teo JT: Don't discount magnet therapy, BMf 332(7534):180, 2006.
94. Eccles NK, Hollinworth H: A pilot study to determine whether a static
          
14(2):64-67,2005.
95. Oestreich AE: Danger of multiple magnets beyond the stomach in children,
Natl MedAssoc 98(2):277-279,2006
96. Tveiten D, Bruset S: Effect of arnica D30 in marathon runners: pooled results
from two double-blind placebo controlled studies, Homeopathy 92:187-189,
2003.
97. Stevinson C, Devaraj VS, Fountain-Barber A et al: Homeopathic arnica for
prevention of pain and bruising: randomized placebo-controlled trial in
hand surgery, J R Soc Med 96:60-65, 2003.
98. Milazzo S, Russell N, Ernst E: Review: efficacy of homeopathic therapy in
cancertreatment,Eur/Cancer 42:282-289,2006.
99. Baars EW, Adriaansen-Tennekes R, Eikmans KJL: Safety of homeopathic
injectables for subcutaneous administration: a documentation of the
experience of prescribing practitioners, J Alterm Complement Med 11(4):
609-616,2005.
330
PART THREE ● Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
APPENDIX 1
ACUPUNCTURE SUPPLIERS
LhaSa oms, Inc.
230 Libbey Parkway
Weymouth, MA 02189
Order toll free: 1-800-722-8775
Information: 781-340-1071
Fax: 781-335-5779
E-mail: info@lhasaoms.com
www.lhasaoms.com
THE SUPPLY CENTER
6829 Canoga Ave., Suite 5
Canoga Park, CA 91303
818-710-6868
Fax: 818-710-6855
E-mail: info@thesupplycenter.com
www.thesupplycenter.com
HelIO MEDICal SUPPLIeS. INC.
606 Charcot Ave.
San Jose, CA 95131
1-800-946-9264 (1-800-YIN-YANG)
Fax:408-433-5566
E-mail: sales@heliomed.com
www.heliomed.com
CHAPTER 16 + Complementary and Alternative Medicine
331
M.E.D. SERVI-SYSTEMS CANaDA LTD.
EASTERN BRANCH
120 Iber Road, Unit 105
Stittsville(Ottawa), ON K2S 1E9
1-800-267-6868 (North America)
613-836-3004 (worldwide)
Fax: 613-831-9356
WESTERNBRANCH(HEADOFFICE)
9109 Shaughnessy St.
Vancouver, BC V6P 6R9
1-800-667-6866 (North America)
604-263-5042 (worldwide)
Fax: 877-660-6866
Fax: 604-263-8781
www.easterncurrents.ca or www.acupuncturesupplies.com/
332
PART THREE ● Therapy for the Alleviation of Pain
APPENDIX 2
VETERINARY
ACUPUNCTURE COURSES
MEDICAL ACUPUNCTURE FOR
VETERINARIANS: OFFERED CONJOINTLY
THROUGH COLORADO STATE UNIVERSITY
COLORADO VETERINARY MEDICAL
ASSOCIATION, AND THE AMERICAN ACADEMY
OF VETERINARY MEDICAL ACUPUNCTURE
Contact:
Narda G. Robinson, DO, DVM, MS, FAAMA
Shipley Professor of Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Director, CSU Center for Comparative and Integrative Pain Medicine
Colorado State University College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences
 Department of Clinical Sciences
300 W. Drake Road
Fort Collins, CO 80523
970-221-4535
Fax: 970-297-1275
E-mail: Narda.Robinson@colostate.edu
THEINTERNATIONALVETERINARY
ACUPUNCTURE SOCIETY
P.O. Box 271395
Fort Collins, CO 80527-1395
970-266-0666
Fax: 970-266-0777
E-mail: office@ivas.org
CHI INSTITUTE
9700 West Hwy. 318
Reddick, FL 32686
1-800-891-1986
Fax: 1-866-700-8772
E-mail: Barbara@tcvm.com
CHAPTER 16 ● Complementary and Alternative Medicine
APPENDIX3
PROFESSIONAL VETERINARY
ACUPUNCTURE ARCHIVES,
TIPS, AND CHAT ROOMS
ON THE INTERNET
PVA-L ARCHIVES
www.listquest.com/secure/pvalist/lq/search.htm?In=pvalist
Username: pva-1
Password: vetacupuncture
PVA-L TIPS
http://users.med.auth.gr/-karanik/english/pva-l/pvaltips.html
PVA-L CHAT ROOM
http://users.med.auth.gr/~karanik/english/vetchatp.html
17
SELECTING ANALGESIC
DRUGS AND ROUTES
OF DRUG ADMINISTRATION
WILLIAMW.MUIRIII
CHOICE OF ANALGESIC THERAPY
The choice of analgesic therapy, whether pharmacologic or nonphar-
macologic, should be tailored to each animal's needs with the following
goals:
● Eliminating or suppressing pain
Tu d n q d sss o i 
behavior
●Making the animal more comfortable
● Returning the animal to maximum function despite residual pain
● Removing stress or distress
● Improving quality of life
The pain experience is often multifaceted and always multidimensional.
endocrine), sensory (location, intensity, quality), postural (stance, gait),
and behavioral (activity, mood, appetite) responses. Pharmacologic
approaches to the treatment of pain should be carefully considered, given
the diverse effects, metabolism, and toxicity of the drugs that are used to
treat pain and the potential for human abuse if opioid analgesics are used.
Determining the cause, location, severity, and duration of pain are the
three most important factors in the design ofa therapeutic plan. The choice
na s e  pd d o p  si r 
surgical procedure, for example, may be considerably different from that
prescribed for the treatment of osteoarthritis from hip dysplasia. Similarly,
the treatment of pain caused by acute inflammatory conditions (abscesses)
or abrasions is different from therapy designed to obtund or eliminate pain
caused bysevere trauma with nerve damage. The choice of drug and dosage
recommendations must be individualized to the patient and patient's needs
because serum levels are poor guides to analgesic efficacy and do little more
337
338PART FOuR ·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
than confirm that the drug is present in the animal's body. The patient's
physical status, medical history, and behavior pattern, in addition to the
pet owner's compliance with and understanding oftherapy, are also factors
that must be considered when pain therapy is prescribed. Ultimately, the
pe sasneo sh jo bupueis iapun s auo se pool se Auo si ued jo puaeanl
the use of therapeutic approaches that target these causes. Research in the
basic sciences is currently unraveling many of the mechanisms responsible
for pain and will continue to suggest the design and manufacture of safer,
more efficacious therapeutic alternatives.
ANAMNESIS
The dog's or cat'sage, weight, sex, breed, and physical status are important
determinants of drug selection and dose (Box 17-1).
Age
Young (less than 12 weeks) and older animals generally require lower
dosages of drugs. Drug metabolism and elimination path ways may not
normal aging or concurrent disease (reduced renal, hepatic function) in
older animals. Similarly, young and older animals generally demonstrate
drugs that also produce calming or sedative effects.
Weight
Weight should be used only as a guide for determining dose. Animals that
are obviously overweight or underweight generally require lower dosages
than are recommended. Overweight cats are particularly susceptible to
BOX 17-1
Factors to Consider Before Prescribing Analgesic Drugs
● Patient: age, weight, sex, breed, physical status, medical behavior, drug history, and
environment
● Mechanism of pain (inflammatory, neuropathic, cancer, other)
● Location and severity of pain
· Consequences of pain
Duration of pain
Route of administration (drug delivery)
● Drug efficacy/safety
●Potential for drug toxicity
●Potential for drug interactions
·Clinical experiences
CHAPTER 17· Selecting Analgesic Drugs and Routes 339
drug overdose because it may be more difficult to estimate their true lean
body weight compared with estimation of lean body weight in overweight
dogs. Regardless, all animals, particularly the smaller ones, should be
weighed as accurately as possible before initiating drug therapy.
Sex
Scientific studies have demonstrated sex-related differences in drug dose-
response characteristics. Clinically, however, drug dosages are rarely
affected by sex differences other than by the effects of sex hormones on
behavior. More aggressive animals usually require a larger dose.
Breed
Breed differences can have a significant impact on drug selection and
dose. Veterinary textbooks should be consulted, and the package insert
for veterinary-approved drugs should be carefully read before any drug
is prescribed. Doberman pinschers, for example, are predisposed to
the extrapyramidal side effects produced by opioid drugs. Some boxers
have demonstrated pronounced side effects and may have died after
Himalayan cats frequently demonstrate increased locomotor activity and
hyperexcitability when administered standard doses of opioids for pain
control.
Physica! Status
The patient's physical status is a major determinant of drug dosage
and the technique selected to produce analgesia. Sick, depressed, or
debilitated dogs and cats may derive more benefit and demonstrate fewer
side effects from analgesic techniques (preemptive, constant rate infusion
[CRI]) and nonconventional routes (epidural, transcutaneous) for drug
and cats that are unconscious or demonstrate signs of cardiorespiratory
compromise and are administered intravenous (IV), intramuscular (IM),
or subcutaneous (SC) analgesic drugs.
HISTORY
The patient's medical, pharmacologic, and pain history provides
valuable information regarding the choice of analgesic therapies and the
development of short- and long-term analgesic plans (see Chapter 5).
Although typically not emphasized, nonpharmacologic approaches should
always be considered as an alternative or in addition to the use of drugs for
the treatment of acute and chronic pain (see Chapter 16).
PART FouR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
MedicalHistory
significantly affect drug dosage. Dogs or cats with a history of significant
CNS or behavioral disorders (seizures, aggression, separation anxiety)
may demonstrate pronounced CNS or behavioral changes when
to analgesia. The administration of relatively low dosages of opioids
to older dogs that have become less social, for example, may produce
for several weeks. Similarly, dogs or cats with diseases that affect drug
metabolism and elimination (liver, renal) may demonstrate drug-related
side effects if administered standard dosages of drugs.
PharmacologicHistory
to analgesic and sedative drugs, should be determined. Drug dosages are
published as guidelines and should be used only as a starting point. Many
   s  r  si    
are being administered nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
or behavior-modifying drugs (tricyclic antidepressants), for example, are
more likely to demonstrate exaggerated drug-related effects, side effects,
analgesic therapy must be tailored to meet the animal's needs, and
knowledge of the animal's response to previous analgesic therapies can
be helpful in this regard.
Pain History/Behavior
The choice of analgesic and the development of an analgesic plan depend
on the duration of the pain (transient, acute, chronic), its severity, and
the animal's response to pain. The dog's or cat's pain history may be
important in the initial design of an analgesic plan. Some dogs and cats,
for example, seem to overreact to mild noxious events, demonstrating
exaggerated signs or responses to what would otherwise be considered
minimal or moderately painful events. Other dogs and cats demonstrate
little or no response to painful stimuli for several days or until they are
examined. Insight as to how the dog or cat responds to painful events helps
determine whether the patient is hypersensitive or a stoic and suggests the
types and dosages of drugs needed to restore a more normal behavior and
reduce stress. Nervous, hyperexcitable, small-breed dogs that have lived
the majority of their lives indoors, for example, generally demonstrate
exaggerated responses to minor traumatic events, including physical
manipulation, compared with larger, more sedentary outside dogs.
Although a generalization, the last statement emphasizes the importance of
knowing the animal's history and response (e.g-, aggressive when hurt) to
more from drugs that produce not only analgesia but also mild sedation.
Environment
The patient's environment may provide clues to the factors responsible
for initiating pain and pain-associated behaviors. One must know
whether there are children in the house and how they interact with the
pets. Older osteoarthritic dogs, for example, that are required to go up
or down stairs may refuse to move and become agitated when coerced.
aggressive if disturbed or forced to play.
OwnerExpectations
The owners' opinions and expectations regarding pain and pain therapies
should be determined. Their ability to administer medications or perform
nonpharmacologic therapeutic techniques must be determined. The
advantages, disadvantages, and cost of the pain therapy chosen should
be explained to every owner. Owners who are unfamiliar with or unsure
of the drugs and techniques used for the treatment of pain are much less
likely to comply with therapeutic recommendations.
CAUSE, SEVERITY,AND DURATION OF PAIN
General guidelines regarding the cause (inflammatory, mechanical,
neuropathic), severity (mild, moderate, severe), and duration (transient,
acute, chronic) of pain should be developed and serve as major
determinants of the therapeutic plan (see Chapter 6).
Cause
Pain can be caused by tissue trauma and inflammation, nerve damage
or irritation, cancer, or unknown factors (idiopathic). Knowing or
determining the cause of pain provides insight into its severity and
duration, thereby suggesting potential therapeutic approaches. Gastric
distention (visceral pain) with or without displacement ("bloat"),
for example, may require gastric decompression, the administration
of potent opioids, surgical intervention, and long-term (days) use of
analgesics. Similarly, the severe visceral pain and respiratory distress
caused by thoracic trauma with pneumothorax cannot be effectively
342
PART FoUR • Acute and Chronic Pain Management
treated by analgesics alone; antiinflammatory medications, chest
tubes, and possibly surgical reconstruction are required when there are
fractured or displaced ribs. Dogs with cervical disk disease (neuropathic
pain) may temporarily and repeatedly benefit from antinflammatory
(glucocorticosteroids) and analgesic (opioids) drugs but eventually
require surgery for long-term relief of pain. Determining the cause
of pain therefore helps determine the importance of the mechanical,
s
remedies (surgery, antiinflammatory medications, analgesics).
Severity
Animals demonstrating signs of severe pain attract attention. It can be
safely assumed, regardless of individual animal variability, that the more
pronounced the signs, the more pronounced the pain. With this in mind, an
obvious conclusion is that severe pain requires the administration of drugs
and the use of techniques that provide immediate, potent, and sustained
analgesic effects. In other words, the severity of the pain determines which
and to what extent various analgesic drugs and techniques are used. Toward
this end, many pain scoring systems and variations of these systems have
been developed to quantitate, categorize, and evaluate pain and the severity
of pain in animals (see Chapter 6). Pain scoring systerms are an integral
part of patient evaluation and serve as the basis for drug selection, dose
determination, and choice of route of administration. A dog or cat with
severe pain resulting from tissue trauma caused by an automobile accident,
for example, generally requires the IV administration of a potent opioid
(hydromorphone) and/or NSAID for immediate-onset, short-term analgesia.
Oral antinflammatory drugs (firocoxib, carprofen, deracoxib, etodolac,
tepoxalin) are administered for long-term analgesia. In contrast, a dog or
cat subjected to intense transient pain associated with the placement of a
large-gauge IV needle (jugular catheter) or the placement of a chest tube may
benefit more from the administration of a local or topical local anesthetic
(lidocaine). Less severe forms of pain generally respond to weaker analgesic
drugs administered at lower dosages, thereby decreasing the potential for
drug-related side effects and toxicity.
Duration
The duration ofpain helps to determine drug(s), drug dose, and duration of
therapy. The injection of a local anesthetic may suffice as analgesic therapy
for an otherwise normal, healthy dog or cat subjected to acute, transient
periods, however, usually require potent analgesic drugs administered in
larger dosages because of the plasticity and upregulation of the sensory
CHAPTER 17· Selecting Analgesic Drugs and Routes
343
nervous system. Chronic pain can be responsible for the production of
“"windup," central sensitization, and allodynia (see Chapter2). Patients with
chronic pain often derive more benefit from a combination of analgesic
drugs that act by different mechanisms than from larger doses of a single
drug. Drug combinations, although potentially more cumbersome to
administer and more expensive, may offer the advantage of drug synergism
and a reduction in drug-related side effects and toxicity (see Chapter 7).
The choice of drug, drug dosage, and therapeutic plan (pharmacologic
to maintain adequate analgesia, prevent development of drug tolerance,
and minimize the potential for drug toxicity.
DEVELOPING A TREATMENT PLAN
The development and periodic reassessment of a therapeutic plan is
essential for producing adequate and effective short- or long-terrm analgesia
in dogs and cats (Box 17-2). A rational approach to the treatment of pain is
most logically based on a clinical appreciation of the various mechanisms
responsible for producing pain and a knowledge of which mechanisms are
important in the production of clinical pain.
Similar to an understanding of the mechanisms responsible for causing
pain, there must be a conceptual and working understanding of the various
The treatment of severe pain with drugs that are capable of producing only
mild analgesic effects not only is ineffective but also makes pain harder to
treat and increases the likelihood for drug failure or toxicity.
Several different therapeutic approaches should be designed for
the treatment of mild, moderate, and severe pain. From a practical
standpoint, the cost of therapy should be integrated into these plans.
Nonpharmacologic therapies should be considered and suggested
B0X 17-2
Key Components of Analgesic Drug Therapy
·● Drug or method for alleviating pain
●Pain prevention program
●Analgesic technique
● Outcome goals
●Methods of assessing analgesia
· Documentation of success/failure
●Pain diary
·Education of staff/pet ownel
344PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
whenever appropriate. Educational materials describing the harmful
and disadvantages of different therapeutic approaches should be made
available to help educate pet owners.
DRUGS
Drug selection and therapeutic technique should be based on the cause,
severity, and duration of pain (see Chapters 6 and 8). Drugs should be
thought of and categorized based on their mechanism of action, analgesic
potency, and potential to produce unwanted side effects (Box 17-3). A pain
scoring combined with quality of life rating system should be developed
or adopted and used for assessing the severity of pain and the success or
failure of therapy (see Chapter 6). Clinical experience and familiarity with
a select group of drugs is important in achieving a beneficial drug effect.
Opioids
Opioids (e.g-, morphine, oxymorphone, butorphanol, and codeine)
 produce mild to excellent analgesia with minimal to moderate behavior
has not been substantiated in dogs and cats, although oral opioid elixirs
(morphine) may be useful. Transdermal and epidural routes of drug
administration offer an alternative to parenteral administration.
a2-Agonists
U.-Agonists (e.g-,xylazine, medetomidine,romifidine,and clonidine)produce
   a     
administration offers an alternative to parenteral routes and is less likely to
produce sedation. Clonidine patches are available for transdermal delivery.
B0X 17-3
Key Drug Issues
● Mechanism of action
●Analgesic potency
· Duration of effect
●Central nervous system depression
●Antinflammatory effects
● Side effects/toxicity
●Drug interactions
+ Cost
NonsteroidalAntiinfiammatory Drugs
NSAIDs (e.g-, firocoxib, carprofen, deracoxib, etodolac, meloxicam,
tepoxalin) produce mild to moderate analgesia and antinflammatory
effects. Oral and parenteral preparations are available. Although NSAIDs
are frequently prescribed for chronic use, liver and renal function should
be periodically evaluated in animals receiving these drugs.
LocalAnesthetics
Local anesthetics produce excellent analgesia but must be administered
 sn  rn  a   n  a
administration techniques (e.g-, lidocaine CRI) enhance the anesthetic
and analgesic effects of concurrently administered drugs.
Other Drugs and Techniques
Many drugs, although not noted for their analgesic effects, can produce
mild analgesia (e.g-, mexiletine and diltiazem) or enhance the analgesic
effects of drugs that do (e.g, acepromazine and droperidol). These
drugs are often combined with more traditional analgesic therapies
effects.
ROUTESOFDRUGADMINISTRATION
Choosing the appropriate route for drug administration and the
administration technique can be the deciding factor in producing
adequate analgesia while avoiding drug-related side effects or toxicities
(Fig. 17-1). The concept of minimal effective concentration, for
example, is of limited value in the clinical administration of analgesics,
given the wide variation in response to analgesic drugs, despite similar
plasma concentrations. Dogs or cats that are sick or that demonstrate
signs of CNS depression or cardiovascular or respiratory compromise
may not accept or adequately absorb oral medications or may not
tolerate the high plasma concentrations produced by IV, IM, or even
SC drug administration compared with alternate routes (e.g-, epidural
or transcutaneous). The route of drug administration may be more
important than the drug administered (Box 17-4).
Oraf
The oral administration of drugs is preferred for the treatment of most
346
PART FOuR·Acuteand ChronicPainManagement
Inhalation
Parenteral:
IV, IM, SC
Oral
Buccal
Rectal
Topical
Patch
FIG. 17-1. Routes of drug administration. Inhalation, buccal (sublinqual), oral
(PO), IV, IM, SQ, topical (cream, patch) and rectal.
B0X 17-4
Routes of Analgesic Drug Administration
●Oral
● Intravenous
Intramuscular/subcutaneous
●Epidural/subarachnoid
●Transcutaneous/topical
●Sublingual/buccal/transmucosal
●Intranasal/inhalational
· Transdermal
·Rectal
with injectable analgesics to produce additive or synergistic effects.
Oral administration of drugs can be accomplished in the hospital or
at home with minimal to no supervision. Drug effects are relatively
 prolonged after oral administration, and drug side effects and toxicities
are comparatively minimal. Orally administered drugs are subject to
first-pass metabolism in the liver, which limits their bioavailability and
clinical efficacy. Diet, eating behavior, drug formulation, and concurrent
s   s  d  s
tract and erratic absorption patterns, leading to an inadequate analgesic
CHAPTER 17 · Selecting Analgesic Drugs and Routes   347
response. Finally, the owner must comply with dosage schedules for
therapy to be effective.
Intravenous
d pue n iso  sd sip go une A
effects. Drugs can be administered IV as a bolus, slow injection, or CRI.
Drugs that are administered IV must be closely monitored for immediate
or delayed adverse drug effects. Drug plasma concentrations are at
potential for drug-related side effects and toxicity. Sites of venous access
in dogs or cats receiving CRI must be evaluated for signs ofextravasation,
thrombophlebitis, and generalized inflammation.
IntramuscularandSubcutaneous
IM and SC drug administration are easily performed and provide
relativelyrapid (5to 20 minutes) onsetofeffects.SC drug administration
is relatively painless if small needles are used. Analgesic drugs can
be administered less frequently than required for IV injections, and
plasma concentrations are not as high, reducing the potential for side
effects and drug-related toxicity. The IM administration of drugs can
be painful, particularly when larger volumes are administered. Drug
absorption is occasionally erratic after IM or SC drug administration,
Erratic drugabsorption is morelikelytooccur in dogs and cats with poor
peripheral circulation (dehydration, hypovolemia, hypothermia).
Epidural/Subarachnoid (Spinal)
More and more drugs are being investigated for epidural or subarachnoid
administration in dogs and cats. Although the epidural route was originally
used only for administration of local anesthetics (lidocaine) and opioids
(morphine), recent clinical trials have investigated the analgesic effects of
epidural administration of NSAIDs (ketoprofen), dissociative anesthetics
(ketamine), and α2-agonists (xylazine, medetomidine). Epidural drug
(hours) with relatively small drug doses, thereby limiting the potential
for side effects and toxicity. The epidural administration of opioids,
Q2-agonists, and NSAIDs also avoids the loss of motor control associated
with the epidural administration of local anesthetic drugs. Epidurally
administered drugs should be sterile and preservative-free and should have
a relatively poor lipid solubilityto limit absorption and prolong effects. The
epidural or subarachnoid administration of drugs must be performed by
appropriately trained and skilled personnel and requires sterile technique.
348
PART FoUR •Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Transdermal and Topica!
Analgesic drugs are available for transdermal (fentanyl, clonidine)
delivery or topical administration. A eutectic mixture of local anesthetics
(lidocaine-prilocaine [EMLA] cream) and multiple concentrations of
lidocaine cream (4% or 5% lidocaine [LMX]) areavailable. Transdermally
delivered drugs are easy to administer with minimal training. The
drug is absorbed into the blood, bypassing liver metabolism (first-pass
elimination), and effects persist for as long as the patch contains drug
and remains in contact with the skin. Transdermal drug delivery is an
excellent method for providing preemptive analgesia or *background"
analgesia before major surgery and as adjunct analgesia after a major
traumatic event. The potential for drug-related side effects and toxicity is
low because of slow drug absorption. Slow drug absorption also prolongs
the time to produce analgesia, making it difficult to predict drug effects
 e so s  sdoa on s   e 
Sublingual, Buccal, and Transmucosa!
Like transdermal drug delivery, the sublingual, buccal, and transmucosal
routes of drug delivery depend on drug absorption from the body surface,
in this case the mucous membranes. The absorbed drug is not subjected
to first-pass liver metabolism. Although potentially having the same
advantages as transdermal drug delivery, the sublingual and buccal routes
of drug administration to dogs and cats requires patient cooperation. The
influence of saliva on drug absorption and the unfamiliar taste produced
of various opioid-containing syrups (e.g-, codeine, morphine, and
through the mucous membranes, producing analgesic effects that last for
several hours in dogs and cats. The buccal absorption of opioids depends
Intranasal orInhalational
Intranasal and inhalational drug deliveryare similarto sublingual and buccal
than butorphanol have been investigated for intranasal administration.
Rectal
I'he rectal administration of drugs to dogs and catsis rarely used. Although
rectal administration of drugs can be performed, the bioavailability of
rectally administered drugs to dogs and cats is poor. Furthermore, rectally
CHAPTER 17 · Selecting Analgesic Drugs and Routes   349
administered drugs are generally absorbed slowly, and drug absorption
TECHNIQUESFORANALGESICDRUGADMINISTRATION
The medical philosophy adopted for drug administration can be as
important as the drug selected in determining the therapeutic efficacy
of analgesic drug therapy (Box 17-5). The efficacy of butorphanol,
for example, for the treatment of severe pain in dogs and cats is
unsubstantiated. Similarly, the analgesic effects of more potent opioids
(e.g-, morphine and fentanyl) are generally enhanced by the concurrent
administration of NSAIDs and frequently reduce the total amount of
opioid required to produce effective analgesia.
Local and Regionaf Anesthetic Nerve Blocks
Local and regional anesthetic nerve blocks (e.g, infiltration, epidural,
and intercostal) are valuable adjuncts to the administration of parenteral
analgesic medications. Performed properly, these techniques provide
excellent analgesia that lasts for several hours with a low potential for
serious side effects (see Chapter 15).
PreemptiveAnalgesia
Preemptive (i.e., treatment before pain occurs) analgesic drugs
and techniques should be used whenever possible. The earlier
pain is treated, the sooner patient well-being and homeostasis can
be reestablished. The use of preemptive techniques to treat pain
 generally reduces drug dosages and the total amount of drug required
to maintain analgesia.
Constant RateInfusion
A CRI can be used to provide continuous titratable analgesia for
extended periods (Fig. 17-2). The use ofa CRIto produce a steady-state
plasma concentration of drug avoids the peaks (potential toxicity)
B0X 17-5
Drug Administration Techniques
· Local/regional anesthesia
·Preemptive analgesia
● Constant rate infusion
·Multimodal
· Drug rotation schedules
09E
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
FIG. 17-2. The quantitative and accurate infusion of drugs (analgesics,
and troughs (potential loss of drug effect) associated with repeated
injectable or oral drug administration. Opioids, local anesthetics,
and some anesthetic drugs (e-g-, ketamine and tiletamine-zolazepam
[Telazol]) can be administered by CRI to provide excellent analgesia
for hours or days. One or two IV bolus drug doses (loading dose
plus CRI) are usually administered in conjunction with the initiation
of CRI to help establish and sustain therapeutic plasma drug
concentrations until steady-state drug concentrations are reached
(see Chapter 7).
Multiple LowDosing
The administration of multiple low doses of analgesic drugs by IV
or IM injection is similar to CRI because a lower dose of drug is
administered more frequently, thus minimizing peak and trough
drug concentrations and the potential for toxicity and ineffective
drug plasma concentrations, respectively. This technique can be
used when CRI cannot be used or is technically difficult to perform
and is well suited for high-risk patients in which higher-dose bolus
administration is more likely to produce unwanted side effects. This
technique, however, is labor intensive and more disturbing to the
patient than CRI.
CHAPTER 17 ·Selecting Analgesic Drugs and Routes
351
Multiple Routes
  e q  i r   s 
routes to produce immediate and sustained drug effects. The IV
administration of a drug in conjunction with its IM or SC administration
produces immediate drug effects, which are sustained for a longer
duration, depending on the rate of absorption and pharmacokinetics
of the drug administered. This technique is particularly useful for
drugs that have intermediate (1 to 2 hours) to short (<30 minutes)
half-lives. Repeated IM administration of morphine in conjunction
with the placement of a fentanyl patch (transcutaneous drug delivery),
effective plasma concentrations of fentanyl are reached, which may take
6 to 12 hours (see Chapter 9).
MuitipleDrugAdministration
The administration of two or more analgesic drugs (multimodal therapy),
sequentially or together in solution (compounding), is an effective
method of improving and enhancing analgesic drug effects. Generally
frequently supraadditive (synergistic) when administered at the same time.
Synergism allows lower doses of each drug to be administered, decreasing
the potential for the development of drug-related side effects or toxicity.
Drug Rotation Schedules
The rotation of drugs that act by the same general mechanism or
different mechanisms (e.g-, opioids and NSAIDS) may help prevent the
development of drug tolerance and drug-related toxicities. Intermittent
dosage schedules (3 days on, 2 days off) and alternate administration of
carprofen with etodolac or codeine, for example, may help to sustain
analgesic drug effects and avoid toxicities unique to single-drug therapy.
WHAT TO DO WHEN THE THERAPEUTIC PLAN
DOES NOT WORK
Anyone who has treated dogs, cats, or any animals in pain is familiar with
therapeutic failure. Many causes for pain exist and many factors influence
the patient's response to painful sensations and the effects of analgesic
therapies ( Box 17-6). Behavior-modifying drugs or techniques and changes
in the animal's environment may be required to treat pain effectively in
some animals. Lack of owner compliance with prescribed recommenda-
tions should be considered as one possible cause of therapeutic failure.
352
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
B0X 17-6
How to Respond to Therapeutic Failure
· Reevaluate patient.
● Reevaluate treatment plan: drug, dose, technique.
●Reevaluate owner compliance.
· Reevaluate patient environment.
· Reevaluate nonpharmacologic treatments.
●Consider alternative or adjunctive therapies.
● Consider drug tolerance/interactions.
●Consider behavioral modification.
SUGGESTEDREADINGS
Asburn MA, Lipman AG: Management of pain in the cancer patient, Anesth
Analg 76:402-416,1993.
Beckman BW: Pathophysiology and management of surgical and chronic oral
pain in dogs and cats, / Vet Dent 23(1):50-60, 2006.
Bushnell TG, Justins DM: Choosing the right analgesic, Drugs 46(3):394-408,
1993.
Clark TP: The clinical pharmacology of cyclooxygenase-2-selective and dual
inhibitors, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 36(5):1061-1085, 2006.
Giuliano EA: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugsin veterinary ophthalmology
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34(3):707-723,2004.
Henrotin Y、 Sanchez C、 Balligand M: Pharmaceutical and nutraceutical
management of canine osteoarthritis: present and future perspectives, Vet ∫
170(1):113-123,2005
Lascelles BD, McFarland JM, Swann H: Guidelines for safe and effective use of
NSAIDs in dogs, Vet Ther 6(3):237-251, 2005.
Mathews KA, Dyson DH: Analgesia and chemical restraint for the emergent
patient,Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 35(2):481-515, 2005.
Muir WW, Woolf CJ: Mechanisms of pain and their therapeutic implications,
fAm Vet Med Assoc219:1346-1356,2001.
lodan e ulas aaieadad a u saa ued ainoe oy sauain ae
by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Pain Management,
Acute Pain Section, Anesthesia 85:1071-1081, 1995.
Robertson SA: Managing pain in feline patients, Vet Clin North Am Srmall Anim
Pract 35(1):129-146, 2005.
Robertson SA, Taylor PM: Pain management in cats: past, present and future. 2.
Treatment of pain: clinical pharmacology, / Feline Med Surg6(5):321-333, 2004.
Taylor PM, Robertson SA: Pain management in cats: past, present and future. 1.
The cat is unique, J Feline Med Surg 6(5):313-320, 2004.
Woolf CJ: Pain: moving from symptom control towards mechanism-specific
pharmacologic management, Arn Intern Med 140:441-451,2004
18
ACUTE PAIN
MANAGEMENT:
A Case-Based Approach
AMESS.GAYNORANDWILLIAMW.MUIRIHI
Nhe following are specific cases of painful animals. The cause for
pain and the rationale for specific treatment are described in
to pain management. Various drugs and procedures are mentioned,
including the doses of drugs administered. More detail on each drug and
procedure is provided in other portions of the Handbook. All patients
should be considered healthy unless otherwise noted.
CASE 1
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
(BOX 18-1)
Analgesic management was for a dog undergoing ovariohysterectomy
(OHE) in a practice that discharges patients the same day as surgery.
Signaiment: 6-month-old female mixed-breed dog weighing 20 kg
Chaflenge: Most owners do not like to take their pet home sedate.
The veterinarian is likely to be called if an animal remains sedate into
the evening. The challenge is to provide adequate analgesia without
sedation for 24 hours.
Source of Pain: The pain from an OHE is multifold. Abdominal wall
pain from the incision definitely occurs. Visceral pain from manipulation
of the uterus and ovaries and from stretching of associated ligaments also
occurs.
BOX 18-1 I CASE 1: CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
● Somatic and visceral pain
·Mild to moderate
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
·Acute onset; short duration
353
354   PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
Many dogs do not exhibit signs of pain in the presence of humans.
Therefore, like any other surgical procedure, it is best to treat pain
preemptively and then follow up with the appropriate postoperative
evaluation and therapy.
Preemptive Anaigesia
Appropriate preemptive analgesic therapy should include an opioid
agonist such as morphine or oxymorphone. This dog received morphine
0.5 mg/kg SC combined with acepromazine 0.02 mg/kg and atropine
0.04 mg/kg. The acepromazine was added to the premedication for
tranquilization. The atropine was added to offset vagal-induced
bradycardia associated with the morphine.
ImmediatePostoperativeAnaigesia
Morphine has a duration of action of approximately 4 to 6 hours
when administered at this dose subcutaneously. Because most OHEs
drugs upon recovery from anesthesia. If the OHE is performed in the
morning, an additional dose of morphine at 0.5 mg/kg SC should be
administered to provide analgesia for the rest of the day. Morphine
    n  s
period.
Anaigesia at the End of the Day
Dogs are treated with nalbuphine at 1.0 mg/kg SC as the dog leaves the
hospital to ensure several more hours of analgesia with minimal or no
sedation.
24-Hour Anaigesia
Mild to moderate pain can be treated with a nonsteroidal
antinflammatory drug (NSAID) such as injectable carprofen 4 mg/kg
SC followed by oral carprofen 4 mg/kg PO sid the next day. Carprofen
can be administered before surgery, after sedation, if the patient will
receive intravenous (IV) fluid administration and will have arterial
blood pressure monitored to ensure adequate perfusion of the kidney.
Alternatively, carprofen should be administered after the procedure
during recovery to increase and extend the period of analgesia. This
helps to avoid NSAID-related renal toxic effects in animals that are
not administered IV fluids or are not having their blood pressure
monitored.
CHAPTER 18·Acute Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
355
4-DayAnaigesia
P   s e  d n a d s
performing an OHE.
1. Carprofen 4.4 mg/kg PO sid. Carprofen should not be administered
orally if another NSAID was originally administered parenterally.
This particular dog received this protocol.
2. Oral tramadol 2 to 3 mg/kg PO bid
3. Transdermal fentanyl patch 2 to 3 μg/kg per hour (Box 18-2)
BOX 18-2 I CASE 1: CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Morphine 1 mg/kg SC
●Postoperative analgesia: Morphine at 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg SC
●Analgesia at the end of the day: Nalbuphine at 1.0 mg/kg SC
●24-hour analgesia: Carprofen 4.4 mg/kg SC
● 3-day analgesia: Carprofen 4 mg/kg P0 sid or
Oral tramadol 2 to 3 mg/kg P0 bid or
Iransdermal fentanyl patch 2 to 3 μg/kg per hour
CASE 2
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY 2
(BOX 18-3)
This case is an example of an analgesic protocol used for dogs that stay
one night in the hospital after OHE.
Signalment: 6-month-old female mixed-breed dog weighing 8 kg
 is that the facility is not staffed in the evening to provide redosing of
analgesics.
Source of Pain: The pain from an OHE is multifold. Abdominal wall pain
uterus and ovaries and from stretching of associated ligaments also occurs.
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
OHEs, like other surgical procedures, are painful. Patients should receive
BOX 18-3 | CASE 2: CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Somatic and visceral pan
·Mild to moderate
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
+Acute onset; short duration
356PART FOUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
PreemptiveAnalgesia
The dog received morphine 7.5 mg SC (approximately 1 mg/kg) 30 minutes
before anesthesia. Morphine has a duration of action of approximately
4 to 6 hours when administered at this dose subcutaneously. The dog also
received acepromazine 0.02 mg/kg and atropine 0.04 mg/kg combined with
the morphine and given subcutaneously. The acepromazine was added to
the premedication for tranquilization. The atropine was added to offset any
 potential for vagal-induced bradycardia associated with the morphine.
ImmediatePostoperative Analgesia
Because most OHEs are short (20 to 40 minutes), most dogs do not
require additional drugs during recovery from anesthesia. This OHE
was performed in the morning, so an additional dose of morphine at
1.0 mg/kg SC was administered 4 hours after the first dose to provide
analgesia for the rest of the day. Morphine provides maximal analgesia
for the immediate postoperative period.
AnaigesiaattheEndof theDay
Because no one is availa ble to redose morphine after 6 PM, this dog received
buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg SC. The advantage of buprenorphine is that it
has a long duration of action, approximately 4 to 12 hours. The analgesia
is not as good as that produced by morphine, but it should be adequate,
especially if an NSAID is administered postoperatively.
24-HourAnaigesia
Analgesia can be maintained with an NSAID such as meloxicam or carprofen.
The NSAID, in the form carprofen 4 mg/kg SC, should be administered
after the procedure during recovery to avoid any potential complications
produced by anesthetic-associated hypotension ( Box 18-4).
BOX 18-4 I CASE 2: CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Morphine 1 mg/kg SC
●24-hour analgesia: Carprofen 4 mg/kg S0
CASE 3
CANINE CASTRATION (BOX 18-5)
Signalment: 10-month-old 30-kg male dog
Challenge: To provide analgesia that will extend for 24 hours.
CHAPTER 18·Acute Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
357
Source of Pain: Castration causes mild to moderate somatic and
visceral pain.
BOX 18-5 | CASE 3: CANINE CASTRATION-DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
·Visceral pan
·Mild to moderate
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
·Acute onset; short duration
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
Preemptive Anaigesia
This dog was premedicated with acepromazine 0.04 mg/kg for
tranquilization, atropine 0.04 mg/kg to prevent vagal-induced
bradycardia, and hydromorphone 0.1 mg/kg for analgesia, all combined
and administered subcutaneously.
ImmediatePostoperativeand24-HourAnalgesia
Because the pain from castration is believed to be mild to moderate, it
can be treated with carprofen 4.4 mg/kg SC. This should be administered
during recovery from anesthesia (Box 18-6).
BOX 18-6| CASE 3: CANINE CASTRATION-THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Hydromorphone 0.1 mg/kg SC
● Immediate postoperative and 24-hour analgesia: Carprofen 4.4 mg/kg Sc
FELINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
CASE 4
(B0X 18-7)
This is a case of a cat that will go home the same day as surgery.
Signaiment: 6-month-old female domestic shorthair cat weighing 3 kg
Source of Pain: The source of pain is a combination of surgical trauma
to the abdominal wall and visceral pain from stretching of ligaments.
BOX 18-7 | CASE 4: FELINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY-
DESCRIPTION OFPAIN
●Somatic and visceral pain
· Mild to moderate
●Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
·Acute onset; short duration
358 PART FOUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
PreemptiveAnalgesia
This cat was premedicated with buprenorphine 0.o1 mg/kg SC for
analgesia combined with medetomidine 0.02 mg/kg for additional
analgesia and sedation, and atropine to prevent bradycardia induced
by the other two drugs. The effects of buprenorphine should last 4 to 8
hours in cats.
Postoperative Anaigesia
Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC was administered at the end of the procedure
and should persist for 24 hours (Box 18-8).
BOX 18-8 | CASE 4: FELINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Postoperative analgesia: Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC
CASE 5
FELINE CASTRATION (BOX 18-9)
Signaiment: 8-month-old male Abyssinian cat weighing 3 kg
Chaflenge: Providing analgesia without sedation so the owner can
take the cat home the same day as surgery
Source of Pain: Visceral pain related to spermatic cord and cremaster
muscle tension. This pain is probably mild to moderate.
·Visceral pain
·Mild to moderate
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
● Acute onset; short duration
TREATMENTAND RATIONALE
Preemptive Anaigesia
This cat was premedicated with hydromorphone 0.1 mg/kg SC for
analgesia combined with medetomidine 0.02 mg/kg for analgesia
and sedation, and atropine to prevent bradycardia induced by the other
two drugs. The hydromorphone should last 3 to 4 hours in a cat.
CHAPTER 18●Acute Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
699
PostoperativeAnalgesia
Carprofen 3 mg/kg SC was administered at the end of the procedure
This should last 24 to 72 hours (Box 18-10).
BOX 18-10 CASE 5: FELINE CASTRATION-
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
● Preemptive analgesia: Hydromorphone 0.1 mg/kg and medetomidine 0.02 mg/kg SC
●Postoperative analgesia: Carprofen 3 mg/kg SC
CASE 6
DECLAW-FRONT FEET (BOX 18-11)
Signaiment: 1l2-year-old castrated male domestic longhair cat
weighing 5.5 kg
Challenge: Pain from declaw procedure is one of the most difficult
sources of pain to treat. Anecdotally, some owners believe their cats are
experienced.
Source of Pain: Severe pain originating from severed ligaments,
tendons, and potentially traumatized bone and periosteum
BOX 18-11 | CASE 6: DECLAW-FRONT FEET-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Somatic pain
·Severe
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
●Neuropathic; nerve damage
· Acute onset; short duration
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
PreemptiveAnalgesia
        s  s 
sia combined with medetomidine 0.02 mg/kg for additional analgesia
and sedation, and atropine to prevent bradycardia induced by the
other two drugs. Methadone was specifically chosen because of its
D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, thus helping to prevent windup and the
development of chronic pain. The dose of methadone was considerably
higher than that used for most other procedures in cats because of the
pain intensity. Methadone lasts 3 to 5 hours in cats.
360PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
 d   s a a e s  s
bupivacaine (0.75%) 1.5 mg/kg split between both front paws. This
rine should be used in peripheral blocks like this. The epinephrine
component causes vasoconstriction and decreased perfusion to the
periphery, potentially resulting in tissue ischemia.
PostoperativeAnaigesia
A multimodal approach to analgesia is crucial because of the potential
for severe pain.
1. Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC was administered at the end of the proce-
dure. This should provide analgesia for up to 24 hours.
2. Four hours after the initial methadone dose, another dose of metha
done 0.5 mg/kg SC was administered. This analgesia was present as
the bupivacaine effect subsided.
3. Buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg SC was administered 31/2 hours after the
last methadone dose. Buprenorphine has a longer duration of action
than methadone and should help keep the cat comfortable through-
out the night, along with the meloxicam.
4. Butorphanol was specifically not used in this case because of the intensity
of pain. Butorphanol only provides mild to moderate analgesic effects (see
Chapter 9). Methadone produces excellent analgesia in cats (Box 18-12).
BOX 18-12 | CASE 6: DECLAW-FR0NT FEET-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Methadone 0.5 mg/kg and medetomidine 0.02 mg/kg SC;
bupivacaine declaw block
after ocal anesthetic infiltration
●Overnight analgesia: Buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg SC 3% hours after the last morphine
administration
cam 0.05 mg/kg P0 sid for 4 days
Analgesiato GoHome
procedure that requires analgesia for 4 to 7 days.
1. Buprenorphine 0.o1 mg/kg buccally bid for 2 days. Administration
 a  a s spod r  adona tng go
petence and lethargy.
2. Meloxicam 0.05 mg/kg PO sid for 4 days
 3. Transdermal fentanyl patch 25 μg/h; leave on for 5 days.
CHAPTER 18·Acute Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
361
CASE 7
INCISOR EXTRACTION (BOX 18-13)
Signaiment: 12-year-old spayed female miniature poodle, weighing
9 kg, with periodontitis requiring extraction of two left lower incisors.
This dog also has mitral regurgitation with a 2/6 systolic murmur.
 There are no apparent signs of heart failure, and the dog is not being
administered any medications.
Source of Pain: Mild to moderate pain arising from the tooth root
and surrounding soft tissue
BOX 18-13 | CASE 7: INCISOR EXTRACTI0N-DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
● Somatic pain
●Mild to moderate
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
· Acute onset; short duration
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
Preemptive Anaigesia
A multimodal therapeutic approach was taken for this dog.
1. This dog was premedicated with oxymorphone 0.1 mg/kg SC for
analgesia, along with glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg to prevent oxymor-
phone-induced bradycardia.
2. A left mental nerve block was performed using 0.5 ml of bupivacaine
(0.75%). The dose was approximately 0.4 mg/kg. A low dose can be
used because the nerve being blocked requires only a small volume of
local anesthetic.
Postoperative Anaigesia
 e  s   n  a  
morphone lasted approximately another 4 hours. The dog was then
given nalbuphine 1.0 mg/kg SC to provide several hours of analgesia
without sedation so that it could be discharged to go home.
2. This dog was prescribed oral morphine elixir (4 mg/ml) 0.5 mg/kg PO
tid to qid. This was to provide analgesia for mild pain for several days
(Box 18-14).
BOX 18-14CASE 7: INCISOR EXTRACTI0N-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Oxymorphone O.1 mg/kg SC; bupivacaine mental nerve block
●Postoperative analgesia: Nalbuphine 1.0 mg/kg SC; oral morphine elixir (4 mg/ml)
0.5 mg/kg P0 tid to qid
362
PART FOUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
CASE 8
IMAXILLECTOMY (BOX 18-15)
Challenge: Mass just behind right upper canine tooth requiring a
partial maxillectomy
Source of Pain: Bone and soft tissue surgical trauma
BOX 18-15 | CASE 8: MAXILLECT0MY-DESCRIPTI0N 0F PAIN
· Somatic pain
Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue traume
· Acute onset; short duration
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
PreoperativeAnaigesia
1. This dog was premedicated with oxymorphone 0.1 mg/kg SC to pro-
vide preemptive analgesia and atropine 0.04 mg/kg SC to prevent
vagal-induced bradycardia.
2. An infraorbital nerve block was performed using 2.5 mg of 0.5% (0.5
ml) bupivacaine. This provided regional anesthesia to the nose, which
was being partially resected.
PostoperativeAnaigesia
This dog receiveda fentanyl bolus 2 μg/kg IV followed bya fentanyl infusion
of 3 to 5 μg/kg per hour IV. Occasionally, the dog appeared dysphoric. As a
result, acepromazine 0.01 mg/kg IV was administered (Box 18-16).
BOX 18-16 | CASE 8: MAXILLECT0MY-THERAPEUTIC 0PTI0NS
●Preemptive analgesia: Oxymorphone 0.1 mg/kg SC; bupivacaine infraorbital block
 e un  A p l y z sog y isi aadsd 
5 μg/kg per hour Iv
CASE 9
MANDIBULECTOMY (BOX 18-17)
Signaiment: 8-year-old FS golden retriever weighing 25 kg
Challenge: This dog had a mass under the left lower canine tooth,
diagnosed as osteosarcoma by previous biopsy. The surgical procedure
included a complete rostral mandibulectomy, resecting 2.5 cm of
mandible. The extensive bone cutting results in significant pain.
Source of Pain: The pain originates from cut bone and periosteum
along with some severed nerves. The potential for severe pain exists.
CHAPTER 18●Acute Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
363
BOX 18-17 CASE 9: MANDIBULECT0MY-DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
· Somatic pain
Moderate to severe intensity
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
Neuropathic; nerve damage
Acute onset; short duration
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
PreemptiveAnalgesia
Mandibulectomies can be very painful and difficult to treat. This case,
like most cases of potential severe pain, warrants a multimodal approach
to pain control.
1. Parenteral analgesia: This dog received morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC as
premedication, along with acepromazine 0.025 mg/kg SC and atro-
pine 0.01 mg/kg SC.
2. Local anesthesia: Local anesthetic blocks are effective when administered
with opioids to help prevent windup resulting from the surgical insult. This
results in a patient thiat may be easier to keep comfortable postoperatively.
a. Mental nerve blocks are useful for cranial mandibulectomies. This
dog's mandibulectomy resected bone caudal to the mental nerve.
As a result, a mental nerve block was not used.
b. Mandibular nerve blocks are useful for providing local anesthesia
to the ramus of the mandible. This dog received bilateral mandibu-
lar nerve blocks using 7.5 mg of (0.5%; 1.5 ml) bupivacaine at each
site. This low dose of local anesthetic is possible because the local
anesthetic is deposited directly over the nerve.
c. Ketamine was administered as a bolus 0.5 mg/kg IV, immediately
before surgical stimulation followed by a ketamine infusion, 10
μg/kg per minute, to help prevent windup and help prevent pain-
induced dysphoria postoperatively.
PostoperativeAnaigesia
1. This dog was started on a fentanyl infusion, 3 μg/kg per hour follow-
ing a fenta nyl bolus of 2 μg/kg IV, immediately after induction to an-
esthesia. The infusion was adjusted as needed throughout the night.
The infusion was discontinued 24 hours after surgery.
 2. The ketamine infusion was lowered to 2 μg/kg per minute for the next
24 hours.
3. This dog became anxious 12 hours affer surgery. Acepromazine 0.01
mg/kg IV was administered. This calmed the dog and presumably
potentiated analgesic drug effects.
364PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
MuftidayAnaigesia
This dog was discharged from the hospital approximately 24 hours after
surgery. Sustained-release morphine at approximately 1.0 mg/kg PO bid
3 days and replaced it with carprofen 50 mg PO bid for another 3 days.
The dog exhibited normal behavior at home (Box 18-18).
BOX 18-18CASE 9:MANDIBULECTOMY-THERAPEUTIC 0PTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC; bupivacaine mandibular nerve block;
ketamine ow-dose infusion
infusion 3 μg/kg per hour IV
● Multiday analgesia: Sustained-release morphine 1 mg/kg P0 bid; carprofen 50 mg P0 bid
CASE 10
NASAL BIOPSY (BOX 18-19)
Signalment: 12-year-old spayed female mixed-breed dog weighing 7 kg
rhinoscopy and potential biopsy.
Source of Pain: Stimulation of nasal mucosa produced moderate to
severe pain.
BOX 18-19 | CASE 10: NASAL BI0PSY-DESCRIPTION 0F PAIN
Visceral pain
· Mild to moderate
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
· Acute onset; short duration
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
PreemptiveAnalgesia
This dog was very calm and required little premedication for restraint
purposes. Nonetheless, the dog was administered oxymorphone 0.05
mg/kg SC for basal analgesia and to produce an anesthetic-sparing effect.
Atropine 0.02 mg/kg SC was administered to prevent opioid-induced
vagal bradycardia.
● This dose of oxymorphone may not be adequate analgesia to prevent
movement as the rhinoscope approaches the back of the nasal passage.
Increasing concentrations ofisoflurane and xylazine 0.1 mg/kg IV were
administered when the scoping procedure and biopsy became very
stimulating. Low doses of xylazine provide good analgesia, especially
when administered in conjunction with an opioid, with which it is
movement and allowed completion of the procedure
PostoperativeAnalgesia
biopsy. As such, analgesics are administered based on the dog's attitude
and clinical signs (Box 18-20).
BOX18-2OCASE10:NASALBIOPSY-THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Oxymorphone 0.05 mg/kg SC
●Intraoperative analgesia: Xylazine 0.1 mg/kg IV
●Postoperative analgesia: None
CASE 11
 SHOULDER SURGERY (BOX 18-21)
Signaiment: 2-year-old castrated male Labrador retriever mixed-bred
dog weighing 41 kg
Chaflenge: Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of the left shoulder
Source of Pain: Articular cartilage defect and surgical trauma
producing moderate to severe pain
BOX 18-21 | CASE 11: SHOULDER SURGERY-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Somatic pain
·Moderate
· Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
· Acute onset; 3 to 5 days' duration
TREATMENT ANDRATIONALE
Preemptive Anaigesia
This dog was premedicated with buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg SC for
analgesia along with acepromazine 0.02 mg/kg SC for calming and
atropine 0.02 mg/kg SC to offset vagal-induced bradycardia. All drugs
were combined in one syringe. Buprenorphine was administered with
the intent of providing a long duration of analgesia.
Postoperative Anaigesia
The dog had a very rough recovery from anesthesia and surgery. Pain was
thought to contribute to the recovery. A test dose of IV fentanyl (2 μg/
kg) was administered Fentanyl administration did not improve the dog's
366
PART FoUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
demeanor, possibly because of buprenorphine antagonism of fentanyl
effects. The dog was then administered medetomidine 1 μg/kg IV, which
calmed the dog considerably. Carprofen 4 mg/kg SC was also administered.
Medetomidine was repeated approximately every 90 minutes for 4 hours.
Four hours after surgery, morphine 1.0 mg/kg was administered SC and
then repeated every 5 hours until the next morning (Box 18-22).
BOX 18-22 | CASE 11: SHOULDER SURGERY-
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg SC
● Postoperative analgesia: Medetomidine 1 μg/kg IV; carprofen 4 mg/kg SC; morphine
1 mg/kg SC
CASE 12
ELBOW SURGERY (BOX 18-23)
Signaiment: 24-month-old female Newfoundland dog weighing 56 kg
Challenge: This dog had OCD of the right elbow joint.
Source of Pain: Articular cartilage defect and surgical trauma
producing moderate to severe pain
BOX 18-23 | CASE 12: ELBOW SURGERY-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
· Somatic pain
·Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
· Acute onset; 3 to 5 days' duration
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
Preemptive Anaigesia
The dog was premedicated with hydromorphone 0.1 mg/kg for analgesia
along with acepromazine 0.015 mg/kg for calming and glycopyrrolate
drugs were combined in one syringe and administered SC
PostoperativeAnalgesia:MuftimodafApproach
1. A dose of 2.5 mg morphine and 7.5 mg bupivacaine was injected into
the joint at the termination of surgery.
a. Morphine should activate articular opioid receptors and provide
some degree of analgesia.
b. Bupivacaine should block sodium channels and provide good an-
algesia for 4 to 8 hours
CHAPTER 18·Acute Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
367
2. This dog woke up very comfortable. Oral tramadol 150 mg 3 times
daily was initiated 6 hours after surgery. Carprofen 4 mg/kg PO sid
was started the morning after surgery.
3. The dog remained comfortable for the 4 days it received the tramadol
and carprofen (Box 18-24).
BOX 18-24 | CASE 12: ELBOW SURGERY-THERAPEUTIC 0PTI0NS
●Preemptive analgesia: Hydromorphone 0.1 mg/kg SC
●Postoperative analgesia: Morphine 2.5 mg and bupivacaine 7.5 mg intraarticular
injection
CASE 13
RADIUS/ULNAR FRACTURE
REPAIR (BOX 18-25)
Signalment: 10-year-old castrated male mixed-breed dog weighing 30 kg
Challenge: This dog jumped from the back of a truck and fractured
its left radius and ulna 3 days before presentation for anesthesia and
surgery. It had been hemodynamically stabilized before presentation.
Source of Pain: Fractured bones producing severe pain
BOX 18-25 | CASE 13: RADIUS/ULNAR FRACTURE REPAIR-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Visceral and somatic pain
●Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory and trauma-induced tissue trauma
Acute onset
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
PreemptiveAnalgesia:Multimodal Approach
1. This dog was premedicated with morphine 1.0 mg/kg for analgesia
along with atropine 0.01 mg/kg SC to prevent bradycardia. No seda
five or tranquilizer was used because this dog was very calm.
2. A brachial plexus block was performed using 5 ml of bupivacaine
(0.75%), equivalent to approximately 1.3 mg/kg after surgical prepa-
ration of the left forelimb.
Postoperative Anaigesia
1. This dog was administered morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC during recovery
from anesthesia.
2. Two hours later this dog was administered another dose of morphine
1.0 mg/kg SC.
368PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
3. The dog was uncomfortable to palpation and was unable to rest com-
fortably. Electroacupuncture treatment was administered.
a. Small intestine meridian 3 to 9
b. Large intestine meridian 4 to 15
c. Pericardium meridian 6 to 3
d. 2.5-Hz alternating current continuous stimulation for 20 minutes
e. This dog was comfortable throughout the night and did not re-
quire any additional analgesics or sedation (Box 18-26).
BOX 18-26 | CASE 13: RADIUS/ULNAR FRACTURE REPAIR-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC; bupivacaine brachial plexus block
●Postoperative analgesia: Morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC; electroacupuncture
CASE 14
FOREUMBAMPUTATION（BOX18-27)
Signalment: 12-year-old male golden retriever weighing 38 kg
Challenge: Osteosarcoma of the right forelimb
Source of Pain: Cancer and soft tissue surgical trauma resulting from
BOX18-27|CASE14:FORELIMBAMPUTATION-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
● Visceral and somatic pain
·Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
·Acute onset
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
Preemptive Anaigesia
1. The dog was premedicated with morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC to provide
preemptive analgesia and atropine 0.04 mg/kg SC to prevent mor-
phine-induced bradycardia.
2. Low-dose ketamine was administered as 0.5 mg/kg bolus followed
by 10 μg/kg per minute infusion. Ketamine was infused throughout
surgery. Ketamine blocks NMDA receptors and should help decrease
Postoperative Anaigesia
1. Morphine 0.1 mg/kg per hour was infused after administering a mor-
phine bolus of 0.1 mg/kg IV.
2. The low ketamine infusion was decreased to 2 μg/kg per minute for
the first 24 hours after surgery.
3. The dog remained comfortable while in the hospital (Box 18-28).
CHAPTER 18·Acute Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
699
BOX 18-28 |CASE 14: F0RELIMB AMPUTATI0N-
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
● Preemptive analgesia: Morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC; ow-dose ketamine IV
0.1 mg/kg per hour; microdose ketamine
CASE 15
THORACOTOMY-STERNOTOMY
(B0X 18-29)
Signalment: 1l-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat
weighing 3.2 kg
Chaflenge: Pulmonary tumor
Source of Pain: Sternotomy and stretching of associated tissues
producing moderate to severe pain
BOX 18-29 | CASE 15: TH0RAC0T0MY-STERN0T0MY-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Visceral and somatic pain
·Severe
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
·Acute onset
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
Premedication
The cat was very fractious. High doses of ketamine or a potent sedative would
need to be administered toachieve adequate chemical restraint. Inaddition, this
cat required excessive physical restraint that would have produced an excessive
amount of stress. As a result, this cat was box-induced with sevoflurane.
Intraoperative Anaigesia
The cat was administered fentanyl 2 μg/kg IV bolus followed by 5 μg/kg
per hour IV infusion before and during surgery to provide analgesia.
Postoperative Anaigesia
The cat was administered lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg and bupivacaine 1.5 mg/kg
mixed together interpleurally and administered through the chest tube
before waking up. This drug combination was administered every 3 to 6
hours. Fentanyl was infused, 2 to 4 μg/kg per hour (Box 18-30).
BOX 18-30 | CASE 15: TH0RAC0TOMY-STERNOT0MY-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
5 μg/kg per hour IV
●Postoperative analgesia: Lidocaine and bupivacaine interpleural block; fentany!
infusion 2 to 4 μg/kg per hour IV
370
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
THORACOTOMY-INTERCOSTAL
CASE 16
(BOX 18-31)
Signaiment: 5-month-old female Labrador retriever weighing 15 kg
Chaflenge: Patent ductus arteriosus
Source of Pain: Soft tissue surgical trauma plus displacement and stretch-
ing of soft tissue, cartilage, and bone, producing moderate to severe pain
BOX 18-31 | CASE 16: TH0RAC0TOMY-INTERCOSTAL-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
● Visceral and somatic pain
·Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
·Acute onset
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
Premedication
This dog was premedicated with methadone 1.0 mg/kg SC along with
atropine 0.02 mg/kg to counter increases in vagal tone, and acepromazine
0.02 mg/kg for calming. Methadone provides excellent intraoperative
analgesia in addition to blocking NMDA receptors, thereby helping to
prevent windup and central sensitization.
● Bupivacaine 2 mg/kg was divided and injected two intercostal spaces
cranial and caudal to the surgical site at the time of closure.
Postoperative Anaigesia
The dog received methadone 0.05 mg/kg IV upon recovery from
anesthesia followed by methadone 0.1 mg/kg per hour. The combination
of local anesthetic and opioid provided excellent analgesia (Box 18-32).
BOX 18-32CASE 16:THORACOTOMY-INTERCOSTAL-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Methadone 1.0 mg/kg SC
● Postoperative analgesia: Bupivacaine intercostal nerve block; methadone bolus
0.05 mg/kg IV followed by methadone infusion 0.1 mg/kg per hour Iv
LAPAROTOMY-INTESTINAL
CASE 17
RESECTION AND ANASTOMOSIS
(B0X 18-33)
Signaiment: 6-year-old castrated male Labrador retriever weighing
47 kg
Challenge: Intestinal foreign body requiring resection and
ana stomosis
CHAPTER 18●Acute Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
371
Source of Pain: Body wall incisional trauma and abdominal ligament
stretching, producing moderate to severe somatic and visceral pain
BOX 18-33 | CASE 17: LAPAROTOMY-INTESTINAL RESECTI0N
AND ANASTOMOSIS-DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Somatic and visceral pain
Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
·Acute onset
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
Premedication
The dog was premedicated with morphine approximately 1.0 mg/kg SC
as preemptive analgesia,along with acepromazine 0.01 mg/kg SC for
calming, and atropine 0.04 mg/kg SC to prevent bradycardia.
● An epidural injection of morphine 0.1 mg/kg combined with
bupivacaine 0.l mg/kg was unsuccessfully attempted at the
lumbosacral vertebral space before surgery. A subarachnoid injection
was performed at the lumbar 6-7 intervertebral space. The low dose of
bupivacaine permitted no alterations in dose, despite injecting in the
cerebrospinal fluid instead of epidurally.
1. Epidural morphine administration provides analgesia, but not
anesthesia, for 12 to 24 hours. Typically, no change in morphine dose
is necessary, regardless of epidural or subarachnoid injection. Epidural
morphine administration may cause urinary retention. Bladder
effects. Larger doses produce motor and sensory blockade. The doses
used in this dog were small with the intent of blocking sensory nerve
transmission without motor blockade or paralysis. Doses intended
PostoperativeAnalgesia
The skin was desensitized using 40 mg of 0.5% bupivacaine in 1:200,000
epinephrine, diluted in half with sterile normal saline. The combination
of subarachnoid drugs and the incisional block produced excellent
analgesia. This dog did not experience urinary retention (Box 18-34).
BOX18-34CASE17:LAPAROTOMY-INTESTINALRESECTION
ANDANASTOMOSIS-THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC; epidural morphine and
bupivacaine administration
●Postoperative analgesia: Bupivacaine incisional block
372
PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
CASE 18
LAPAROTOMY-CYSTOTOMY
(BOX 18-35)
Signaiment: 4-year-old male cocker spaniel mixed-breed dog
weighing 12 kg
Challenge: Urinary calculi requiring laparotomy and cystotomy
Source of Pain: Body wall incisional trauma and abdominal ligament
BOX 18-35 | CASE 18: LAPAR0T0MY-CYST0T0MY-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Somatic and visceral pain
Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
·Acute onset
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
Premedication
This dog had a history of idiopathic epilepsy and was extremely nervous
and active. The dog was premedicated with morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC for
preemptive analgesia. Acepromazine was avoided because of a history of
seizures. Xylazine 0.4 mg/kg SC was administered with the morphine.
Xylazine has synergistic effects with opioids to produce better sedation
and analgesia. Atropine 0.04 mg/kg SC was added to the mixture beca use
both drugs increase vagal tone and can cause bradycardia.
PostoperativeAnalgesia
1. This dog was not administered epidural morphine or local anesthetic
even though this would likely produce good postoperative analgesia.
The dog's behavior made it extremely difficult to maintain a uri
nary catheter without him chewing at it. Because epidural morphine
administration can cause urinary retention and this patient was
undergoing bladder surgery, it was believed best to not subject the
cystotomy incision to excess intraluminal pressure.
2. An incisional block was performed before skin closure using 15 mg of 0.5%
bupivacaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine diluted in half with 0.9% saline.
This provided good body wall analgesia for approximately 8 hours.
qe oo aiaond on pansupe sm oy nd oy/ g on 7 g 
dominal analgesia.
4. The dog became dysphoric and was administered xylazine 0.05 mg/kg
IV as needed.
CHAPTER 18·Acute Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
373
5. This dog was discharged from the hospital the following day with no
other analgesics (Box 18-36).
BOX 18-36| CASE 18: LAPAR0T0MY-CYST0T0MY-
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Morphine 1.0 mg/kg and xylazine 0.4 mg/kg SC
CASE 19
PANCREATITIS (BOX 18-37)
Signaiment: 12-year-old spayed female miniature schnauzer dog
Chaflenge: History of vomiting and lethargy for 3 days; abdominal
pain; no abdominal obstruction; blood work consistent with pancreatitis
Source of Pain: Severe visceral pain associated with pancreatitis
BOX 18-37  CASE 19: PANCREATITIS-DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
● Visceral pain
·Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory
· Acute onset
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
● This dog was initially unsuccessfully treated with continuous infusion
of fentanyl 3 to 6 μg/kg per hour after a bolus of 2 μg/kg. The dog was
still unable to rest comfortably.
for thoracic and cranial abdominal pain. The nerves from the cranial
abdomen enter the spinal cord in the thorax.
1. Lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg was injected in the sixth intercostal space
through a 22-gauge butterfly catheter. Lidocaine was injected
initially to produce an immediate block.
2. Bupivacaine 1.5 mg/kg was injected following the lidocaine.
Bupivacaine has a 15- to 20-minute duration until the onset
of analgesia and can cause stinging. The lidocaine prevents the
bupivacaine from stinging.
3. This technique produced comfort, allowing this dog to sleep. The
was continued at 2 μg/kg per hour (Box 18-38).
BOX 18-38CASE 19:PANCREATITIS-THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
● Analgesia: Lidocaine and bupivacaine interpleural block
374
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
LUMBOSACRAL DISK SURGERY
CASE 20
(B0X 18-39)
Signaiment: 7-year-old spayed female miniature dachshund dog
weighing 8 kg
Challenge: Lumbosacral disk protrusion
Source of Pain: Spinal cord swelling and disk entrapment of nerve
roots causes severe pain.
BOX 18-39 | CASE 20: LUMBOSACRAL DISK SURGERY-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
● Somatic and visceral pain
Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma and underlying disease
·Acute onset
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
Premedication
This dog was premedicated with morphine 0.75 mg/kg SC to provide
analgesia, along with glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg to help prevent bradycardia.
IntraoperativeAnalgesia
Thisdog received fentanyl 2 μg/kg IV followed by fentanyl 10 μg/kgper hour
the anticipated completion of surgery to facilitate a timely extubation.
PostoperativeAnalgesia
This dog had a smooth recovery. He remained sedate. The fentanyl infusion
was restarted at 3 μg/kg per hour. This dog remained comfortable for the next
36 hours before it was discharged from the critical care unit (Box 18-40).
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
● Preemptive analgesia: Morphine 0.75 mg/kg SC
yr  usn   p    sno  isai aao
per hour IV
CASE 21
TAIL AMPUTATION (BOX 18-41)
Signaiment: 2-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat
CHAPTER 18+Acute Pain Management: A Case-Based Approach
375
Challenge: The cat's tail got caught in a radiator fan, causing a
degloving injury and a fracture distal to coccygeal bone 5.
Source of Pain: Bone fracture and soft tissue trauma, producing
severe localized pain
BOX 18-41 | CASE 21: TAIL AMPUTATION-DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
· Somatic pain
·Moderate
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma and underlying disease
● Acute onset
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
Preemptive Anaigesia
1. This cat received medetomidine 0.02 mg/kg and hydromorphone
0.1 mg/kg administered together SC for analgesia and sedation. Atro-
pine 0.02 mg/kg SC was also administered to prevent bradycardia.
2. Bupivacaine 0.75 mg/kg was injected epidurally between coccygeal
bones l and 2 after induction of anesthesia.
PostoperativeAnaigesia
1. Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC was injected in recovery to provide analgesia
and to reduce inflammation.
2. The cat received hydromorphone 0.1 mg/kg SC 4 hours after the
initial hydromorphone injections (Box 18-42).
BOX 18-42 | CASE 21: TAIL AMPUTATI0N-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Hydromorphone 0.1 mg/kg SC and medetomidine 0.02 mg/kg
SC; bupivacaine epidural
   a      is  
CASE22
REAR LIMB AMPUTATION (BOX 18-43)
Signaiment: 7-year-old spayed female rottweiler dog weighing 42 kg
Challenge: Osteosarcoma of the left rear limb, requiring amputation
Source of Pain: Cancer surgical trauma producing severe pain
BOX 18-43 | CASE 22: REAR LIMB AMPUTATION-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
● Somatic pain
·Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory and surgically induced tissue trauma
·Acute onset
 PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
PreoperativeAnaigesia
1. The dog was administered morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC for preemptive
analgesia and atropine 0.05 mg/kg SC. No other tranquilizer or seda
five was administered.
2. Morphine 0.1 mg/kg and bupivacaine 0.3 mg/kg were combined and
administered epidurally to provide supplemental intraoperative and
postoperative analgesia of 12 to 24 hours' duration.
Postoperative Analgesia
The dog was administered fentanyl 4 to 6 mg/kg per hour IV over the
next 24 hours to maintain analgesia. This was followed by sustained-
release morphine 30 mg PO twice daily for the next 4 days (Box 18-44).
BOX 18-44CASE 22:REAR LIMBAMPUTATION-
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
6 mg/kg per hour Iv
● Multiday analgesia: Sustained-release morphine 30 mg P0 bid
CASE 23
BILATERAL FEMORAL FRACTURE
REPAIR (B0X 18-45)
Signaiment: 6-year-old spayed femaleAustralian shepherd
mixed-breed dog weighing 26 kg
Challenge: This dog slipped off an icy deck under construction and fell
25 feet; radiographs revealed bilateral comminuted femoral fractures.
Source of Pain: Broken bones and soft tissue trauma producing
severe pain
BOX 18-45 | CASE 23: BILATERAL FEMORAL FRACTURE
REPAIR-DESCRIPTION OFPAIN
●Somatic pain
·Severe
● Inflammatory, surgically, and traumatically induced tissue trauma
●Acute onset
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
PreemptiveAnaigesia
Femoral fracture repairs can be very painful and difficult to treat.
This case, like most cases of potential severe pain, warrants a multimodal
approach.
CHAPTER18·AcutePainManagement:ACase-BasedApproach
377
1. Parenteral analgesia: This dog received morphine l.0 mg/kg SC as
premedication, along with acepromazine 0.025 mg/kg SC and atro
pine 0.01 mg/kg SC.
2. An epidural catheter was inserted in the lumbosacral space and advanced
three disk spaces cranially after inducing anesthesia. Morphine 0.1 mg/
kg along with bupivacaine 0.1 mg/kg was injected through the catheter
before surgery. This catheter allowed redosing of epidural analgesics
analgesia for 12 to 24 hours with minimal central nervous system side
effects. The low dose of bupivacaine blocked sensory nerve transmis-
sion with minimal effect on motor nerve transmission. This approach
allowed the dog to feel its legs in recovery, preventing self-trauma and
mutilation, which sometimes occurs with epidural regional anesthesia.
This dog underwent uneventful anesthesia and surgery.
The dog recovered from anesthesia very painful and agitated.
1. Morphine 0.1 mg/kg was administered IV and infused, 0.1 mg/kg per
hour, to provide analgesia in addition to the epidural morphine. The
infusion was continued for 16 hours.
2. Acepromazine 0.25 mg IV was administered in recovery because of
agitation. It was redosed 3l2 hours later.
3. Epidural morphine 0.1 mg/kg was redosed 12 hours after the initial
dose and then at 24-hour intervals for 3 days, at which time the epi-
dural catheter was removed (Box 18-46).
BOX 18-46|CASE 23:BILATERAL FEMORAL FRACTURE REPAIR-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Preemptive analgesia: Morphine 1.0 mg/kg SC; morphine and bupivacaine via epidural
catheter
CASE 24
GENERAL TRAUMA (BOX 18-47)
Signalment: 7-year-old castrated male domestic shorthair cat weighing 3 kg
Challenge: The cat was recently hit by a car and suffered head trauma,
a broken left humerus, and general soft tissue tra uma.
Source of Pain: General soft tissue trauma and fractured bone,
producing severe pain
●Somatic pain
●Moderate to severe
● Inflammatory and trauma-induced tissue trauma
●Acute onset
PART FOuR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
● The immediate goal was to provide good analgesia overnight but be
able to assess mentation periodically in order to determine the status
of the head trauma.
· Fentanyl was considered for pain control but rejected because it would
make it difficult to assess mentation.
· Remifentanil does not require liver metabolism but is cleared via
nonspecific esterases throughout the body. Remifentanil has a duration
of action of 8 to 10 minutes regardless of infusion time. Remifentanil
was administered 6 μg/kg per hour, which kept the cat very comfortable.
The remifentanil infusion was discontinued when neurologic
assessment was desired. Neurologic assessment was performed 10
minutes later. Analgesia was rapidly reestablished by administering a
bolus of remifentanil 4 μg/kg and restarting the infusion (Box 18-48).
BOX 18-48CASE 24:GENERAL TRAUMA-THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
●Continuous analgesia: Remifentanil 6 μg/kg per hour
CASE 25
EXERCISE-INDUCED TRAUMA
(BOX 18-49)
Signaiment: 4-year-old spayed female mixed-breed dog weighing 25 kg
Challenge: Limping on right rear limb after a long hike in the
mountains
Source of Pain: The dog has mild hip dysplasia of the right coxofemoral
joint resulting in moderate osteoarthritic pain. He has some muscle
soreness also.
BOX 18-49 | CASE 25: EXERCISE-INDUCED TRAUMA-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Somatic pain
· Mild to moderate
● Inflammatory and exercise-induced tissue trauma
● Acute onset
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
The dog was successfully treated with carprofen 50 mg orally twice daily
for 7 days (Box 18-50).
BOX 18-50 | CASE 25: EXERCISE-INDUCED TRAUMA-
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
●Analgesia: Carprofen 2.2 mg/kg P0 bid
19
CHRONIC PAIN
MANAGEMENT:
A Case-Based Approach
JAMES S.GAYNORANDWILLIAMW.MUIRIH
lollowing are specific cases of animals with chronic pain. The
 nature of the case and rationale for specific treatment are
described. Each case presents a unique aspect or problem as
it relates to pain management. Because the animals were evaluated
were used. Various drugs, procedures, and drug doses are detailed.
The selection of drugs and response to therapy should be considered
anecdotal because patient well-being was subjectively assessed and
primarily determined by improvement of the animal's quality of life.
More detailed information on each drug and procedure can be found
in various portions of the Handbook. All patients should be considered
systemically healthy unless otherwise noted.
Please note the abbreviations for frequency of dosing as recognized
within the pharmacy profession:
bid =Twice daily
qd= Once daily
qid =4 times daily
qod = Every other day
sid =once a day
tid =3 times daily
CASE 1
HIP DYSPLASIA (BOX 19-1)
Pain control was provided for a dog with degenerative disease of both
hip joints.
Signaiment: 12-year-old female spayed German shepherd
weighing 36 kg with bilateral hip dysplasia, left worse than right
379
1080
 PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Challenge: This dog has had chronic osteoarthritis pain for 8 years.
The pain continues to worsen with age.
Cause of Pain: Osteoarthritis of the coxofemoral joints
·Coxofemoral osteoarthritis
·Moderate to severe intensity
●Somatic: inflammatory
●Long term to lifelong
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
● This dog was initially receiving aspirin as needed on bad days for
several years. The owner and the veterinarian became concerned with
the possibility of gastrointestinal side effects (ulcers, hemorrhage).
● The dog began receiving carprofen 25 mg PO bid. This dose was low,
but the dog was much more comfortable within 1 day.
● The hip-associated pain worsened, and the dose of carprofen was
increased to 50 mg PO bid. This made the dog more comfortable for
approximately 6 months.
● The dog was in pain again after 6 months. Rather than increasing
the dose of carprofen and risking side effects, the veterinarian
recommended switching from carprofen to etodolac.
● It is reasonable to expect that if one drug does not work well for an
individual, another might work better.
· Considerable risk is present when immediately switching from one non-
additive side effects, such as gastrointestinal ulceration or renal toxicity.
· It is advisable to have a washout period between ending one NSAID
and starting another. A period of 10 days is considered safe or at least
five half-lives of the drug being discontinued.
● If a washout period is not possible, administering a gastrointestinal
protecta nt, such as misoprostol or omeprazole, for approximately 4
to 10 days is advisable. For example, end one NSAID on the evening
of one day and start misoprostol 2 to 5 μg/kg PO bid. Start the new
NSAID the following day.
be administered orally.
· Carprofen was discontinued for 10 days, during which time this dog
became very uncomfortable. Etodolac 450 mg PO daily was then
administered. The dog did not experience a great improvement in
quality of life compared with carprofen.
CHAPTER 19 ●Chronic Pain Management: A Case-Based Approach
381
· The veterinarian and owner thendiscussed the potentialofacupuncture
for relief of pain.
●Electroacupuncture was instituted twice weekly for 3 weeks, alternating
hips at each treatment using the following protocol.
1. GB 29 to GB 30
2. BL 40 to BL. 54
3. GB 34
4. Bilateral BL 11
5. Alternating current, 2.5 Hz, continuous for 20 minutes
● The dog became much more comfortable. During the fourth week of
acupuncture the dog received only one treatment.
2 months the etodolac dose was decreased to 300 mg PO daily. The
dog remained comfortable (Box 19-2)
S
       
●Second therapy: Etodolac 450 mg P0 qd
●Finaf therapy: Electroacupuncture
CASE 2
HIP OSTEOARTHRITIS (BOX 19-3)
Signalment: 5-year-old female spayed 40-kg Old English sheepdog
with bilateral degenerative joint disease of the coxofemoral joints
Challenge: This dog has had chronic osteoarthritis pain for
3 years. She has been taking deracoxib 50 mg PO qd for 3 years.
The deracoxib became less effective for controlling pain recently.
The dog was switched to carprofen 150 mg PO qd, which maintained
her comfort for several months before its efficacy began to decrease.
Cause of Pain: Osteoarthritis of the coxofemoral joints
BOX 19-3 | CASE 2: HIP OSTEOARTHRITIS-DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Moderate intensity
· Somatic and central: inflammatory and neuropathic
·Long term to lifelong
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
 d           
of a prolonged low-medium-grade constant noxious stimulus
382PART FOUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
bombarding the spinal cord. This case typifies the clinical presentation.
When treating patients with osteoarthritis and windup, NSAID
administration can be maintained.
· Carprofen 150 mg PO qd. This dog became comfortable on the third
day of treatment and remained comfortable for months on carprofen
alone (Box 19-4).
BOX 19-4 | CASE 2: HIP OSTEOARTHRITIS-THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
●Frst therapy: Amantadine 3 mg/kg P0 qd for 21 days
● Concurrent therapy: Carprofen 150 mg P0 qd
RADIATION-INDUCED PAIN
CASE 3
(BOX 19-5)
Signaiment: 9-year-old spayed female Labrador retriever weighing
31 kg
Challenge: This dog had a mast cell tumor removed from the
lateral aspect of her mid left thigh and has been treated with radiation
therapy for 14 treatments over a 3-week period. The dog has developed
progressively more pain than could be managed at home with oral
morphine and will not stand up.
Cause of Pain: Radiation-induced soft tissue damage and inflammation.
BOX 19-5 |CASE 3: RADIATION-INDUCED PAIN-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Radiation therapy
●Severe intensity
●Somatic:inflammatory
·Days to weeks
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
The dog has developed severe pain that has affected her quality oflife and
the ability of the owner to cope with her.
Initia!Therapy
The initial goal of therapy for this dog was to gain control of her pain.
· The dog was hospitalized, and a peripheral catheter was placed
in her cephalic vein. Ketamine was diluted and administered as a
bolus of 0.5 mg/kg IV followed by 1 μg/kg per minute. Ketamine
was used as an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist
to help decrease central neuronal hyperexcitability and reduce the
chronic pain.
CHAPTER 19·ChronicPainManagement:A Case-BasedApproach
8
● Fentanyl was administered concurrently, initially as a 2-μg/kg bolus
followed by a 5-μg/kg per hour infusion. Within 1 hour, this dog was
willing and able to stand and walk.
● Fentanyl and ketamine were administered for approximately 48 hours,
decreasing the fenta nyl to 2 μg/kg per hour during the last 12 hours.
ContinuedTherapy
This dog was hospitalized for an additional 48 hours to make the transition
to oral drug therapy before releasing her back to the owner's care.
· Oral sustained-release morphine was started, 30 mg PO bid for 10
days. It was believed that this dose of morphine would control the
pain based on the low dose of fentanyl on which the dog had been
maintained during her initial therapy. This is the same dose of
morphine she was receiving before admission to the hospital. After 10
days, shie was weaned to sustained-release morphine 30 mg PO qd for
5 days. Morphine was then discontinued completely.
● Amantadine was started, 100 mg PO qd for 5 days, to block the NMDA
receptors and prevent central neuronal excitability
· This dog was released from the hospital comfortable and remained
comfortable at home (Box 19-6).
BOX19-6|CASE3:RADIATION-INDUCEDPAIN-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●First therapy: Sustained-release oral morphine 30 mg P0 bid
●Second therapy: Ketamine 0.5 mg/kg IV followed by 1 μg/kg per min concurrent
sinou 8t Jano inou lad Dy/bn z ~u/by/ir g Aq paolo, snjpg by/bn z IAueuay
●Finaf therapy: Sustained-release oral morphine 30 mg P0 bid for 10 days and
amantadine 100 mg P0 qd for 5 days
FORELIMB AMPUTATION PAIN
CASE 4
(B0X 19-7)
Signaiment: 7-year-old spayed female husky weighing 25 kg
Challenge: The dog had osteosarcoma of the right front limb
culminating in an uneventful forelimb amputation. The dog was
presented with a complaint of intermittently crying out. The dog
has been receiving codeine 30 mg with acetaminophen 300 mg
orally twice daily for 5 days. Upon physical examination the dog
was hypersensitive to touch and cried when lightly touched across
her lateral thorax and abdomen. The dog had no neck or back pain.
Allodynia was diagnosed.
Source of Pain: The source of pain was unclear but was considered
to be diffuse.
384
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
BOX 19-7 | CASE 4: F0RELIMB AMPUTATI0N PAIN-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Moderate intensity
●Somatic: inflammatory and neuropathic
· Long-term duration if not treatable
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
allodynia is difficult to treat with a single drug (opioids) and generally
requires a multimodal approach.
● Amantadine 100 mg PO qd for 5 days was initiated to block NMDA
receptors and decrease central neuronal excitability, with the intent of
decreasing her allodynia.
● Sustained-release morphine 30 mg PO bid was started for 10 days to
provide analgesia from the chronic pain.
● The owner reported that the dog was comfortable within 2 days. The
seventh day after her new analgesic protocol had started (2 days after
discontinuing the amantadine), she started developing allodynia
again. Amantadine 100 mg PO qd was started for another 10 days, and
the sustained-release morphine for another 5 days. The owner did not
report any more pain at the end of 10 days (Box 19-8).
BOX19-8|CASE4:FORELIMBAMPUTATIONPAIN-
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
● Frst therapy: Acetaminophen 300 mg and codeine 30 mg P0 bid
● Second therapy: Amantadine 100 mg P0 qd for 5 days concurrent with sustained-
release morphine 30 mg P0 bid for 10 days
●Finaf therapy: Amantadine 100 mg P0 qd for 10 days concurrent with sustained-
release morphine 30 mg P0 bid for 10 days
BILATERAL HIP OSTEOARTHRITIS
CASE 5
(BOX 19-9)
Signaiment: 1l-year-old female spayed 4-kg Himalayan
Challenge: This cat cannot jump or play as she has in the past.
The owner believed this change in behavior was due to old age.
Source of Pain: Cartilage damage in coxofemoral joints
BOX 19-9| CASE 5: BILATERAL HIP OSTEOARTHRITIS-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
·Moderate to severe intensity
●Somatic: inflammatory
· Long term to lifelong
CHAPTER 19·Chronic Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
385
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
● Meloxicam was administered with progressively decreasing doses.
Doses decrease because of most cats' inability to metabolize meloxicam
adequately. The concept behind this dosing regimen is to maintain
effective blood levels of meloxicam without causing any toxicity.
1. 0.05 mg/kg (1 drop from the dosing syringe) PO qd for 5 days
2. 0.05 mg/2 kg (1 drop/2 kg) PO qd for 5 days
3. 0.05 mg/cat PO qd for 5 days
4. 0.05 mg/kg PO qod for three treatments
5. Discontinue meloxicam for 7 days and then restart at the high dose
(Box 19-10)
BOX19-1OCASE5:BILATERALHIPOSTEOARTHRITIS-
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
●Frst therapy: 0.05 mg/kg (1 drop from the dosing syringe) P0 qd for 5 days
●Second therapy: 0.05 mg/2 kg (1 drop/2 kg) P0 qd for 5 days
    1  a pr 
●Fourth therapy: 0.05 mg/kg P0 qd for three treatments
·Fifth therapy: Discontinue meloxicam for 7 days and then restart at the high dose
● If a cat develops pain during the step-down dosing, this likely signifies
a reasonable level of metabolic activity. The cat is then administered
the previously higher dose.
 Complete blood count and blood chemistries focusingon renal function
are analyzed before treatment, 2 to 3 weeks after starting treatment,
and then every 3 to 6 months. Cat kidneys seem to be particularly
susceptible to the cyclooxygenase inhibitory effects of NSAIDs.
BILATERAL STIFLE
CASE 6
OSTEOARTHRITIS (BOX 19-11)
Signaiment: 15-year-old female spayed 3.5-kg domestic longhair cat
Chaflenge: This cat no longer jumps and plays and is being treated
for chronic renal failure.
Source of Pain: Damaged cartilage in both stifles
BOX19-11CASE6:BILATERALSTIFLEOSTEOARTHRITIS-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Moderate to severe intensity
●Somatic: inflammatory
● Long term to lifelong
988
 PART FOUR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
● The challenge is that the cat has compromised kidneys and should not
receive NSAIDs.
· A reasonable alternative to NSAID therapy is Microlactin, a milk-
 d    r d 
Microlactin is a biological response modifier, but not a drug. A brand
is chosen that has documented efficacy because production is not
regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The cat should
receive 200 mg orally twice daily.
● A combination of glucosamine hydrochloride and chondroitin
sulfate can be administered. Manganese acts as a catalyst for these
two compounds to increase their bioactivity. The cat received 125 mg
of glucosamine, 100 mg of chondroitin, and 1 mg of manganese as a
powder on food twice daily. A brand is chosen that has documented
efficacy because nutraceutical production is not regulated by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (Box 19-12).
BOX 19-12| CASE 6: BILATERAL STIFLE OSTEOARTHRITIS-
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
●Frst therapy: 200 mg MicroLactin P0 bid
●Second therapy: 125 mg glucosamine sulfate, 100 mg chondroitin
sulfate, and 1 mg manganese P0 bid
BILATERAL ELBOW DYSPLASIA
CASE 7
(BOX 19-13)
Signalment: 7-year-old female spayed Chow-Labrador mix weighing
32kg
Challenge: To attain adequate relief from elbow pain is usually
difficult. The dog has severe osteoarthritis resulting from elbow
dysplasia. She has been treated with multiple NSAIDs, including
carprofen, deracoxib, meloxicam, etodolac, and tepoxalin. Tepoxalin
300 mg daily seems to have provided a small amount of pain relief.
Source of Pain: Cartilage damage in both elbows
BOX19-13CASE7:BILATERALELBOWDYSPLASIA-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
· Severe intensity
●Somatic:inflammatory
· Long term to lifelong
CHAPTER 19·Chronic Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
387
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
● Tepoxalin 300 mg PO daily was maintained for inflammatory pain.
· Amantadine 100 mg PO daily was added with the rationale that the
dog likely had some degree of centrally mediated hyperexcitability.
The dog became more comfortable after 3 days.
● Tramadol 100 mg PO bid was added to improve pain relief. Tramadol
immediately induced drowsiness. Tramadol was decreased to 75 mg
PO once daily, the highest dose that did not cause drowsiness, but
there was no pain relief.
● Low-level therapeutic laser was initiated twice weekly for 2 weeks. A
continuously pulsing signal was applied at four sites surrounding each
elbow, 30 seconds per site with an energy level of 1 J/s. The dog responded
to this therapy, walking and playing much more vigorously. The low-level
● This dog's reasonable level of comfort was maintained with tepoxalin
300 mg PO sid qd and low-level therapeutic laser therapy once every
12 to 14 weeks (Box 19-14)
BOX 19-14 | CASE 7: BILATERAL ELBOW DYSPLASIA-
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
●Frst therapy: Tepoxalin 300 mg P0 qd
● Second therapy: Amantadine 100 mg P0 qd for 21 days
●hird therapy: Tramadol 75 to 100 mg P0 qd to bid
Fourth therapy:Low-level therapeutic aser
CASE 8
BILATERALELBOW
OSTEOARTHRITIS (BOX 19-15)
Signalment: 4-year-old female spayed Newfoundland weighing 58 kg
Challenge: This dog has had elbow dysplasia and secondary
osteoarthritis since puppyhood. The dog has received multiple therapies.
Like many other dogs, she has received multiple sequential NSAIDs,
with meloxicam 6.0 mg PO daily providing the best but minimal pain
qid had been administered before admission with no obvious effect.
Source of Pain: Damaged cartilage resulting from elbow dysplasia
BOX 19-15 | CASE 8: BILATERAL ELBOW OSTEOARTHRITIS-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
·Severe intensity
●Somatic: inflammatory
● Long term to lifelong
1880
 PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
Meloxicam 6.0 mg PO daily was continued asthe base for inflammatory
pain.
· Gabapentin bid was started in an escalating dose scale in an attempt
to provide multimodal analgesia. The dog was initially administered
300 mg PO of gabapentin bid for 14 days and demonstrated minimal
pain relief. The dose of gabapentin was increased to 600 mg PO bid,
which improved pain relief. The dose of gabapentin was increased to
900 mg PO bid. The dog became intermittently drowsy, so the dose
was decreased to 600 mg PO bid.
● The owner was interested in attempting an alternative multimodal
approach to pain control. Clomipramine, a tricyclic antidepressant, 80
mg PO qd, was initiated. The dog's pain relief increased significantly
over the next 7 days (Box 19-16).
BOX19-16CASE8:BILATERALELBOWOSTEOARTHRITIS-
THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●Frst therapy: Meloxicam 5.0 mg PO qd
●hird therapy: Clomipramine 80 mg P0 qd
UNILATERAL HIP PAIN
CASE 9
WITH SECONDARY LUMBAR
PAIN (B0X 19-17)
Signalment: 3-year-old female spayed mixed-breed dog weighing 2 kg
Challenge: This dog had pain associated with documented moderate
hip dysplasia ofthe left coxofemoral joint that was unsuccessfully
treated with carprofen 75 mg PO sid before referral. The dog's hips were
not painful during physical examination, but the dog demonstrated
moderate to severe pain of her epaxial muscles between the
thoracolumbar and lumbosacral junctions. This was likely caused by an
abnormal gait and the clinical ma nifestations of pain including trouble
sta nding and jumping into the car. Muscular pain is difficult to treat,
Source of Pain: Damaged cartilage and skeletal muscle tension and stress
BOX19-17CASE9:UNILATERALHIPDYSPLASIAWITH
SECONDARYLUMBARPAIN-DESCRIPTIONOFPAIN
·Moderate intensity
●Somatic: inflammatory
+ Long term to lifelong
CHAPTER 19·Chronic Pain Management:A Case-Based Approach
68E
TREATMENTANDRATIONALE
· Carprofen 75 mg PO qd was continued, and tramadol 75 mg PO bid
was added. This was determined to be unsuccessful after 2 weeks.
· Acupuncture therapy was initiated twice weekly for 2 weeks, then
at progressively increasing intervals. Acupuncture induces local
antinflammatory effects and centrally mediated analgesic effects and
can relieve muscle spasms. The acupuncture points used were bilateral
BL 19, BL 21, BL 23, and BL 40. The dog responded after the first
treatment and continued to improve during the first four treatments.
Carprofen therapy was maintained, and acupuncture therapy was
applied as needed (Box 19-18).
BOX 19-18 | CASE 9: UNILATERAL HIP DYSPLASIA WITH
SECONDARYLUMBARPAIN-THERAPEUTICOPTIONS
●First therapy: Carprofen 75 mg PO qd
●Second therapy: Tramadol 75 mg P0 bid
●hird therapy:Acupuncture
CASE 10
OSTE0SARCOMA (B0X 19-19)
Signaiment: 7-year-old female spayed Great Dane weighing 49 kg
Challenge: The dog had been limping for several weeks with pain
localized to the distal right humerus. Radiographs and subsequent
biopsy indicate osteosarcoma. The owner elected palliative pain
control rather than amputation or radiation/chemotherapy. Pain
control in this patient required an aggressive multimodal approach.
Source of Pain: Disruption of bone and periosteum, with swelling
and infla mmation of the surrounding soft tissues
BOX 19-19|CASE 10: 0STE0SARC0MA-
DESCRIPTION OF PAIN
●Moderate to severe intensity
●Somatic: inflammatory
·Long term to lifelong until euthanasia
TREATMENT AND RATIONALE
● Carprofen 200 mg PO qd was initiated for inflammatory pain.
●Amantadine 200 mg PO qd was added into the NSAID therapy to help
the life of the patient.
390 PART FOUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
● Tramadol 150 to 200 mg PO bid to qid was administered. Tramadol
more comprehensive multimodal approach.
· Pamidronate 60 mg IV was infused every 3 to 4 weeks. As a
bisphosphonate, pamidronate inhibits osteoclast activity of the tumor,
expand outward and has less invasive effects.
● Oxycodone 5 to 15 mg PO bid to tid was administered. Tramadol
was replaced with oxycodone, a potent μ-opioid agonist, as the pain
became more severe (Box 19-20).
BOX 19-20 | CASE 10: 0STE0SARC0MA-THERAPEUTIC
OPTIONS
●Frst therapy: Carprofen 200 mg P0 qd
●Second therapy:Amantadine 200 mg P0 qd
●Third therapy: Tramadol 150 to 200 mg P0 bid to qid
●Fourth therapy: Pamidronate 60 mg IV infusion every 3 to 4 weeks
·Fifth therapy: Oxycodone 5 to 15 mg P0 bid to tid
● Acetaminophen 500 mg PO bid was administered. Acetaminophen
has been used in conjunction with NSAIDs for breakthrough pain
for 1 to 5 days at a time. Acetaminophen should only be used when
absolutely necessary at low doses and for short periods in animals with
normal hepatic and renal function.
· The dog's quality of life, as defined by the owner, remained good.
This included eating regularly, walking daily, and playing with the
other dogs in the house. The dog was euthanized because of dyspnea
resulting from pulmonary metastases 5l/2 months after her original
diagnosis.
20
DRUG ANTAGONISM
AND ANTAGONISTS
WILLIAMW.MUIRIII
rug-related side effects and toxicity are common consequences
of drug administration, even when recommended drug dosages
and dosing schedules are followed. Some side effects are
easily eliminated (e.g-, opioid-induced bradycardia and depression),
whereas others may be irreversible and fatal (e.g-, nonsteroidal
antinflammatory drug-induced acute renal failure). Acute onset of
life-threatening side effects (e.g-, apnea) is particularly problematic
because of the potential consequences. Many of the drugs used to
produce analgesia (e.g-, opioids, α2-agonists, and local anesthetics)
have the potential to produce a wide variety of side effects and
toxicity. Opioids are notorious for their ability to induce vomiting,
bradycardia, and augmentation of the respiratory depressant effects
of anesthetics. Q-Agonists can produce bradycardia, respiratory
depression, and excessive central nervous system (CNS) depression
in otherwise normal healthy dogs or cats, even when low dosages
are administered. The intravenous (IV) bolus administration of
benzodiazepines (e.g-, diazepam and midazolam), drugs usually
considered to be relatively free of side effects or toxicity, can induce
acute collapse, bradycardia, and unconsciousness. The initial response
to a drug-related side effect, once identified, should be focused on
its elimination.Fortunately,a variety of drugs and pharmacologic
techniques can be used to antagonize or eliminate unwanted drug
side effects. This chapter focuses on mechanisms of drug antagonism
that can be used to reduce or eliminate the side effects and toxicities
produced by analgesic drugs. Receptor blockade and physiologic drug
antagonism are emphasized after a brief discussion of other methods
for drug antagonism (Box 20-1).
391
392   PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
B0X 20-1
Drug Antagonism
discontinue)
● Pharmacokinetic antagonism (prevent absorption; hasten metabolism and elimination)
● Competitive antagonism (bind or inactive receptors)
●Physiologic antagonism (counteract adverse effect)
DISCONTINUING DRUG ADMINISTRATION
Stopping the administration of a drug, slowing the rate of drug
administration, or decreasing the frequency of drug administration are
simple and effective methods for minimizing unwanted drug-related
side effects or toxicity. Patients that are receiving drugs chronically
(nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs) should be monitored periodically
for signs of toxicity (e.g-, gastric ulcers and abnormal renal and liver
function test results). These procedures, however, are not effective for
the immediate termination of acute drug-related side effects.
DRUG ADMINISTRATION
The dose, rate of drug administration, and frequency and route of drug
or incrementally administering the dose decreases peak plasma drug
concentrations, thereby decreasing the potential for the development of
drug-related side effects.
ROUTEOFADMINISTRATION
Administering drugs by routes that delay drug absorption (e.g-, oral or
d ssp q a p yd n aso a snd (a
development of drug-related side effects.
PHARMACOKINETIC ANTAGONISM
Pharmacokinetic antagonism is the use of therapies and techniques that
decrease the plasma concentration ofthe drug. Toward this end, therapies
that decrease or inhibit drug absorption or increase drug elimination
should be considered.
CHAPTER 20·Drug Antagonism and Antagonists
393
DECREASINGDRUGABSORPTION
The absorption oforallyadministered drugs can be decreased or inhibited
by the administration of substances that interfere with drug absorption
from the gastrointestinal tract (kaolin, pectin). Alternatively, drugs that
induce vomiting (apomorphine) can be administered to limit the amount
of drug that is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Local anesthetics
are frequently administered with epinephrine to decrease the local blood
supply, thereby decreasing their systemic absorption and intensifying
their local analgesic actions. Their delayed entry into the blood supply
also minimizes their plasma concentration and the potential for systemic
side effects.
INCREASING DRUGELIMINATION
 a  n   aq  oa 
blood supply to the major organs of elimination (liver, kidneys,
lungs) for the drug in question. This may require subcutaneous or IV
administration of fluids and cardiovascular stimulants (dopamine,
dobutamine). The renal excretion of drugs can be increased by
administering fluids, optimizing pH (e.g-, alkaline urine pH), and
promoting diuresis (furosemide).
RECEPTOR BLOCKADE (DRUG ANTAGONISTS)
Opioids and α2-agonists produce their effects by combining with and
 
and produce less than the expected maximal response are referred to
as partial agonists (e.g-, buprenorphine). Furthermore, two drugs with
the same ability to combine (affinity) with a receptor could produce
different degrees of analgesia (activity). The drug that produces the
maximal effect is termed α full agonist, whereas the drug that produces
     i si i  a  s
antagonists combine with receptors without causing their activation,
thereby preventing the effects of agonists. The affinity of the drug
antagonist for the receptor determines how much drug is necessary to
  s      
Some drugs combine with, activate, and inhibit the receptor occupation
at a time and that the effects of the antagonist or agonist-antagonist are
394
PART FoUR ·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
surmountable if enough agonist or partial agonist is administered (see
Chapter 7). Butorphanol, for example, is an opioid agonist-antagonist
that is additive with full opioid agonists when administered at low
dosages. Larger dosages (greater than 0.2 mg/kg) of butorphanol can be
hydromorphone. Low doses of the opioid antagonist naltrexone have
been administered in conjunction with hydromorphone to humans in
order to minimize opioid-related side effects (delirium, depression,
vomiting, constipation) without interfering with opioid agonist-
induced analgesia. Most drug antagonists are generally administered
in doses far in excess of what is required to overcome agonist effects.
This is an important point, considering the administration of a drug
antagonist reverses toxic and analgesic effects of another drug. Special
consideration should be given to the antagonist selected, its dose, and
route ofadministration. Unless a life or death situation, drug antagonists
should be administered incrementally (titrated) to achieve the desired
effect whenever possible. Finally, caution is advised whenever a drug
antagonist is administered to reverse CNS depression because the return
to consciousness may produce excitement, agitation, and aggression.
OPIOIDANTAGONISTS
Naloxone and naltrexone are pure opioid antagonists (i.e., produce no
opioid effects) that have high affinity for μ-, K-, and 8-opioid receptors.
Relatively small doses of either drug can be used to rapidly reverse
()       am
metabolized and eliminated in dogs and cats, producing relatively short-
lived (10 to 20 minutes) effects and predisposing to renarcotization and
respiratory depression. Naltrexone produces effects similar to those of
naloxone but has a much longer duration ofaction (several hours). Both
drugs produce few direct, drug-related effects when administered IV.
Naloxone and naltrexone will reverse the analgesic effects of systemic
and parenteral opioid administration and inhibit acupuncture analgesia.
The IV administration of large doses of naloxone or naltrexone may
produce a state of hyperalgesia in dogs and cats because these drugs
interfere with the protective effectofendogenous opioids (e.g-, endorphin
and enkephalin). IV bolusadministration of naloxone generallyproduces
rapid reversal of opioid-related side effects but may cause some animals
to become excited, delirious, or aggressive. Unless an emergency situation
exists, small doses of either drug should be incrementally administered
to produce the desired effect (e.g-, consciousness; Table 20-1).
CHAPTER 20 + Drug Antagonism and Antagonists
395
TABLE 20-1
Opioid Antagonists
Drug
Recommended Use
Emergency Use
Naloxone*
5-15 μg/kg IV
 50-100 μg/kg IV
Naltrexone*
50-100 μg/kg SQ
一
Nalorphine*
0.05-0.1 mg/kg Iv
一
Aumazenil
0.2 mg total dose IV
一
 Butorphanol 
0.05-1.0 mg/kg Iv
 Pentazocine
0.1-0.5 mg/kg Iv
Buprenorphine
 5-10 μg/kg IV
*Repeat as necessary.
tMonitor for respiratory depression; drug is a partial agonist.
OPIOIDPARTIALORMIXEDAGONISTS-ANTAGONISTS
Nalorphine, nalbuphine, pentazocine, butorphanol, and bupren-
orphine are opioids classified as partial agonists (i.e., buprenorphine;
produce less than the maximal response) or agonist-antagonists
(i.e., butorphanol; activate and block opioid receptors), depending
on the opioid receptor in question (see Chapters 8 and 9). These
S o        
to reverse the unwanted effects (e.g-, prolonged sedation) of pure
opioid agonists (e.g-, morphine and hydromorphone). Butorphanol,
for example, can be administered during recovery from anesthesia
to antagonize prolonged recovery produced by the preanesthetic
administration of hydromorphone. Butorphanol administration,
if necessary, increases the level of consciousness, thereby helping
prevent respiratory
y depression in the unstimulated postsurgical
patient and produces mild to moderate opioid receptor-mediated
analgesia. Evidence also exists that the administration of small doses
of opioid agonist-antagonists (e.g-, nalorphine, pentazocine, or
butorphanol) in conjunction with or after the administration of a
pure opioid agonist (e.g-, morphine or hydromorphone) may produce
additive analgesia. This suggests that analgesia is improved in the
postoperative patient in which the sedative effects of morphine are
agonists or agonist-antagonists to antagonize the effects of a pure
opioid agonist (morphine, hydromorphone) because some partial
agonists (buprenorphine) are known to exaggerate the respiratory
depressant effects of pure opioid agonists. This effect could become
problematic in animals that do not regain consciousness after the
administration of buprenorphine.
96
 PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
α2-AGONISTS
Yohimbine, tolazoline, and atipamezole are Q-receptor antagonists
that can antagonize central and peripheral c-receptors (Table 20-2).
Yohimbine (α2/α,=40/1) and tolazoline (α2/α,=4/1) are relatively
(1 = l) oze   sisuu- oyou
and occasionally produce hypotension (o; blockade) and reflex
tachycardia. Tolazoline is also noted for producing histamine release,
which may contribute to hypotension. All three drugs are recommended
for the reversal of αz-agonist-induced
 (xylazine, medetomidine,
detomidine, romifidine) side effects, including sedation, respiratory
depression, and bradycardia. The intramuscular (IM) administration of
atipamezole produces rapid and complete reversal of αs-agonist effects,
including the elimination of analgesia. The IV bolus administration of
manufacturer-recommended dosages of α2-agonists should be reserved
for emergency or life-threatening situations. Q-Agonist administration
      
delirium, and aggression associated with vomiting, urination, and
defecation. Clinically, the IM or subcutaneous administration of
atipamezole producesrapid uneventful recovery from oz-agonist sedation
and respiratory depression without significant untoward effects.
BENZODIAZEPINEANTAGONISTS
Diazepam and midazolam are centrally acting muscle relaxants
         
muscle relaxation before surgery. Diazepam and midazolam can
induce disorientation, delirium, and on rare occasions profound
CNS and associated respiratory depression. On rare occasions, the IV
bolus administration of diazepam can also produce bradycardia and
hypotension. Flumazenil is a rapidly acting and specific competitive
antagonist of diazepam- and midazolam-induced CNS and respiratory
TABLE 20-2
α2-Antagonists
Drug
Dose
Yohimbine
0.1-0.3 mg/kg IV
0.3-0.5 mg/kg IM
Tolazoline
0.5-1.0 mg/kg Iv
2-5 mg/kg IM
Atipamezole
0.05-0.2 mg/kg IV
2-5 times medetomidine dose
CHAPTER 20 + Drug Antagonism and Antagonists
397
depression. Flumazenil is also capable of producing partial reversal of
inhalant anesthetic-induced CNS depression. Clinical dosages range
from 0.1 mg/kg IV to 0.3 mg/kg IM. IV administration is rarely associated
with emergence delirium or signs of excitement. Larger doses (>3 mg/
kg IV plus infusion) of flumazenil antagonize platelet-activating factor
and have been shown to be beneficial in the treatment of hemorrhagic
shock.
PHYSIOLOGIC ANTAGONISM
Physiologic antagonism refers to the administration of drugs that do
20-3). The administration offluidsor dopamine to oppose the hypotensive
effects of inhalant anesthesia is one example of physiologic antagonism.
TABLE 20-3
Therapy for Analgesic Drug-Related Side Effects
Problem
Therapy
Dose
Sedation/depression
Analeptics
Doxapram
0.2-0.5 mg/kg IV
 Aminophylline 
2-10 mg/kg Iv
Excitement/seizures
Tranquilizers/muscle
relaxants
 Acepromazine 
0.01-0.1 mg/kg IV, IM
Droperidol
0.1-1.0 mg/kg M, IM
Medetomidine
0.02-0.05 mg/kg V, IM
Diazepam
0.1-0.5 mg/kg N, CRI 
Phenobarbital
1-3 mg/kg IV
 Propofol
1-3 mg/kg Iv; 0.1-0.2
mg/kg per minute
Womiting
Antiemetics
 Ondansetron
0.5 mg/kg IV
Metoclopramide
0.1-0.3 mg/kg Iv
Bradycardia
Anticholinergics
Atropine
0.01-0.02 mg/kg v, IM 
Glycopyrrolate
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV, IM
Respiratory depression
Respiratory stimulants
Doxapram
0.2-0.5 mg/kg IV
ventilation
Hypotension
Catecholamines
Dopamine 
0.001-0.005 mg/kg per
 minute IV
Dobutamine
0.001-0.010 mg/kg per
 minute IV
Ephedrine 
0.1-0.5 mg/kg IM
B6E
PART FoUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
The administration of atropine or glycopyrrolate to treat opioid or
The wide variety of drugs acting by diverse mechanisms, which are
used as analgesics in dogs and cats, have the potential to produce many
unwanted side effects. CNS depression or excitement, respiratory
depression, bradycardia, hypotension, and muscle twitching are among
the most commonly encountered side effects associated with the
side effects of opioids, αz-agonists, and benzodiazepines and are best
treated by changing or discontinuing medication.
ANALEPTICS
Sedation and depression are common side effects of many analgesic
drugs. Excessive sedation or depression can produce an unresponsive,
listless pet, a reduction in appetite, and the potential for significant
respiratory depression during sleep. This type of response to centrally
acting analgesic drugs is best treated by reducing the analgesic
drug dose or selecting an analgesic that does not produce CNS
effects. Clinically, many postoperative patients demonstrate good
analgesia but significant CNS depression, requiring semicontinuous
monitoring. A decision may need to be made whether the patient
should be administered a specific drug antagonist (if appropriate)
with the risk of reducing or eliminating analgesia. Low doses of a
specific antagonist can be titrated to effect with the hope of producing
increased consciousness and little or no loss of analgesia. In some
instances, agonist-antagonists (e.g-, butorphanol) can be administered
to counteract unwanted CNS depression and produce analgesia. An
alternative approach would be to administer a specific antagonist,
a CNS stimulant or analeptic. Doxapram is a respiratory stimulant
that increases CNS activity in dogs and cats. Although not a specific
antagonist, doxapram can counteract the CNS depressant effects
of low to moderate doses of o2-agonists, opioids, and injectable or
inhalant anesthetics. Once conscious, most animals remain conscious,
but because of the relatively short half-life of doxapram, animals
administered this drug should be closely monitored to avoid a relapse
to CNS and respiratory depression. Aminophylline, although noted
for its bronchodilatory effects, also stimulates the CNS. The IV or
IM administration of aminophylline to dogs and cats can shorten
recovery from anesthesia, increase alertness, and counteract mild to
moderate sedation without antagonizing the effects of analgesic drugs.
Aminophylline has a much longer duration of action than doxapram.
CHAPTER20·DrugAntagonismandAntagonists
66
TRANQVILIZERS/MUSCLERELAXANTS
Nervousness, apprehension, agitation, seizures, and involuntary
muscle twitching are potential side effects associated with the use
of traditional centrally acting analgesic medications. These side
effects are more frequent when large doses are administered or when
analgesic drugs are given to animals with preexisting CNS disorders.
Acepromazine is an excellent tranquilizer that produces adjunctive
analgesic and antiemetic effects when combined with opioids.
   q  ( l) ss e   3 
         
sedation than needed. Droperidol and haloperidol are butyrophenone
tranquilizers noted for their mild calming and antiemetic effects
and can be used as alternatives to acepromazine. Droperidol and
haloperidol are frequently used as behavior modifiers, and either
drug can be used to reduce or eliminate apprehension and agitation
in dogs and cats. Drug dose should be titrated to the desired effect,
and initial dosages of droperidol should not exceed 0.1 mg/kg IV
or IM. Diazepam and midazolam are excellent centrally acting
neuromuscular blocking drugs that can be used to control involuntary
muscle twitching or spasms and seizures. Repeated IV administration
(0.1 mg/kg) or infusion (0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg per hour) may be required
to control involuntary muscle spasms or seizures in some animals.
Dogs and cats with seizures that do not respond to diazepam or
midazolam therapy should be administered phenobarbital (1 to 3
mg/kg IV) or anesthetized with propofol (1 to 3 mg/kg IV; 0.1 to 0.2
mg/kg per minute).
ANTIEMETICS
Nausea and vomiting are common but self-limiting side effects
associated with the use of opioid and o2-agonist drugs. Occasionally,
vomiting may persist and result in dyspnea, bradycardia, and potentially
aspiration. Vomiting is particularly problematic when it occurs
in association with the induction, maintenance, or recovery from
anesthesia. As noted previously, acepromazine or droperidol can be used
before or in combination with opioids or α2-agonists to reduce vomiting.
Ondansetron (0.5 mg/kg IV) or metoclopramide (0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg
IM) can be used to prevent or eliminate vomiting without producing
sedation. Persistent vomiting in dogs should be treated by infusing
metoclopramide (0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg per hour).
400
PART FoUR •Acute and Chronic Pain Management
ANTICHOLINERGICS
Sinus bradycardia, first- and second-degree atrioventricular block
with ventricular escape beats, and rarely, third-degree atrioventricular
block may occur after the administration of opioids and particularly
Q-agonists. Cardiac rhythm disturbances can occur, although they are
increases in parasympathetic tone and are readily responsive to treatment
with atropine (0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg IV) or glycopyrrolate (0.005 to 0.01
mg/kg IV). 0-Agonist-induced bradyarrhythmias may also be due to
        e s
in sympathetic tone. Regardless, initial therapy is identical to that for
opioids.
RESPIRATORYSTIMVLANTS
Respiratory depression is an underappreciated and significant side
effect associated with IV or long-term analgesic drug administration;
it is most common when opioids and α2-agonists are administered in
conjunction with injectable or inhalant anesthetics. Signs of respiratory
depression are often subtle, unless significant decreases in respiratory
rate or apnea are observed. Respiratory rate and depth should be
closely monitored after the IV administration of opioids, Q-agonists,
and benzodiazepines. Doxapram is an excellent CNS and respiratory
stimulant but is not a specific drug antagonist and produces only short-
term effects. Significant respiratory depression may follow a period of
transient respiratory stimulation if consciousness does not improve, for
    d  s  
have been significantly reduced. Respiratory depression therefore is best
treated by careful patient monitoring, oxygen supplementation, nursing
care, and techniques that hasten drug elimination. If necessary, assisted
   n   os  r 
normal pH and blood gas values.
CATECHOLAMINES
hypotension is suspected. Hypotension and poor tissue perfusion may
occur as a consequence of loss of consciousness, bradyarrhythmias,
vasodilation, and low cardiac output. Clinically, hypotension may result
in lethargy, depression, muscle weakness, and considerable delays in
recovery from anesthesia. Acute hypotension should be treated with
CHAPTER 20 ● Drug Antagonism and Antagonists   401
appropriate fluids (10 to 20 ml/kg IV lactated Ringer's solution; 5 to 10
ml/kg IV hetastarch) and the administration of dopamine (1 to 4 μg/kg
per minute), dobutamine (1 to 10 μg/kg per minute), or ephedrine (0.1
to 0.5 mg/kg IV to effect).
SUGGESTED READINGS
Heniff MS, Moore G, Trout A et al: Comparison of routes of flumazenil
administration to reverse midazolam-induced respiratory depression in a
canine model, Acad Emerg Med 4:1115-1118, 1997.
Muir WW, Hubbell JAE: Drugs used for preanesthetic medication. In Muir WW,
Hubbell JAE, editors: Handbook of veterinary anesthesia, ed 3.
St Louis, 1999, Mosby.
Salonen S, Vuorilehto L, Vainio O et al: Atipamezole increases medetomidine
clearance in the dog: an agonist-antagonist interaction, J Vet Pharrmacol Ther
18:328-332,1995.
Schaffer DD、 Hsu WH、 Hopper DL: Antagonism of xylazine-induced
4-aminopyridine, doxapram, or yohimbine, Am f Vet Res 47(10):2116-2121,
1986.
Thurman JC、 Tranquilli WJ、 Benson GJ: Preanesthetics and anesthetic
adjuncts. In Thurman JC, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ, editors: Lumb & fones'
veterinary anesthesia, ed 3, Baltimore, 1996, Williams & Wilkins.
21
CANCER PAIN
MANAGEMENT
JAMES S. GAYNOR
         
practice as knowledge, drugs, and therapeutic techniques evolve.
Although some cancers still are not effectively treated, many owners
want palliative pain control in order to maintain a good quality oflife.
● An attempt to alleviate the pet's pain is vitally important. Cancer pain
is estimated to be effectively managed in 90% of humans with currently
available drugs and techniques.
CANCER PAIN
Most cancer pain is controllable.
The four main steps in ensuring that pain management is optimized
in veterinary patients are as follows.
FOURSTEPSTOOPTIMIZECANCERPAINCONTROL
 1. Educate yourself on the assessment and alleviation of cancer pain.
2. Create real client expectations.
3. Assess pet pain regularly.
4. Use opioi ds as part of a muiltimodar approach.
1. Educate and train staff concerning the importance of alleviation of
pain, assessment of pain, available drugs and potential complications,
a nd interventional techniques.
2. Educate the client concerning realistic expectations surrounding pain
control. Convey the idea that most of the patient's pain can be man-
aged. This involves letting the client know that owner involvement
in evaluating the pet and providing feedback on therapy is crucial to
success. The veterinarian and owner should participate in developing
402
CHAPTER 21 + Cancer Pain Management
403
effective strategies to alleviate pain. Owner involvement also helps de-
crease the potential feeling of helplessness.
3.The third step is to assess the pet's pain and quality of life thoroughly
in go aso a o pe is a ie (a iid as)
not just when pain gets severe.
4. Provide excellent support for the use of opioids and other controlled
substances (be available!).
DRUGS AND TECHNIQUES FOR ALLEVIATION
OF PAIN
·A good starting point for the management of cancer pain is to follow
the World Health Organization ladder, which is a three-step hierarchy
(Fig. 21-1).
1. Drugs within the same category can have different side effects.
Therefore, if possible, it may be best to substitute drugs within a
category before switching therapies. It is always best to try to keep
dosage scheduling as simple as possible. The more complicated the
regimen, the more likely that noncompliance will occur.
2. Mild to moderate pain should be treated with a nonsteroidal
antinflammatory drug (NSAID).
3. As pain increases, opioids or opioid-like drugs should be added to
the regimen. As pain becomes more severe, increase the dose of the
Step 3
Step 2
Opioid;
adjuvant if
Combination
Step 1
necessary
low-dose
opioid with
nonopioid;
 adjuvant if
Severe pain
Nonopioid;
necessary
adjuvant if
necessary
Moderatepain
Mild pain
FlG. 21-1. World Health Organization analgesia ladder. (Used by permission of
the World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.)
404PART FOUR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
needed, as pain becomes moderate to severe. Continuous analgesia
facilitates maintenance of patient comfort. Additional doses of
analgesics can then be administered as pain is intermittently more
severe.
4. Adjuvant drugs should be administered to help with specific types
of pain and anxiety (e.g-, gabapentin and alendronate [Fosamax]).
NONOPIOIDS
· Nonopioid analgesics include drugs such as NSAIDs and
acetaminophen. Use of an NSAID that is approved for use in the
intended species is desirable because these drugs have been more
thoroughly studied and generally have significantly fewer side effects
than nonapproved drugs (see Chapter 10).
● All nonopioids except acetaminophen are considered NSAIDs.
Despite the low antinflammatory activity of acetaminophen, it
possesses beneficial analgesic effects, minimal risk of bleeding in
thrombocytopenic patients, decreased gastrointestinal side effects, and
synergism with opioid analgesics, such as codeine. Acetaminophen
should not be used in cats because of inadequate cytochrome P4so
dependent hydroxylation.
  no  sad n  P i
masses, intraabdominal masses, and bone metastases—generally
responds to NSAID therapy. NSAIDs have an opioid-sparing effect
so that better analgesia can be achieved with lower doses of opioids
when needed.
2. NSAIDs have central analgesic and peripheral antinflammatory
effects mediated via inhibition of cyclooxygenase. The choice of
clinical response, and tolerance of side effects (see Chapter 10).
3. The most common side effect of NSAID administration in dogs
is gastric irritation and bleeding because of loss of gastric acid
inhibition and of cytoprotective mucous production normally
promoted by prostaglandins.
a. Other side effects include renal failure and hepatic dysfunction
that may lead to failure.
b. NSAIDs that are more selective for inhibition of cyclooxygen-
ase-2 (COX-2) seem to have fewer gastrointestinal effects and
potentially fewer renal effects.
c. Selective COX-2 inhibitors—such as carprofen, deracoxib,
meloxicam, firocoxib, and the dual inhibitor tepoxalin
should be considered priority NSAIDs in cancer patients.
      s
A blood chemistry panel should be performed before initiating
NSAID therapy.
d.If there is evidence of liver or renal disease, dehydration, or hy-
 potension, another approach to therapy should be considered.
Therapy with NSAIDs may also inhibit platelet function leading
to bleeding and oozing of blood from incision sites. Therapy with
NSAIDs should be stopped if this occurs.
e. If clinical effectiveness is not achieved with one NSAID, it
should be discontinued and another started 7 days later to avoid
additive or synergistic COX inhibition effects.
f. Aspirin should be avoided in dogs because of the increased pos-
sibility of gastrointestinal bleeding, even with buffered formula-
tions.
g. Administration of misoprostol or omeprazole can help provide
gastrointestinal protection during the switch-over period. All
cancer patients should be closely monitored for gastrointestinal
bleeding during NSAID therapy because chemotherapy may in-
duce thrombocytopenia.
OPIOIDS
Tramadol, an opioid-like drug, can provide excellent adjunctive therapy
(see Chapter 14).
● Opioids are the major class of analgesics used in the management of
moderate to severe cancer pain. Opioids are the most effective and
predictable and have a low risk of side effects.
+ The required dose of opioid increases as a patient's pain increases.
OPIOIDS
·Opioids are the most effective,predictable analgesics.
· Do not be afraid to increase dose as duration and intensity of pain increase
1. Veterinarians have an ethical obligation to alleviate animal pain.
2. Opioids can be administered while managing side effects to
maximally help the patient. Side effects of opioid administration
include diarrhea and vomiting initially and constipation with
long-term use. Sedation and dysphoria may also occur. The
initial gastrointestinal effects occur most frequently with the first
injection (first-dose effect) in the perioperative period and usually
do not occur with subsequent dosing. These effects usually do not,
but may, occur with oral dosing.
406 PART FOUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
3. Discussion of dosing schedules is important when sending a patient
home with oral medications.
a. The prescribed dose may be perfect, may not provide enough
analgesia, may induce sedation, or may induce dysphoria or
excitement.
b. Adjustment of the dose requires excellent doctor-client interac-
tion.
c. Bradycardia is a potential side effect associated with opioid
administration but is most common if opioids are administered
parenterally. If bradycardia occurs, an anticholinergic, such as
atropine or glycopyrrolate, can be administered, rather than
discontinuing the opioid.
are not limited by a ceiling effect. As pain increases, larger doses may
be administered.
● Morphine is an extremely effective and versatile opioid for cancer-
formulations, including short-duration tablets and liquids and
sustained-release tablets.
● Oral morphine is effective for providing long-term analgesia in dogs
and cats with moderate to severe pain. Patients receiving analgesics at
set dosing intervals should be provided with a short-duration opioid
for breakthrough pain.
● Oxymorphone is only available as an injectable analgesic and can
induce panting by changing the temperature set-point in the brain.
This usually is not an issue, except when attempting thoracic or
abdominal radiography.
● Meperidine is very short-acting in animals, limiting its use as an
analgesic in cancer patients.
● Codeine is available alone or with acetaminophen, allowing some
flexibility in choice of oral medications.
· Fentanyl is an injectable drug that is potent and effective. Fentanyl can
be infused because it is short acting. This trait also enables the dose to
be changed rapidly if necessary in order to achieve good analgesia and
minimal sedation.
the same degree of analgesia as does morphine and has a ceiling effect.
Cats seem to develop a greater degree of analgesia than do dogs. The
advantage of buprenorphine is that it has a very long duration of
action, 6 to 12 hours. Buprenorphine also has a long time to onset
of effect, approximately 40 minutes, even when given intravenously.
Buprenorphine should only be used for mild to moderate cancer pain
CHAPTER 21 ● Cancer Pain Management  407
because of the inherent lack of maximal analgesia compared with
morphine.
● Oral oxycodone is currently being used more and more frequently
for severe pain in dogs. Oxycodone seems to induce less sedation and
dysphoria than oral morphine and provides a greater degree of pain
control than oral codeine.
● Butorphanol is a K-agonist/μ-antagonist. The analgesia is not as good as
dnq ss rd s u g   pnd pe
produces analgesia of very short duration in dogs and may be of limited
value for the treatment of moderate to severe cancer pain.
Transdermal fentanyl patches are an alternative to oral morphine,
       
24 hours to take effect and last 2 to 4 days.
1. Additional analgesia must be provided during the first halfto 1 day
after patch placement.
can result in unreliable plasma concentrations in dogs.
3. Fentanyl patches may not provide enough analgesia for severe pain
but allow lower doses of adjunctive drugs.
4. Fentanyl patches are expensive and should not be the first approach
to chronic therapy.
5. Transdermal fentanyl administration is most appropriate in those
patients that do not tolerate oral medication.
● Epidural opioid administration, especially of morphine, has been
used as a method for providing perioperative analgesia. Opioids can
be administered epidurally for days to weeks following placement of
an epidural catheter (see Chapter 16).
● Opioid dose is selected to produce analgesia and minimize side effects.
1. The need for increased doses often reflects progression of disease.
2. Long-term use of opioids can produce tolerance.
3. Veterinarians should not be afraid of increasing opioid doses in
patients that continue to show signs of pain. A distinct advantage of
using opioids for pain control is that they are reversible with naloxone
or nalmefene if unacceptable side effects occur. Prolonged use may
 produce constipation. Oral laxatives can help alleviate this problem.
Q2-AGONISTS
● Xylazine and medetomidine are two Qz-agonists approved for use in
small animals in the United States. They are noncontrolled parenteral
drugs and provide excellent visceral analgesia, but only for 20 minutes
to 2 hours.
408PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
●Xylazine and medetomidine should not be the first or only choice
cardiovascular side effects.
● Xylazine and medetomidine are synergistic with opioids. This effect
is useful postoperatively for enhancing analgesia and alleviating
dysphoria (see Chapter 11).
NMDA RECEPTOR ANTAGONIST
● Ketamine has been identified as an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor antagonist. NMDA receptors are believed to be important in
the processes leading up to central sensitization and windup.
● As an NMDA receptor antagonist, ketamine reduces postoperative
 pain and opioid requirements for a variety of procedures in humans.
● Ketamine doses are much smaller than those for anesthesia.
1. Patients do not develop behavioral or cardiovascular effects.
2. Microdose ketamine may decrease the incidence of opioid-induced
dysphoria postoperatively.
● Microdose ketamine has been demonstrated to be effective for pain
control in the perioperative period and after the dog has been sent
home. Specific studies have not been completed to document efficacy
in other situations. Presumably, other intense painful procedures and
ailments would benefit from ketamine administration.
● Ketamine should be administered as a bolus (0.5 mg/kg IV) followed
by an infusion (10 μg/kg per minute) before and during surgical
stimulation. A lower infusion rate (2 μg/kg per minute) may be
beneficial for the first 24 hours postoperatively and an even lower rate
(1 μg/kg per minute) for the next 24 hours.
· Ketamine can be mixed in a bag of crystalloid solutions for
administration during anesthesia in the absence of an infusion pump.
Adding 60 mg (0.6 ml) of ketamine to a 1-L bag of crystalloid fluids
will deliver ketamine at 10 μg/kg per minute when the administration
rate is 10 ml/kg per hour.
● Amantadine can be administered at 3 mg/kg PO once daily to prevent
windup. Amantadine should be part of the early intervention in
patients with osteosarcoma.
TRANQVILIZERS
· A concern that frequently arises with pain management is concurrent
tranquilization and sedation. Many drugs produce concurrent sedation. As
mentioned previously, opioids can produce dysphoria instead of sedation.
CHAPTER 21 + Cancer Pain Management
409
● Dysphoria becomes more likely when cats are administered dog doses
of opioids and when a patient is already experiencing high anxiety.
      s d  i
soothing or by changes in position.
2. Low-dose acepromazine (Table 21-1), both intravenously (IV) and/
or intramuscularly (IM), is reasonable drug therapy for dysphoria.
Although acepromazine does not alleviate pain, it calms anxious
patients and makes them care less about their pain. Acepromazine
can also be given orally, especially in the evening for animals that
have trouble sleeping.
3. Alprazolam, 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg PO daily, can be administered as an
anxiolytic.
4. The benzodiazepines diazepam and midazolam can beadministered
as alternative therapy for animals in which acepromazine is
contraindicated and those with bleeding and seizure disorders.
a. Benzodiazepines should not be used by themselves in most alert
patients because they frequently cause apprehension and excite-
ment. Sedation usually occurs when combined with opioids.
b.A low dose of xylazine, IV or IM, also can decrease dysphoria and
increase analgesia in patients that are hemodynamically stable.
5. Patients that develop dysphoria after oral analgesic medications
often respond well to oral acepromazine or diazepam. To determine
whether the opioid is effective is important before changing the
a nalgesia regimen.
CommonlyUsedAdjuvantDrugsforPatients
TABLE 21-1
with Cancer Pain
Drug
Route
Dose
Acepromazine 
V
0.005-0.03 mg/kg
 Acepromazine 
SQ, IM
0.02-0.05 mg/kg
PO
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
Diazepam/midazolam (Versed)
IV
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
xylazine
IV
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
Xylazine
IM
0.2 mg/kg
Medetomidine (Domitor)
IV
0.001 mg/kg
Medetomidine
IM
0.002 mg/kg
Amitriptyline (Elavil)
PO
Dog: 1-2 mg/kg q1 2-24h
Cat 25-12.5 mg per cat c24h
mipramine (Tofranil)
PO
Dog: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg q8h
Cat: 2.5-5 mg/kg q12h
Doses are the same for dogs and cats unless otherwise described.
410PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
TRICYCLICANTIDEPRESSANTS
 Tricyclic antidepressants, such as amitriptyline and imipramine, block
the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine in the central nervous
system. They also have antihistamine effects.
· These drugs have been used in humans for the treatment of chronic
and neuropathic pain at doses considerably lower than those used to
treat depression. Presumably, they have similar analgesic properties
and enhance opioid analgesia.
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
· Local anesthetic techniques can be used instead of general anesthesie
in selected patients or more commonly in combination with injectable
analgesics (see Chapters 12 and 15).
EPIDURALANALGESIA
· A catheter can be placed in the epidural space. Maintenance of this
catheter requires veterinarian and client vigila nce to ensure cleanliness
and prevent infection migrating to the spinal cord. With proper care,
an epidural catheter can remain in place for days to weeks.
LOCAL OR WHOLE BODY RADIATION
by reducing metastatic or primary tumor bulk.
● Radiation dose should be adjusted to the amount necessary to kill
tumor cells and that which would affect normal cells.
● Mucositis of the oral cavity and pharynx can develop after radiation of
the neck, head, or oral cavities, resulting in impaired ability to eat and
drink.
● Mucositis therapy includes analgesics, sucralfate, 2% viscous lidocaine,
and green tea rinses.
BISPHOSPHANATES
· Bony metastases are one of the most common causes of pain in
advanced cancer. Some tumors cause osteoblastic metastases, but
most cause osteolytic lesions.
● Administration of bisphosphonates, such as pamidronate or alendr-
onate (Fosamax), reduces pain and pathologic fractures in humans.
CHAPTER 21 ● Cancer Pain Management 411
· Bisphosphonates accumulate on bone surfaces and inhibit osteoclast-
induced resorption, favoring bone formation. This therapy may
 sd    on  n s   
osteosarcoma-related pain.
STRONTIUM-89
●Intravenous administration of strontium-89 has also been shown to
provide analgesia related to bony metastases in approximately 50% of
humans, but its use is uncommon in veterinary patients.
ACUPUNCTURE
● Acupuncture can be used as a pain-relieving modality, often when
conventional therapy does not work.
lower doses of drugs that may have side effects (see Chapter 17).
● In general, acupuncture analgesia is extremely useful for pelvic, radial/
ulnar, and femoral bone pain and cutaneous discomfort resulting
from radiation therapy.
● Acupuncture helps alleviate nausea associated with chemotherapy and
opioid analgesics and promotes general well- being.
APPROACHTOPAININTHECANCERPATIENT
· The first principle is to practice a multimodal approach to analgesia.
Use drugs in combination that work by different mechanisms of action
to allow optimal analgesia at the lowest dose possible.
           
activities related to pain assessment and management. This flowchart
emphasizes the use of multiple modalities, beginning therapy with the
least invasive methods and advancing treatment to meet the patient's
needs.
● Pain control should be achievable by following these simple ABCs:
ABCS OF CANCER PAIN CONTROL
A—Assess pain.
B—-Believe owner.
C—Choose appropriate therapy.
E——Empower clients to participate.
F—-Facilitate combination therapy.
412
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
1. Assess the pain. Ask for the owner's perceptions.
2. Believe the owner. The owner sees the pet everyday in its own
environment.
3. Choose appropriate
therapy following
the WorldHealth
Organization ladder and other more specific paradigms.
4. Deliver therapy in a logical, coordinated manner.
5. Combine pain therapy
programs
and
regimens
with
recommendations for managing and improving the animal's
quality of life (see Chapter 29).
6. Empower the clients to participate actively in their pet's well-being.
SURGICALCASEEXAMPLES
· The following generic examples, in conjunction with the flowchart,
  d  s   s  i
TABLE 21-2
Management of Surgical Pain
Time
Drugs
Rationale
 Preoperative
Morphine
 Preemptive, long-lasting 
analgesia
±Acepromazine
Tranquilization, calming,
anxiolysis
Atropine/glycopyrrolate
Prevent bradycardia associ-
ated with opioids
Appropriate nerve blocks
 Preemptive analgesia, prevent
windup
Epidural anesthesia if
Preemptive analgesia, prevent
applicable
windup
htraoperative
Fentanyl continuous infusion 
 Decrease cardiovascular
effects of inhalant agents;
additional analgesia
Microdose ketamine
Prevent windup
Morphine-lidocaine-ketamine I
 Decrease cardiovascular
effects of inhalant agents;
additional analgesia
Prevent windup
Acute postoperative
Appropriate nerve blocks
Analgesia
Fentanyl continuous infusion
 Analgesia adjustable to patient
needs
Microdose ketamine
Prevent windup, dysphoria
Postoperative adjuncts  Acepromazine
Anxiolysis, dysphoria
Aprazolam
Anxiolysis
Diazepam/midazolam
Dysphoria
Xylazine/medetomidine
Additional analgesia, dysphoria
CHAPTER 21 + Cancer Pain Management
413
oncology practice. The examples recommend specific techniques for
the procedure rather than a complete analgesia program.
Lateral thoracotomy
1. Intercostal nerve block
2. Interpleural local anesthetic
3. Opioid epidural
Sternotomy
1. Interpleural local anesthetic
2. Opioid epidural
● Forelimb amputation
1. Brachial plexus nerve block
2. Opioid epidural
● Rear limb amputation: opioid epidural
● Cranial mandibular surgery
1. Mandibular nerve block
2. Mental nerve block
· Upper lip and nose procedure: infraorbital nerve block
● Maxillary surgery: maxillary nerve block
● Midcaudal abdominal surgery. opioid epidural (local anesthetic also if
in ca udal abdomen)
● Cranial abdominal surgery
1. Interpleural local anesthetic
2. Opioid epidural
● Although not all types of pain can be addressed, pain relief should be
considered achievable by following recommendations and paradigms
in this manuscript.
OUTPATIENTCASEEXAMPLES
· Osteosarcoma—assuming the patient does not have an amputation
1. Initial therapy with an approved NSAID for mild to moderate pain
2. Continuous therapy with amantadine to treat and prevent
windup
3. Pamidronate, a bisphosphonate, every 3 to 4 weeks to decrease
osteoclast function
4. Tramadol with the NSAID for moderate to severe pain
 5. Oxycodone to replace tramadol as the pain gets worse
Chondrosarcoma
1. Initial therapy with an approved NSAID for mild to moderate
pain
2. Gabapentin in progressively increasing doses for analgesia and to
help prevent windup
414PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
●Transitional cell carcinoma
1. This is the only tumor that has been identified definitively as being
responsive to piroxicam. Hence, piroxicam should be administered
for anticancer effects and for analgesia. The patient's packed
cell volume should be monitored closely because piroxicam is a
nonspecific COX-1/COX-2 inhibitor, predisposing to moderate to
severe ulceration and the potential for gastrointestinal bleeding-
2. Administer tramadol with piroxicam for more severe pain.
SUMMARY
● Most animals with cancer have pain that can be treated.
● Engage the owners as fully as possible.
●Practice multimodal analgesia.
· If a specific regimen is not working, increase the dose or change
protocols.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Cancer pain relief, ed 2, Geneva, 1996, World Health Organization.
Friedland I: Local and systemic radiation for palliation of metastatic disease, Urol
Clin North Am 26:391-402, 1999.
Fu ES, Miguel R, Scharf JE: Preemptive ketamine decreases postoperative
Analg 84: 1086-1090,1997.
Goisis A, Gorini M, Ratti R, et al: Application of a WHO protocol on medical
therapy for oncologic pain in an internal medicine hospital, Tumori 75:470-
472,1989.
Golden BD, Abramson SB: Selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors, Rheurm Dis
Clin North Am 25:359-378, 1999.
Jacox A, Carr DB, Payne R, et al: Management ofcancer pain, Rockville, Md, 1994.
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research.
Kasalicky J, Krajska V: The effect of repeated strontium-89 chloride therapy on
bone pain palliation in patients with skeletal cancer metastases, Eur ∫ Nucl
Med25:1362-1367,1998
Merskey H: Pharmacologic approaches other than opioids in chronic non-cancer
pain management, Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 41:187-190, 1997.
Nair N: Relative efficacy of 32P and 89Sr in palliation of skeletal metastases,
fNucl Med40:256-261,1999.
Sawyer DC、 Rech RH, Durham RA, et al: Dose response to butorphanol
administered subcutaneously to increase visceral nociceptive threshold in
dogs, Am J Vet Res 52:1826-1830, 1991.
22
PAIN MANAGEMENT
IN THE CAT
SHEILAHA.ROBERTSON
United States and the United Kingdom. Most cats will undergo at
least one surgery in their life span, usually elective neutering, that
is associated with the potential for them to experience acute pain. Until
recently, there was little awareness of chronic pain in cats, and it is likely
this has been greatly underestimated. New studies suggest that many
senior cats (>10 years of age) have radiographic or clinical evidence of
degenerative joint disease and that the clinical signs are different from
those seen in dogs. The incidence of other long-term pain conditions
such as cancer, intervertebral disk disease, and oral and ocular pain is
unknown but undoubtedly significant.
Alleviation of pain in cats historically has lagged behind that in other
companion animals, but this is rapidly changing. The challenges of
treating pain in cats are unique but not insurmountable (Box 22- 1).
The drugs discussed elsewhere in this book can be used in a pain
management plan for cats and include opioids (Chapter 9), nonsteroidal
antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; Chapter 10), α2-agonists (Chapter 11),
local anesthetics (Chapter 12), and many of the drugs listed under “other
BOX 22-1
Challenges of Treating Pain in Cats
● Difficulty in recognizing pain in cats
●Lack of species-specific information
●Unique metabolism of drugs (e.g., low capacity for hepatic glucuronidation)
● Risk of adverse side effects (e.g., toxicity with long-term use of nonsteroidal
antinflammatory drugs)
●Paucity of drugs with market authorization
· Difficulty in administration of medications to cats
415
416
PART FoUR • Acute and Chronic Pain Management
drugs used to treat pain" (Chapter 14). In addition, complementary therapies
are applicable to cats (Chapter 16). This chapter discusses the unique features
of these drugs and modalities when used in cats and also provides practical
information for managing common pain conditions in the feline patient.
RECOGNITION OF PAIN IN CATS
No validated gold standard pain scoring systems exist for use in animals,
but specific pain behaviors are now recognized (Chapters 5 and 6). Studies
that have tried to correlate objective physiological data such as heart
rate, temperature, respiratory rate, plasma cortisol, and β-endorphins
with pain in cats have been unsuccessful because these are influenced by
many factors other than pain. Therefore, observation of behavior is the
often veterinarians must rely on information from the owner. Pain may
solitary one. Loss of normal behavior may also occur; for example, a cat
with degenerative joint disease no longer jumping up onto its favorite
resting spots, or adoption of a new strategy such as standing to urinate
ACUTE PAIN
because of fear, this can make assessing pain very difficult. However, cats
and tense and try to hide. These cats do not respond positivelyto human
interaction such as stroking. The painful cat that is immobile and
hiding at the back of the cage is often overlooked and goes untreated. In
some cats the response to pain is different and exhibited by manic and
aggressive behavior, growling, hissing, and rolling around their cage. The
their pain, but the two must be differentiated: often if the bandage can
be removed, the cat calms down; if not, then pain should be suspected.
Cats with abdominal pain frequently adopt a sternal posture, with their
head down, elbows drawn back, stifles forward, abdominal muscles
tensed, and back arched, and their eyes are often half-shut or “squinting
(Fig. 22-1).
Limb pain prevents weight bearing; however, pain is often bilateral
in cats (forelimb declaw) and therefore easily overlooked. One of the
many commonly reported problems following onychectomy is excessive
         
FIG. 22-1. The typical features suggestive of abdominal pain are seen in this
cat: note the sternal posture, with head down, elbows drawn back, stifles forward,
licking and chewing of the feet. If possible, one should assess the response
to palpation on or around the source of pain, for example; a cat that has
around a surgical incision.
 o sq e p o po so d e soi si 
      s  d si  a
agent and observe for a positive improvement in behavior or demeanor.
Pain should always be assessed and recorded in hospitalized patients.
A pain scoring system that suits the individual clinic should be adopted;
this must be user friendly and not too time consuming; for examples, see
Chapter 6.
CHRONIC PAIN
The most common cause of chronic pain in cats is osteoarthritis (OA),
but cancer or oral, ocular, and long-standing skin diseases or wounds are
alsoimportant causes.
 o  e  e e   s   s
severe orthopedic disease and because of a pet cat's lifestyle, lameness
or exercise intolerance are not common owner complaints. In addition,
       
common, and this makes lameness difficult to detect. To elicit pain on
clinical examination of some cats is also notoriously difficult.
Clinical experience suggests that the behavioral changes that
accompany OA are insidious and easily missed or are assumed to
418
PART FOUR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
be inevitable with advancing age; therefore the owner does not seek
veterinary advice. Changes in behavior including decreased grooming,
reluctance to jump up on favorite places, inability to jump as high as
before, and soiling outside the litter box should prompt the veterinarian
to look for sources of chronic pain. Other changes that owners report
are altered sleeping habits (an increase or decrease), withdrawing from
human interaction, hiding and dislike of being stroked or brushed.
Inactivity, which may result from chronic joint pain, is much more
difficult to determine in cats because they naturally sleep a lot and are
often solitary, and in many cases the owners are not home all day to
monitor their cat's activity level.
Analgesic trials may sometimes be the only way to confirm thatchronic
pain was present. For example, after intervention with an NSAID in cats
with a presumptive diagnosis of OA, the majority of owners believed that
their cats made an improvement, and the most common clinical sign
that improved was the unwillingness to jump, the height of the jump,
and a noticeably less stiff gait.
METABOLISM OF DRUGS
Compared with other mammals, cats have a very low capacity for
hepatic glucuronidation of exogenously administered drugs.? Cats
may lack these metabolic pathways because of their all-meat diet and
lack of exposure and therefore need to metabolize plants containing
phytoalexins.
These metabolic differences can lead to toxic side effects if doses and
dosing intervals are not adjusted. Alternatively, if the parent compound
 e d s        
may be less effective. The deficiency of the glucuronidation pathway
in cats explains their susceptibility to the toxic side effects of phenolic
drugs such as acetaminophen (paracetamol) and long half-lives of other
drugs such as carprofen and aspirin. Only small amounts of morphine-
6-glucuronide (M-6-G) are produced after administration of morphine
in cats, and because this metabolite contributes to the overall analgesic
profile of morphine in other species, morphine may be less effective
in cats.
Armed with a better understanding of feline drug metabolism, one
can understand why the response to some drugs is unpredictable and
different from other species, and this allows clinicians to make more
appropriate choices, for example, choosing a drug that relies more on
oxidative path ways, such as meloxicam, and using pharmacokinetic data
such as half-life from research studies to devise dosing intervals.
CHAPTER 22 · Pain Management in the Cat
419
ANALGESIC DRUGS
OPIOIDS
Opioids are the most versatile, reliable, and efficacious drugs for
the treatment of pain and have an excellent safety record. In cats,
As veterinarians study cats more, it is becoming clear that as in other
species, there are genetic differences between individuals in their
response to opioids. This may be correlated with individual differences
in metabolism and with the number, type, and distribution of opioid
receptors. For these reasons, one should not expect all cats to respond
equally to a set dose of a specific opioid, emphasizing the need for careful
pain assessment and individually tailored treatment protocols.
TimingofAdministration
Opioids have distinct advantages when given before surgery, this is
termed preemptive anaigesia. Opioids can decrease but not fully prevent
central sensitization, and animals that receive opioids before surgery
compared with those receiving them after surgery. When opioids are on
board during a surgical procedure, heart rate and blood pressure tend to
remain stable because they are not influenced by noxious stimuli.
Another advantage of using opioids before anesthesia in ma ny species
is their anesthetic-sparing effect; for example, less inhalant agent is
required, often resulting in less cardiopulmonary depression. In cats this
effect is less apparent than in dogs? but is still clinically useful.
SideEffects
Many opioids can be used successfully in cats. The notion that cats are
    (  o ,  n 
on studies using doses far in excess of those needed to alleviate pain. The
opioids and doses suggested in this chapter often result in sedation and
euphoric behavior (rubbing against the cage or a person, purring and
administration in painful cats or when used in combination with drugs
such as acetylpromazine or medetomidine that provide sedation.
In contrast to many other species, opioids cause mydriasis in cats
rather than miosis, but the analgesic effects can wear off before pupil size
returns to normal, so pupil size should not be relied on as an indicaton
that analgesia is still present. Mydriasis, inability to focus, and poor depth
bumping into objects, and showing aversion to bright light.
420
PART FOuR·Acute and ChronicPainManagement
Nausea (licking of the lips, apprehension, and salivation) and
vomiting are features of opioid administration in many species. In
research and clinical settings the incidence of these side effects varies
with the drug and the route of administration. Vomiting and nausea
        
and is rarely seen after administration of butorphanol, buprenorphine.
fentanyl, meperidine, methadone, or oxymorphone. Vomiting is much
more likely after subcutaneous injection than after intravenous dosing
with intramuscular administration lying in between. These side effects
are also more likely to be seen in a pain-free cat (for example, when
opioids are used as a preemptive analgesic in an elective case) and if
they are not coadministered with acetylpromazine. Vomiting should be
avoided in cats that are obtunded and may not have adequate airway
protection and in those with a suspected increase in intracranial or
intraocular pressure or with a corneal foreign body because the act of
yomiting increases intracranial and intraocular pressure.
Long-term use of opioids is common in humans with chronic pain.
and is likely associated with decreased gastrointestinal motility.
Route of administration also affects time to onset, intensity, and dura
tion of action. In an experimental model using hydromorphone, onset time
was shortest and intensity of effect and duration greatest after intravenous
(IV) dosing. Time to peak effect was slowest after subcutaneous (SC)
administration, and the duration and intensity of effect after intramuscular
(IM) and SC administration were less than after IV dosing. When an IV
catheter is available, this is the recommended route of administration. This
avoids repeated SC or IM injections, which can be painful and stressful for
cats and more diffcult for nursing personnel to perform.
Opioid-Related Hyperthermia. Hyperthermia can occur after
opioid administration in cats. Hyperthermia is reported with meperi
dine and morphine, but only at high doses and not at those commonly
used clinically. However, in a clinical setting using recommended doses
(0.1 mg/kg) of hydromorphone, more than 60% of cats had tempera-
tures greater than 40° C (104° F) at some time during recovery, with
one cat reaching 42.5° C (108.5° F).4 Hyperthermia was not alleviated by
NSAID administration. These cats were treated with fans, bathing with
cool water or alcohol, and administration of acepromazine to promote
vasodilation; in two cases, naloxone was used after palliative measures
failed. Mildly elevated rectal temperatures have been reported in associa-
tion with transdermal fentanyl patches but rarely require treatment.
Cardiovascular depression, including bradycardia, is not a common
side effect of opioids in clinical situations. If this does occur, it can be
CHAPTER 22 + Pain Management in the Cat
421
treated with atropine or glycopyrrolate (see Chapter 9). Respiratory
of other anesthetic agents and can easily be managed by providing
ventilatory support. In conscious cats, hypoventilation after opioid use
is rare and usually only seen after an overdose or if there is underlying
pathologic condition such as head trauma. In these situations, naloxone
respiratory depression is reversed and not all the analgesia. Naloxone
(0.4 mg/ml) should be diluted in a 1:10 ratio with normal saline and given
by slow IV injection until a response is seen. Alternatively, butorphanol
(0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg) can be given to reverse μ-opioid agonists.
Clinical Use ofOpioids
Buprenorphine. Buprenorphine is a partial μ-agonist that is
because it is versatile and is a less highly scheduled controlled drug
than the pure μ-agonist agents. Onset of analgesia is faster than
previously believed but dependent on route of administration; there
is significant analgesia within 30 minutes after IV or transmucosal
administration, but onset of effect can take up to 45 minutes to 1
hour after SC and IM dosing. Peak effect occurs 90 minutes after IV
or transmucosal administration.
Transmucosal absorption through oral mucous membranes is
effective in cats with almost 100% bioavailability by this route, likely
a result of their alkaline saliva. Transmucosal administration has
proved to be effective and acceptable in cats and can be mastered by
owners for at-home treatment. The commercially available preparation
for injection is used for transmucosal dosing and the small volume
(0.3 ml at a dose of 0.02 mg/kg in a 5-kg cat) can easily be placed
on any oral mucous membrane such as under the tongue or in the
cheek pouch. Buprenorphine (o.02 mg/kg) was equally effective by
the IV and transmucosal route and may provide analgesia for up to
administered, highly effective, and long acting.
A transdermal matrix patch delivery system for buprenorphine is
now available for use in humans. Preliminary work in cats shows that
absorption is good, but it has not yet been used or evaluated in a clinical
setting-
Butorphanol. Butorphanol is an agonist-antagonist opioid and
exhibits a “ceiling” effect after which increasing the dose does not pro-
duce any further analgesia. In cats, this ceiling dose may be as low as
422
PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
0.1 mg/kg.5 Butorphanol appears to be an effective visceral but poor
somatic analgesic and so may be a good choice for temporary relief of
visceral pain syndromes such as interstitial cystitis. Clinical and experi-
mental investigations indicate that butorphanol is short acting in most
cats (<2 hours) and requires frequent dosing to be effective. Some recent
research studies show that some cats do respond well to butorphanol
  si s    sod (so i) o  
each cat must be individually assessed.
Nalbuphine. Nalbuphine is another agonist-antagonist, similar
to butorphanol, but is currently not scheduled by the U.s. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA). Nalbuphine also has a ceiling effect and
is adequate for mild to moderate degrees of pain. Nalbuphine seems to
provide good visceral and somatic analgesia, but well-designed studies
are lacking. The recommended doses of nalbuphine in cats are 0.1 to 0.2
mg/kg IV and up to 0.5 mg/kg IM or SC.
Fentanyl. Fentanyl is a potent, short-acting pure μ-agonist that
it can be given as intermittent boluses or by infusion (see Constant Rate
Infusions).
Transdermal fentanyl patches that release fentanyl over several days
have been used for alleviation of acute perioperative pain in cats. These
patches provide a “hands-off" approach to pain management that is
especially attractive in cats that are difficult to medicate. Plasma fentanyl
concentrations are variable after patch placement in cats, and in some
cats uptake is limited and does not reach an effective steady-state plasma
concentration (>1 ng/ml); therefore, if patches are used, each cat must
be assessed carefully for comfort. The variability may be related to the
size of the patch compared with the weight of the cat, skin permeability,
placement site, skin perfusion, subcutaneous fat, and body temperature.
When effective, cats achieve steady-state plasma concentration faster than
dogs (6 to 12 hours compared with 18 to 24 hours), and plasma levels
take longer to decline after patch removal in cats (up to 18 to 20 hours).
Transdermal fentanyl patches have proved useful in a clinical setting for
routine ovariohysterectomy and onychectomy. Significantly elevated
temperatures (1.0° C above baseline) 4 to 12 hours after transdermal
fentanyl patch application are reported.
Meperidine (Pethidine, Demerol). Meperidine (pethidine,
           
produce excitement. Meperidine rarely causes vomiting in cats. The
main drawback of meperidine is its short duration of action. In clini-
cal practice, meperidine performs as predicted in experimental studies.
CHAPTER 22·Pain Management in the Cat 423
producing good analgesia for little more than 1 to 2 hours. This drug is a
reasonable choice for minor procedures of short duration but is not ideal
for cats that require longer treatment because repeated IM injections can
be painful, and cats quickly become resentful of this.
Hydromorphone.Doses ofless than 0.05 mg/kg hydromorphone
did not produce antinociception in a research model, whereas a dose of
0.1 mg/kg IV was effective for 3.5 to 7 hours, with considerable inter-
(0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg), hydromorphone provides good analgesia and seda-
tion. Hydromorphone can be associated with hyperthermia, nausea, and
vomiting (see Side Effects).
 Methadone. Methadone has been used in cats at doses ranging
from 0.1 to 0.6 mg/kg, normally bythe IM or SC route, but IV dosing is also
commonlyperformed. Nausea and vomiting are rare after administration.
In a clinical setting when used for ovariohysterectomy, methadone was
effective and produced no undesirable behavioral, cardiovascular, or
respiratory effects. In addition to its μ-agonist actions, methadone may
also contribute to analgesia via antagonism of N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptors. Methadone shows great potential as a versatile analgesic agent
for cats.6,7
Morphine. Morphine has been widely used in cats and does not pro-
duce excitation at doses of 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg, which has provided clinically
useful analgesia. After IM or SC administration, onset of analgesic action
timing of administration should be taken into account. In research cats, no
M-6-G, the active analgesic metabolite, was detected after IM administra-
tion. After IV dosing, M-6-G was detected in 50% of cats; therefore, if IV
access is available, this may be a more effective route of administration.
Oxymorphone. Oxymorphone been a popular analgesic for many
years in the United States, where it is licensed for use in the cat. Oxymor-
phone produces few undesirable side effects but is more expensive than
other μ-opioid agonists.
Mixing of Opioids
It has been proposed that mixing of different classes of opioids may result
in added benefits. However, the outcome seems variable; a combination
of hydromorphone and butorphanol did not have additive effects but
did produce a longer lasting (up to 9 hours) but less intense effect than
combination produced greater levels of antinociception than when used
individually, but combining butorphanol and buprenorphine provided
no added benefits over either drug used alone.
424   PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
ConstantRateInfusions
Fentanyl. Fentanyl is suitable for constant rate infusion in cats
but should be titrated to effect to reduce accumulation. Fentanyl is
most commonly used during anesthesia so that less inhalant agents are
required, and it also allows the anesthetist to alter the level of analgesia
rapidly. Fentanyl infusion can be continued into the postopera-
tive period, when again it is easily titrated to individual patient needs.
A loading dose of 5 to 10 μg/kg IV is suggested, followed by 10 to 45 μg/kg
per hour during anesthesia, reducing the dose postoperatively to 2 to
5 μg/kg hour, depending on the individual cat's needs
Alfentanil.  Alfentanil is a short-acting opioid that is suitable for
infusion. Alfentanil reduced isoflurane requirements and improved
some cardiovascular variables, but at effective doses hyperthermia and
metabolic acidosis were reported.
Remifentanil.  Remifentanil has an ideal pharmacokinetic profle
for infusion and has been used successfully in dogs; early clinical reports
of its intraoperative use in cats are promising using doses similar to those
in dogs (0.1 to 1.0 μg/kg per minute).
Epidura/Opioid Administration
Morphine, fentanyl, pethidine, methadone, and buprenorphine have been
challenging in cats because of their small size, and because the spinal cord
ends more caudally, entering the subarachnoid space is more likely, even at
the lumbosacral junction. Clinical reports suggest that this route is effective
in cats, but more recent studies show that epidurally administered opioids
may be less effective than previously believed, so it is recommended that if
the epidural route is chosen, a local anesthetic also be used (Chapter 15).
Each opioid drug is described in detail in Chapter 9, and recommen-
ded doses and routes of administration for cats are shown in Table 22-1.
NONSTEROIDALANTINFLAMMATORYAGENTS
Until recently, NSAIDs have not been widely used in cats largely because of
the fear of toxicity. Considerable species variation exists in cyclooxygenase
  ps a pono sds a  s os issa (o
In addition, for many NSAIDs pharmacokinetic data are only available
  ss        s  
the metabolism or safety of chronic administration. The deficiency of
glucuronidation pathways in cats results in slow metabolism of several
NSAlls, particularly the phenolic compounds. However, drug meta bolism
CHAPTER 22 + Pain Management in the Cat
425
 All CRls should be preceded with a bolus to achieve effective plasma concen-
tration. Infusion rate can be adjusted to rapidly change degree of analgesia
Doses of 0.1 mg/kg regardless of route may be associated with hyperthermia
Active metabolites reported only in low concentration; therefore may be less 
Not associated with vomiting or hyperthermia. Licensed for use in cats in 
Uptake occurs but dosing regimens and efficacy in dinical setings not 
(a buas by6w z'o< ssop 6ui oh nauag a
 onup painpauos epou s ing suone pioido seh 
body temperature reported in some cats
effective than in other species
Short-acting in some cats
Hyperthermia not reported
UK Wetergesic)
Not to be given Iv
 Commonly Used Opioid Drugs and Doses for Cats 
established
Comments
 thermia
*The human product Ultracet contains acetaminophen and must notbe used in cats.
Oral (capsules, tablets,
V, IM, transmucosal
Administration
Transdermal (over
 shaved skin)
Transdermal
Route of
v, IM, SC 
N, IM, SC 
N, IM, SC 
liquid}
IM, SC
v, IM 
CRI, Constant rate infusion; TDF, transdermal fentanyl.
N
0.01-0.03 mg/kg
35 μg/hour patch
unouy 6y6ri 0 1
μg/hr, 2.5 mg
0.1-0.8 mg/kg
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
0.1-0.6 mg/kg
0.2-0.5 mg/kg
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
2-10 μg/kg
5-10 mg/kg
1-4 mg/kg
Dose
Meperidine (pethidine, 
TABLE 22-1
Buprenorphine
Hydromorphone 
Oxymorphone
Butorphanol
TDF patch
Demerol)
Methadone
Morphine 
Tramadol
Tramadol*
p!OdO
Fentanyl
Bolus
426PART FOUR ·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
and excretion pathways other than glucuronidation such as oxidation,
sulfation, and active drug transport do not appear to be deficient in cats
compared with other species. In recent years, a number of newer NSAIDs
have become licensed for use in cats in several countries. NSAIDs have the
advantage of being long acting, providing up to 24 hours of analgesia, and
they are not subject to the purchase and storage restrictions of the opioids.
SideEffects
The adverse side effects of the newer NSAIDs are not yet well
documented in cats but are similar to those described for other species
(Chapter 10) and include renal, hepatic, and gastrointestinal toxicity.
NSAIDs should not be used if there is preexisting renal or hepatic
disease, if corticosteroids are being used, or in the face of hypovolemia,
dehydration, or hypotension or if substantial blood loss is anticipated.
A complete blood count and chemistry panel drawn before use may
detect animals unsuitable for NSAID treatment (e.g., those with renal
disease or significant liver disease) and provide baseline data if there
is an unexpected complication following administration.
ClinicalfyUsefu!NSAiDs
Carprofen. Carprofen (2 to 4 mg/kg SC or IV) provides good post-
operative analgesia for at least 24 hours in cats following soft tissue sur-
gery. Anecdotal reports of toxicity have been made, usually associated
with concurrent disease and prolonged administration of the oral for-
mulations. Carprofen undergoes glucuronidation, and problems with
repeated dosing may be a result of variable intercat pharmacokinetics;
for example, in one study the half-life of carprofen after IV administra-
tion to healthy adult cats ranged from 9 to 49 hours. Repeat dosing is not
recommended.
Ketoprofen.Ketoprofen has proved to be an effective analge
sic for use in cats; 2 mg/kg provided postoperative analgesia for at least
18 hours and was comparable to carprofen, meloxicam, and tolfenamic
bleeding; therefore, it is usually given after surgery. Oral formulations
(1 mg/kg once daily) have been used for longer periods to treat muscu-
loskeletaldisorders.
Meloxicam.Meloxicam is a COX-2 selective NSAID, and the in-
jectable formulation is licensed for preoperative use in many countries ( up
to 0.3 mg/kg SC). Meloxicam is clinically effective for surgical procedures
including ovariohysterectomy, castration, and orthopedic surgery.
The sweet-flavored oral formulation seems palatable to most cats,
and in one study it was voted by owners as easier to administer than
CHAPTER 22 ● Pain Management in the Cat
427
ketoprofen. The liquid formulation also allows for accurate dosing, which
is important when this drug is used long term. Meloxicam has been used
improvement. Meloxicam does not have a prolonged half-life in cats
because it is metabolized by hepatic oxidative pathways, and this may be
why it has achieved success for long-term use. In 2007, meloxicam oral
suspension (0.5 mg/ml) received market authorization for the treatment of
OA in cats in several European countries. The suggested dose is 0.1 mg/kg
on day one followed by a maintenance dose of 0.05 mg/kg once daily. The
daily dose can be given on food or directly into the mouth using the drop
dispenser of the botle or the measuring syringe provided. Some cats may
require lower maintenance doses, and this can be decided by the owner.
If NSAIDs are used off-label (e.g-, oral meloxicam suspension in
the United States), the owner should be made aware of this. In all cases
the owner should be informed of the possible side effects verbally and
in writing. This should include what clinical signs to look for (e.g--
yomiting, inappetence, and bloody stool) that would warrant calling the
veterinarian and stopping treatment.
Although there are no standard guidelines for monitoring cats receiving
NSAIDs over prolonged periods, the veterinarian should follow the cats
carefully. It is suggested that the packed cell volume, total protein, blood
urea nitrogen, creatinine, and liver enzymes be measured in addition to
urine analysis before and after 1 week of treatment and then atthree monthly
intervals. Liver enzymes may rise with chronic drug administration but
do not reflect hepatic function; an increase of more than 200% should
prompt running liver function tests such as a bile acid assay.
ClinicalChoices
Little difference in the efficacy of the NSAIDs described previously is
apparent in the acute perioperative setting, and all provide good analgesia
in the majority of cats for up to 24 hours. Choice of agent depends on
long-term use, meloxicam is currently the best choice and the onlyNSAID
labeled for treatment of chronic musculoskeletal disorders in cats, at least
in same countries. Once a NSAID has been chosen, the cat should not
be placed on a different one without a period of “wash out,” which is
arbitrarily said to be 5 to 7 days (Chapter 10).
With the availability of newer NSAIDs the efficacy and safety of
which are established, there appears to be little justification for use of the
older NSAIDs such as aspirin, flunixin, and phenylbutazone to provide
analgesia in cats. Paracetamol, ibuprofen, indomethacin, and naproxen
are extremely toxic in cats and should never be used.
428
PART FOuR ·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
α2-ADRENOCEPTORAGONISTS
The Q-adrenoceptor agonists, which include xylazine, medetomidine,
and dexmedetomidine, provide sedation, muscle relaxation, and analgesia
in cats. Medetomidine is labeled for use in cats in some countries. These
drugs are not commonly used for their analgesic effect alone because of
the profound sedation and cardiovascular depression that accompanies
their use. The vasoconstriction and decrease in cardiac output associated
with cz-agonists preclude their use in cats with cardiovascular disease or
preexisting hypovolemia.
Medetomidine can be used alone for chemical restraint sothat
minor painful procedures can be performed (cleaning wounds, lancing
abscesses) or fractious cats can be examined. Published doses range from
5 to 150 μg/kg IM, and the effects of medetomidine are dose dependent.
In most cases, doses of 30 to 50 μg/kg are sufficient. Duration of effect
is also dose dependent, with a dose of 50 μg/kg lasting up to 3 hours.
Much lower doses (5 to 20 μg/kg IM) can be used in combination with
buprenorphine, methadone, or morphine to provide sedation and
analgesia.
Low-dose constant rate IV infusions can be used in cats; this is a
good technique for fractious cats; often 1 to 2 μg/kg per hour facilitates
interventions are required.
Medetomidine can be antagonized with atipamezole, but this
will reverse analgesia in addition to sedation. The reversal dose (in
micrograms) is 2.5 times the dose of medetomidine administered.
In painful and fractious cats, oral administration of medetomidine
(up to 200 μg/kg), which likely results in transmucosal uptake, can be a
useful technique for chemical restraint, but the responses can be variable,
and excessive salivation occurs in some cats.9
Epidural administration of medetomidine ( 10 μg/kg) was found to be
effective in cats, but the duration of effect was only 4 hours, and although
cardiopulmonary variables were not considerably affected, most cats
vomited after administration. Based on the variable results of epidural
morphine administration, medetomidine may be a viable option for cats
undergoing abdominal or hind limb surgery.
LOCALANESTHETICS
The local anesthetic techniques described in Chapter 12 can be adapted fo1
use in the cat. One ofthe most commonly used local anesthetic techniques
in cats is a digital nerve block before onychectomy (Fig. 22-2).
CHAPTER 22 + Pain Management in the Cat
429
FlG. 22-2. Local anesthetic blocks are very effective for blocking nociceptive
before onychectomy.
Bupivacaine (total dose 2 to 3 mg/kg) without epinephrine is often
used, but longer-acting agents would be more beneficial. Cats do not
lose motor function with this technique but may have proprioceptive
deficits.
 Implantable wound catheters that can remain in situ for several days
have been used in cats after major surgery including limb amputations
and extensive fibrosarcoma resection. Injection of local anesthetic agents
(mepivacaine [Carbocaine], lidocaine, and bupivacaine} at 4- to 6-hour
intervals maintains excellent analgesia, and in most cases the use of
systemically administered opioids and NSAIDs can be reduced.
A topical liposome-encapsulated formulation of lidocaine is available
(ELA-Max, over the counter), and a eutectic mixture of lidocaine and
prilocaine (EMLA cream, prescription required) can be applied to shaved
skin to provide analgesia in advance of venipuncture, catheter placement,
and skin biopsies. Transdermal absorption did occur after application of
below toxic values.
IV infusions of lidocaine decrease inhalant anesthetic requirements
in dogs and may provide analgesia. At plasma concentrations that
reduce isoflurane requirements in cats, there is significant cardiovascular
depression and impaired diffusion,l° and therefore this technique is not
recommended in cats.
430   PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
OTHERDRUGS
Tramado!
Although not classified as an opioid, tramadol has weak binding affinity at
Clinical experience shows that in cats, opioid-like effects such as dilated
pupils and euphoria can be significant, depending on the dose. Tramadol
suggest that the effective injectable dose is greater than 1 mg/kg, and in the
clinical setting, 2 to 5 mg/kg has provided analgesia for soft tissue surgery.
Oral bioavailability in cats is approximately 60% and peak concentra-
tion is reached within 45 minutes, making oral administration useful for
postoperative pain control after hospital discharge and also for chronic
 pain in cats; 5 to 10 mg/kg PO 2 to 3 times a day has been suggested.
Gabapentin
Gabapentin is most appropriate for neuropathic pain and therefore could
      s n n n  
a o as  no  s ae  
disk disease. Recommended starting doses are 10 mg/kg PO 2 times daily;
doses may be increased or decreased based on the response. At higher
doses, some cats become sedate.
Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline at doses ranging from 2.5 to 12.5 mg/kg PO q24h has
and anecdotal reports indicate some success with other chronic pain
conditions.
Amantadine
 aa sso d s rn a p  se pn
been critically evaluated in cats, but 3 to 5 mg/kg PO 1 to 2 times a day
is reported to be helpful in some cats; amantadine is often used with
NSAIDs or gabapentin.
COMPLEMENTARY METHODS FOR TREATING
FELINEPAIN
In recent years the popularity of more “holistic" or “natural" approaches
to medicine for humans and pets has increased. Complementary,
alternative, or integrative veterinary medicine is challenging to define, but
CHAPTER 22 + Pain Management in the Cat
431
the American Veterinary Medical Association states that this approach
to medicine includes aromatherapy, Bach flower remedy therapy
a Piy o  nd aa-mo  a
orthomolecular therapy, veterinary acupuncture, acutherapy, and
therapy (similar to osteopathy, chiropractic, or physical medicine and
therapy); veterinary nutraceutical therapy, and veterinary phytotherapy.
Of these modalities, acupuncture is the best studied, with enough
evidence for it to be endorsed by the National Institutes of Health for
humans with chronic OA. Contrary to popular belief, many cats are
tolerant of acupuncture therapy, and it should be considered a viable
choice for analgesic therapy, alone or in combination with drug therapy.
Some cats that are painful will not eat, and acupuncture can be effective
for appetite stimulation. The classic or traditional point that is often
used is called Shan-gen, which is similar to GV-25 (GV means governor
vessel), which is on the midline of the boundary between the hair and
nonhair part of the nose.
ACUTE PAIN CASE STUDIES (BoXeS 22-2 to 22-4)
TREATMENT OF CHRONIC PAIN
Osteoarthritis
As in dogs, weight control should be addressed in cats with OA. If there
are no contraindications for use, meloxicam is effective in many cats. In
some cats, this alone is not sufficient, or preexistingrenal or hepatic disease
precludes its use. In these cases, tramadol, gabapentin, and amantadine
or various combinations of these can make many cats comfortable.
nutraceuticals, and acupuncture are beneficial.
Chondroprotective and
dNutraceutical  Agents. Animal
nutritional supplements typically are not subject to premarketing evalua-
tion by licensing authorities for purity, safety, or efficacy and may contain
active pharmacologic agents or unknown substances. The mechanism of
action of many of the proposed compounds is not known, and no well-
controlled prospective clinical trial using this approach to alleviation of
pain related to OA in cats has been published.
Chondroprotectants are available as oral nutraceuticals and as
injectable (IM, IV, or intraarticular) pharmaceuticals, but their modes of
action are poorly understood and their efficacy is controversial. Mixtures
of chondroitin sulfate, glucosamine hydrochloride, and manganese are
432
PARTFOuR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
BOX 22-2
Ovariohysterectomy and Forelimb Declaw Pain
● Somatic and visceral pain
● Large inflammatory component to pain
Moderate to severe intensity
●Potential to develop neuropathic pain (digits)
·Pain acute in onset
● Duration of several days or even weeks if complications arise
B0X 22-3
Ovariohysterectomy and Forelimb Declaw Analgesia
● Premedication:
acetylpromazine 0.05 mg/kg IM or SC
buprenorphine 0.02 mg/kg transmucosally
● Induction:
ketamine 5 mg/kg and diazepam 0.25 mg/kg Iv
·Local anesthetic block:
2 mg/kg bupivacaine, digital nerve block
●Postoperatively (in clinic):
meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC
buprenorphine 0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg every 6 to 8 hours
●Postoperatively (at home):
meloxicam 0.1 mg/kg P0 once daily for 4 days
buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg transmucosally every 8 hours
for three doses
BOX 22-4
Hind Limb Amputation Analgesia
●Premedication:
medetomidine 5 μg/kg IM
methadone 0.3 mg/kg IM
meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC
● Induction:
ketamine 5 mg/kg and diazepam 2.5 mg/kg IV
●Postoperatively:
methadone 0.3 mg/kg IV q4-6h for 24 hours
lidocaine 3 mg/kg infused into wound catheter, every 4 to 6 hours
(3 days); remove catheter on fourth postoperative day (send
patient home)
gabapentin 10 mg/kg bid for 2 weeks (start on day of surgery)
meloxicam 0.1 mg/kg P0 q24h for 4 days and then 0.025 to
CHAPTER 22 ● Pain Management in the Cat
433
are only licensed by the FDA for use in dogs in the United States. Adequan
(polysulfated glycosaminoglycan) at 4.4 mg/kg IM every 3 to 5 days for a
total of eight injections is reported in cats.1l
Cancer Pain
COX-2 has been identified in many human and dog carcinomas, and there is
growing evidence from experimental, epidemiologic, and clinical trials that
NSAIDs and in particular the COX-2 selective drugs may have a role in the
prevention and treatment of some types of cancer. NSAIDs are thought to
inhibit tumor growth by several different mechanisms including restoration
of apoptosis (programmed cel death) and inhibition of angiogenesis.12
Immunocytochemistry studies have been performed on a variety of
feline neoplasms to determine COX-2 expression.13 In contrast to canine
studies in which COX-2 can be demonstrated in between 47% and 100%
of squamous cell carcinomas, transitional cell carcinomas, and prostatic
adenocarcinomas, COX-2 expression was found in only 37% of feline
transitional cell carcinomas and 9% oforal squamous cell carcinomas. No
COX-2 immunoreactivity could be found in feline cutaneous squamous
cell carcinomas, several adenocarcinomas (intestinal and pulmonary),
or vaccine-related sarcomas.13 However, in one study 96% of invasive
feline mammary carcinomas were positive for COX-2, supporting the
role of COX-2 inhibitors in the treatment of these tumors.l4 Based
on this species difference in COX-2 expression between canine and
feline cancers, NSAIDs may have less of a role as anticancer agents in
 i        
pain. Opioids, tramadol, amantadine, and gabapentin have been used
individually or in combination to provide comfort to cats with cancer
in a similar fashion to that described for OA.
Oral Pain
Stomatitis, gingivitis, oral cancer, and dental disease are common medical
long-standing. In addition to specific surgical or medical intervention to
treat the primary problem, pain must also be addressed. These cats resent
be dropped into the corner of the mouth, and the liquid formulation of
meloxicam can be mixed with soft food.
AdministrationofDrugs
IV, IM, and SC administration of drugs may be possible in a hospital
setting; however, it is notoriously difficult for owners to medicate cats
successfully in a home environment, resulting in poor compliance and
434
PART FouR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
thus failure ofthe treatment plan. Oral administration of pills, caplets, or
capsules requires physical restraint, often by more than one person, and
have an unpleasant taste and because of their keen sense of smell, cats
are suspicious of drugs placed in their food. Analgesics can be disguised
  o   as  s ,  n  
compounded in a liquid that the cat finds palatable. Little data exist on
the stability of individual drugs affer compounding, and if done, one
must adhere to all laws on compounding.
drugs in transdermalcreams has become popular butis based onempirical
information. Fentanyl compounded inpluronic lecithin organogel cream
failed to be absorbed through the skin of the inner pinnae or dorsum
of the shaved neck in cats even after a dose of 30 μg/kg. The American
data exist to document the proper regimen of a gel product necessary to
deliver a safe, yet effective, dose of any drug in any species."
Transmucosal administration of buprenorphine for short-term
         s
because it is a tasteless and odorless liquid. The oral formulation of
meloxicam is accepted by most cats, and only very small volumes are
required.
SUMMARY
 pi  u  aq a ss iae s ii isd an 
feline analgesia. A better understanding of cat's unique metabolism
has shown that extrapolation across species boundaries is unwise
and has prompted valuable cat-specific studies. The opioids are now
used more commonly in cats with good analgesic effect and few side
effects. Excellent acute pain management is achievable in cats by
using opioids, NSAIDs, Q2-agonists, and local anesthetics. Although
many studies use single drugs, a multimodal approach using agents
that work at different parts of the pain pathway is commonly used in
clinical settings with added benefit. Compared with dogs, few pain
scoring systems have been developed for cats, and this remains an
important goal.
Management of chronic pain in cats is a challenge because of the
potential problems with long-term NSAID use; however, recent approval
of long-term use of meloxicam (in some countries) and the success of
long-term treatment is encouraging. As veterinarians gain experience
CHAPTER 22 ·Pain Management in the Cat 435
with less traditional analgesics such as amitriptyline, amantadine, and
gabapentin and critically evaluate complementary therapies, the ability
to provide comfort to this population of cats will improve.
REFERENCES
1. Clarke SP, Bennett D: Feline osteoarthritis: a prospective study of 28 cases,
Small Anim Pract 47(8):439-445,2006.
2. Court MH, Greenblatt DJ: Molecular genetic basis for deficient
acetaminophen glucuronidation by cats: UGT1A6 is a pseudogene, and
evidence for reduced diversity of expressed hepatic UGTlA isoforms,
Pharmacogenetics 10(4):355-369, 2000.
3. Ikiw JE、 Pascoe PJ、 Tripp LD: Efects of morphine, butorphanol,
buprenorphine, and U50488H on the minimum alveolar concentration of
isoflurane in cats,Am f Vet Res 63(8):1198-1202, 2002.
4. Niedfeldt RL、 Robertson SA: Postanesthetic hyperthermia in cats: a
retrospective comparison between hydromorphone and buprenorphine, Vet
AnaesthAnalg33(6):381-389,2006.
 5. Lascelles BD, Robertson SA: Use of thermal threshold response to evaluate
the antinociceptive effects of butorphanol in cats, Amm / Vet Res 65(8):1085-
1089,2004.
6. Rohrer Bley C,Neiger-Aeschbacher G,Busato A,Schatzmann U: Comparison
in cats using indicators of post-operative pain, Vet Anaesth Analg 31(3):175-
182,2004.
7. Steagall PV, Carnicelli P, Taylor PMet al: Effects of subcutaneous methadone.
morphine, buprenorphine or saline on thermal and pressure thresholds in
cats,/Vet Pharmacol Ther 29(6):531-537,2006.
8. Pypendop BH, Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE: Effects of epidural administration of
morphine and buprenorphine on the minimum alveolar concentration of
isoflurane in cats,Am f Vet Res 67(9):1471-1475, 2006.
9. Ansah OB, Raekallio M, Vainio O: Comparing oral and intramuscular
administration of medetomidine in cats, fournal of Veterinary Anaesthesia
25(1):41-46, 1998
10. Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE: Assessment of the hemodynamic effects of lidocaine
administered IV in isoflurane-anesthetized cats, Am /Vet Res 66(4):661-668, 2005.
11. Beale BS: Use of nutraceuticals and chondroprotectants in osteoarthritic
dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34(1):271-289, 2004.
12. de Groot DJ、 de Vries EG, Groen HJ, de Jong S: Non-steroidal anti-
Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 61(1):52-69,2007.
13. Beam SL,RassnickKM,Moore AS,McDonoughSP:Animmunohistochemical
study of cyclooxygenase-2 expression in various feline neoplasms, Vet Pathol
40(5):496-500,2003
      a        
feline invasive mammary carcinomas: correlation with clinicopathological
features and prognostic molecular markers、 Breast Cancer Res Treat
98:115-120, 2006.
436
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
SUGGESTED READINGS
Beckman BW: Pathophysiology and management of surgical and chronic oral
pain in dogs and cats, J Vet Dent 23(1):50-60, 2006.
Carroll GL、 Howe LB、 Peterson KD: Analgesic effcacy of preoperative
administration of meloxicam or butorphanol in onychectomized cats, / Am
Vet Med Assoc 226(6):913-919,2005
Lamont LA: Feline perioperative pain management, Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 32(4):747-763,2002.
Robertson SA: Managing pain in feline patients, Vet Clin North Am Small Anirm
Pract 35(1):129-146, 2005.
Robertson SA, Taylor PM: Pain management in cats: past, present and future.
2. Treatment of pain: clinical pharmacology, J Feline Med Surg 6(5):321-333,
2004.
Robertson SA, Taylor PM, Sear JW, Keuhnel G: Relationship between plasma
concentrations and analgesia after intravenous fentanyl and disposition after
other routes of administration in cats,f Vet Pharmacol Ther 28:1-7, 2005.
Taylor PM, Robertson SA: Pain management in cats: past, present and future.
1. The cat is unique, J Feline Med Surg 6(5):313-320, 2004.
Taylor PM、 Robertson SA,Dixon MJ et al: Morphine、 pethidine and
buprenorphine disposition in the cat, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 24(6):391-398,
2001.
23
PAIN MANAGEMENT
IN HORSES AND CATTLE
PHILLIPLERCHEANDWILLIAMW.MUIRIH
 ain is generally one ofthe first and most dominant signs ofinjury or
responses induced by surgical procedures and anesthesia (e.g-, hy-
potension and ischemia) produce a series of behavioral, neurophysiolog-
ic, endocrine, metabolic, and cellular responses (stress response) that can
initiate, maintain, and amplify pain.
PAINPERCEPTION
Nociception (noxious stimulus perception) can be considered
to involve five primary processes: transduction, transmission,
modulation, projection, and perception (Fig. 23-1). Pain is normally
produced by noxious mechanical, chemical, or thermal activation
of small-diameter, high-threshold A8 and C sensory nerve fibers.
Noxious stimuli are transduced into electrical impulses by peripheral
pain receptors and subsequently transmitted throughout the sensory
nervous system. These electrical impulses are modulated by a variety
of endogenous systems (e.g-, opioid, serotonergic, and noradrenergic)
in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord before being transmitted to the
brain, where emotional, behavioral, and physiologic responses are
initiated.
PHYSIOLOGIC PAIN
Pain is considered physiologic when it operates to protect the body by
warning of contact with tissue-damaging stimuli. This type of pain is
produced by stimulation of nociceptors innervated by high-threshold A8
(group III) and unmyelinated C (group IV) fibers.
437
438
PART FOuR·Acuteand ChronicPainManagement
Inhalanl anesthelics (hakthane,
sevaflurane, isaflurane)
Injaclabe aneslhalics (lhiopenlal
propofol, kalamine)
Sadalives (xylazina, delomidline,
Opiis (bularphanal, marphine)
rmifidine)
Tranquilizars (aoapromazine)
:sleuiseue eqeioe(u pue lueieuul
Perceptlon
Lacal anaslhelics
apidural; subarachnak:
Carlax
Opinids
Projectlon
azAgonisls
Thalamus
Dissacialive aneslhelics (kalamine)
Modulatlon
Pagonal anesthesia;
apidural; subarachnoid;
kcal aneslhelics
Spinothalamic
lracl
Inlravenous; regional
snid kcal aneslhesia:
Lacal aneslhelics
Opinids
αz-Agonisls
Transductlon
Noxious slimulus:
Machanical
Chemical
Tharmal
FIG.
 23-1. Nociception involves transduction, transmission, modulation,
projection, and perception. Various drugs and drug delivery techniques are used
to inhibit theseprocesses.
CLINICAL PAIN
"Clinical" pain, by contrast, is produced by peripheral tissue injury or
nerve damage. Clinical pain therefore is categorized as inflammatory or
neuropathic pain. The term idiopathic pain is used to describe pain of
unknown origin.
Inflammatory Pain
 Inflammatory pain is somatic (skin, joints, muscles, or periosteum) or
visceral (thoracic and abdominal viscera).
● Somatic pain is easily localized; is aching, stabbing, or throbbing; and
generally is acute. Somatic pain includes cutaneous or incisional pain
after operation. Somatic pain is frequently identified as superficial
(skin) or deep (joints, muscle, and periosteum).
decrescendo and may be referred to cutaneous sites far from the site of
injury.
CHAPTER 23 ● Pain Management in Horses and Cattle  439
Neuropathic Pain
Neuropathic pain occurs as a direct result of damage to peripheral nerves
or the spinal cord; is described as burning, stabbing, and intermittent;
and is often unresponsive to treatment.
Inflammatory and neuropathic pain can produce allodynia,
hyperalgesia (primary and secondary), and central nervous system (CNS)
and peripheral sensitization to external stimuli (see Chapter 2).
CHEMICAL MEDIATORS OF PAIN
Chemical mediators of pain and inflammation include histamine,
(IL-1, IL-6), neutrophil-chemotactic peptides, nerve growth factor, and
neuropeptides, including substance P. These substances enhance the
excitability of sensory nerves and postganglionic sympathetic nerve fiber
(see Chapter 2).
 Inflammation increases the sensitivity of A8 and C fibers; causes some
Aβ fibers to express substance P; stimulates the synthesis and release of
nerve growth factor, a peptide that increases the synthesis of substance
P and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP); stimulates the release of
histamine and leukotrienes; and is associated with the development of
        o
of these inflammatory and tissue chemical responses is the development
of diverse yet interrelated positive feedback loops, which enhance neural
sensitivity and intensify pain.
Once transduced, the electrical impulses are transmitted to
C-fiber terminals in the dorsal horn, where the excitatory neuropeptides
(tachykinins), substance P, neurokinin A, CGRP, and the amino acid
glutamate are released to activate postsynaptic tachykinin (NK1, NK2),
CGRP, and glutamate (e-g-, N-methyl-D-aspartate [NMDA]; amino-
hydroxy-methyl-isoxazolepropionate, kainate) receptors.
Cumulative increases in the number of electrical impulses produced
in dorsal horn cells caused by increased C-fiber stimulus frequency
result in increases in excitability of spinal cord neurons and CNS
“windup." Windup contributes to central sensitization, hyperalgesia,
and allodynia. A similar phenomenon in the hippocampus has been
termed long-term potentiation and is thought to be the basis for the
acquisition of new information and certain forms of short-term
memory.
440
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Periphery
Substance P
Tachykin.ns
Glutamate
Dorsal root ganglion
AMPA
NMDA
Gerie
[Wind-up]
neuron
Inflammation
Cfibers
1
Hyperalgesia
Spinal cord
Surgery
NE
FlG. 23-2. Central sensitization: high-intensity chronic painful stimuli lead to
activation of amino-hydroxy-methyl-isoxazolepropionate/kainate and N-methyl-
D-aspartate receptors. The resulting activation of signaling pathways alters gene
further input ("windup").
EFFECTS OF PAIN
Pain is exaggerated by the inflammatory response, which in turn increases
the production of pain neurotransmitters (e.g-, substance P and CGRP)
and increases the excitability of sensory neurons.
● Pain produces a catabolic state, suppresses the immune response, and
promotes inflammation, which delays wound healing and predisposes
the patient to infection and intensified medical care (see Chapter 3).
?
Pain increases patient risk during anesthesia because more drugs are
required to maintain a stable plane of anesthesia.
· Pain increases morbidity and the cost of patient care and occupies time
better spent on other endeavors. These points justify the treatment of
pain in all circumstances, which in turn produces a general feeling of
mental satisfaction in hospital personnel and owners that patients are
not needlessly suffering.
ASSESSMENTOFPAINFULBEHAVIOR
Pain recognition relies on a sound understanding of normal equine
or bovine physiology and behavior and of stress-related or behavioral
changes (e.g-, flank watching and decreased fed intake) that may
      
441
indicate painful conditions. Also important to recognize are the
behavioral changes that may occur when a patient is introduced to a new
environment, which occurs when an animal is hospitalized. A thorough,
detailed history may also be helpful in assessing pain because the owner
or handler is more likely to be aware of behaviors that may be masked
during an examination by a veterinarian.
Pain is a complex multidimensional experience, and no single
measured parameter is a pathognomonic indicator. The behavioral
response to pain depends on species, breed, age, disease or surgical
process, and duration. Additionally, pain is an individual experience
and is thus different for each animal. Although some behaviors are
similar, horses and ruminants respond differently to pain (Table 23-1).
Cattle are generally considered to have a higher tolerance for pain than
horses. A draft horse is less likely to demonstrate overtly painful behavior
compared with a highly excitable Thoroughbred. Older horses and cows
are generally more stoic than foals and calves. One must recognize
that nonspecific behavioral indicators may be present with painful and
nonpainful conditions. Abdominal and limb pain exhibit relatively
specific behaviors and postures in horses and cattle (Figs. 23-3 to 23-6).
Assessment of painful behavior is often best achieved by using a staged
process. When possible, the animal should be observed when it cannot
see the observer or othier persons, for many animals chiange or mask
their painful behavior in the presence of humans because of a protective
observation may require the use of a remote video camera. Following
this, interaction with the silent observer, verbal response to the observer,
and finally interaction through touch can be assessed. Painful animals
are less likely to interact with humans, to explore their environment, and
to spend time at the front of the stall, and they are more likely to ignore
their environment and spend time at the back of the stall or avoid contact.
Finally, direct palpation or manipulation of a painful area or limb usually
elicits responses such as escape, avoidance, withdrawal, vocalization,
kicking, or biting. This approach to assessing pain-related behavior is time-
consuming but results in a better evaluation of otherwise unrecognized
painful conditions.
PAINASSESSMENTTOOLS
The development of pain assessment tools (verbal rating, simple descriptive,
numerical rating and visual analog scales) for horses and cattle lags behind
that seen in dogs and cats. Recent studies have begun to develop and assess
pain scales for specific types of pain in horses. As an example, evaluation
442
PART FOuRAcute and ChronicPain Management
Behavioral Indicators of Pain in Horses
TABLE 23-1
and Cattle
Behavioral Indicator
Equine
Ruminant
NONSPECIFIC BEHAVIORAL INDICATORS
Considerable restlessness, agitation, and anxiety
Rigid stance and reluctance to move
√
Lowered head carriage
 Fixed stare and dilated nostrils, clenched jaw
Aggression toward own foal
 Ag gression toward handlers, horses, objects, and self
Tail wagging
Foot stamping, kicking
Bruxism (teeth grinding)
 Abnormal grazing pattern
Lip curling
BEHAVIORAL INDICATORS OF ABDOMINAL PAIN
Wocalization (deep groaning, grunting)
Rolling
Kcking at abdomen
Flank watching
?
Stretching
 Dullness and depression
BEHAVIORAL INDICATORS OF LIMB AND FOOT PAIN
Weight-shifting between limbs
Limb guarding
V
Abnormal weight distribution
V
 Pointing, hanging, and rotating limbs
 Abnormal movement
Reluctance to move
Arched back
BEHAVIORAL INDICATORS OF HEAD AND DENTAL PAIN
Head shaking
 Abnormal bit behavior
Atered eating; anorexia, quidding, food pocketing
?
of behavioral changes after arthroscopy showed that horses spent less time
eating and less time at the front of the stall and demonstrated more abnormal
(predefined) behaviors such as groaning and atypical postures in the first 48
hours after surgery. Validated numerical and descriptive pain scales are likely
to be developed in the near future, although they will most likely be focused
on colic pain or pain following arthroscopy. Use of visual analog scales to
monitor trends may be useful in situations in which pain scales have not been
validated. Pain scales are more accurate with observer training and experience.
(See Table 23-2 and Figures 23-3 to 23-6 for behaviors associated with pain.)
443
FlG. 23-3. Abnormal posture. This horse had abdominal pain (colic)
FlG. 23-4. Rolling. This foal had severe colic.
Response to therapy can also be used to assess pain and the effectiveness
of analgesic therapy. The gradual return of normal behavior and the
cessation of abnormal behavior after therapy would indicate that a patient
ismorecomfortable.
444
PART FOuR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
FlG. 23-5. Pointing. Postoperatively, this horse was reluctant to bear weight
on the operated limb.
FIG. 23-6. Holding limb off the ground. This cow had an extensive hock wound
and would alternate between barely toe-touching the ground and standing on
threelegs.
CHAPTER 23 + Pain Management in Horses and Cattle
BOX 23-1
Drugs Used to Produce Analgesia in Horses and Cattle
Local and Regional Anesthesia
Local anesthetics (lidocaine)
Opioids, c-agonists, dissociative drugs (ketamine)
Systemic Drugs
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (phenylbutazone, flunixin meglumine, ketoprofen)
Opioids (morphine, butorphanol)
c2-Agonists (xylazine, detomidine,romifidine)
Dissociative drugs (ketamine)
Local anesthetics (lidocaine, mexiletine, infusion)
Analgesic Adjunctst
Phenothiazines (acepromazine)
Benzodiazepines (diazepam, midazolam)
Eectrolytes(magnesium-26 salts)
Calcium blockers (diltiazem)
Administered in the epidural or subarachnoid space.
Not recommended in cattle.
Drugs that produce little or no analgesia when administered alone.
SYSTEMIC DRUG THERAPY
  a  n u n  
different injuries or surgical procedures, resulting in a variety of
physiologic responses (e.g-, heart rate, blood pressure, and sympathetic
outflow) that require multiple analgesic drugs used in combination
(multimodal therapy) and additional adjunctive pain therapy.
A wide variety of drug therapies is available for the treatment of pain
in horses (Box 23-1; Table 23-2). Importantly, sedatives, tranquilizers,
and opioids modulate CNS processing and the development of
hyperalgesia and allodynia. The administration of drugs in cattle
must always take into account drug withdrawal times, which may
decrease the use of analgesics and adjuncts in cattle compared with
horses and small animal species (Table 23-3; Box 23-1). Furthermore,
side effects from systemic drug administration differ (e.g-, significant
respiratory depression with xylazine), limiting the use of some classes
of analgesics in cattle.
Occasionally, analgesic drugs are deliberately administered 12 to
24 hours before extensive soft tissue or orthopedic surgery to preempt
(minimize) the response to pain and to prevent the development of CNS
hypersensitivity and resultant hyperalgesia and allodynia. This is termed
preemptiveanaigesia.
446
PART FOuR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
jeual pue uogean (ig) leunsauonseh io leuand
Potential for excitement and increased locomotor 
Potential for Gl ulceration and renal toxicity
Potential for Gl ulceration and renal toxicity
Potential for Gl ulceration and renal toxicity
Potential for Gl ulceration and renal toxicity
Potential for ataxia and disorientation 
Potential for ataxia and disorientation
Laminitis, immune suppression 
Laminitis, immune suppression
Laminitis, immune suppression 
Laminitis, immune suppression
Tablets: 0.25-1.0 mg/kg PO
Concerns/Comments
toxicity
activity
activity
 sasloh ul eisebleuy aonpold ol pesn shnia 
 Antinflammatory, analgesic
Antinflammatory, analgesic 
Antinflammatory, analgesic 
Antinflammatory, analgesic
Antinflammatory, analgesic 
Antinflammatory, analgesic
Antinflammatory, analgesic
Antinflammatory, analgesic
Antinflammatory, analgesic
Analgesia 0.5)
Analgesia (0.5)
Analgesia (3)
Analgesia (1)
Effects
NONSTEROIDAL ANTINFLAM MATORY DRUGS
Intravenous
Dose (mg/kg)
0.015-0.050
0.25-1.0
0.01-0.04
0.01-0.04
1.0-4.0
0.1-0.5
1.1-2.2
0.5-1.0
0.05-0.1
0.2-1.1
0.5-1.1
5-22
TABLE 23-2
CORTICOSTEROIDS
Methylprednisolone
Funixin meglumine
Sodium succinate
Hydrocortisone
Dexamethasone
Phenylbutazone 
Prednisolone
Buprenorphine 
lsonicotinate
Ketoprofen 
Butorphanol
Pentazocine
Dipyrone
Carprofen 
OPIDIDS
Morphine
Drugs
CHAPTER 23 ·Pain Management in Horses and Cattle
447
Potential for excitement and increased locomotor
Potential for excitement and increased locomotor 
Potential for bradycardia, hypoventilation, and 
Potential for bradycardia, hypoventilation, and
Potential for bradycardia, hypoventilation, and
Potential for bradycardia and hypoventilation
activity
ataxia
ataxia
 oualod iaieai aeipu siaqunu iayh anip aul jo Aoualod sisaggue aul alesiput sasauuared ut siaquinn
ataxia
Sedation, analgesia, and muscle relaxation
Sedation, analgesia, and muscle relaxation
Sedation, analgesia, and muscle relaxation 
Sedation, analgesia, and muscle relaxation
Analgesia (0.5)
Analgesia (1 0)
Analgesia (100)
 100-μg/h patches
0.01-0.02; two
per 450 kg 
0.001-0.02
0.01-0.02
0.01-0.02
0.04-0.08
0.2-1.0
0.5-1.0
Oxymorphone
α2-AGONISTS
Medetomidine
Meperidine
Detomidine 
Xylazine 
Romifidine
Fentanyl
448
PART FOUR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
TABLE 23-3
Drugs Used to Produce Analgesia in Cattle
Intravenous
Drugs
Dose (mg/kg)
Effects
Concerns/Comments
NONSTEROIDAL ANTINFLAMMATORY DRUGS
Flunixin
1.0
Antinflammatory,
Potential for gastrointes-
meglumine
analgesic
tinal ulceration and 
renal toxicity
Ketoprofen
2.0
 Antinflammatory,
 Potential for gastrointes-
analgesic
tinal ulceration and 
renal toxicity
OPIDIDS
Morphine
0.1-0.5
Analgesic
Butorphanol
0.05-0.1
Analgesic
MULTIMODALTHERAPY
The combination or sequential administration of analgesics that act
by different mechanisms (multimodal therapy) is often advocated to
maximize analgesic drug effects (Table 23-4). The administration of two
major analgesics (nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug [NSAID]-opioid,
analgesic effects that permit the reduction of individual drug doses and
potentially a subsequent reduction in drug-related adverse side effects.
DRUGSYNERGISM
Many analgesic drugs are additive or synergistic (supraadditive) when
effects. In more qualitative terms, the combination oftwo drugs produces
a better effect (analgesia) than expected. Drug synergism usually allows
the dose of most drugs to be reduced, thereby reducing the potential
for side effects. Drug combinations that are likely to be synergistic are
produced when drugs that act by different and distinct mechanisms of
action are combined.
Synergism or supraadditivity has been demonstrated when local
anesthetics are combined with opioids or dissociative anesthetics and
when NSAIDs are combined with opioids.
● The combination of oz-agonists with opioids produces excellent
clinical analgesia in horses (Table 23-4). The transdermal delivery of
CHAPTER 23 + Pain Management in Horses and Cattle
449
TABLE23-4
Analgesic Drug Combinations in the Horse
Intravenous
Drug Combination
Dose (mg/kg)
Concerns
Acepromazine
0.02-0.05
Hypotension
 Butorphanol 
0.02-0.05
Acepromazine
0.02-0.05
Hypotension
Buprenorphine 
0.005-0.01
 Acepromazine
0.02-0.05
Bradycardia, hypotension
Xylazine
0.2-0.5
Xylazine*
0.3-0.5
Bradycardia, ataxia
 Butorphanol 
0.01-0.05
Xylazine*
0.3-0.5
Bradycardia
Meperidine
0.5-1.0
Xylazine*
0.5-1.0
 Bradycardia, ataxia
Morphine
0.1-0.5
Xylazine*
0.5-1.0
Bradycardia
Fentanyl
0.01-0.02
*Detomidine or medetomidine (0.01-0.02 mg/kg) or romifidine (0.04-0.08 mg/kg) can be
substituted for xylazine.
doses of α2-agonists (e.g-, xylazine or detomidine) as needed, provides
excellent analgesia for extended periods (12 hours). α-Agonists are
not used systemically to provide analgesia in cattle primarily because
of their tendency to cause potent respiratory depression. Cattle are
exquisitely sensitive to the respiratory depressant effects of xylazine.
● The administration of adjunctive drugs (tranquilizers) in conjunction
with major analgesic
C drugs may potentiate analgesic effects and
produces additional calming effects. The simultaneous or sequential
administration of acepromazine and meperidine (neuroleptanalgesia)
or acepromazine and xylazine potentiates analgesia. Several of the
major analgesics (e.g., opioids and α2-agonists) have the added benefit
of being reversible (Table 23-4).
PREEMPTIVEANALGESIA
Preemptive analgesia reduces the number and amount of anesthetics
the maintenance phase of anesthesia, reduces the total amount of analgesic
drugs required to control pain intraoperatively and postoperatively, and
decreases overall patient morbidity associated with surgery and anesthesia.
Local anesthetics or NSAIDs combined with low doses of opioids or
C2-agonists are the most routinely administered systemic major analgesic
drugs used to provide analgesia for short-term pain therapy (Table 23-3).
450   PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
COMBINATION OF OPIOID AGONISTS
WITHAGONIST-ANTAGONISTS
Reversing or antagonizing adverse effects may antagonize the drug's
analgesic activity. Interestingly and
surprisingly, however, the
combination of opioid agonists with agonist-antagonists or “pure"
antagonists has shown unexpected analgesic effects. The μ-opioid agonist
morphine and K-agonist butorphanol, the μ-agonist oxymorphone
and K-agonist butorphanol, and the μ-agonist morphine and the pure
μ-receptor antagonist naloxone produced additive and synergistic
antinociceptive effects in humans and cats for reasons that remain poorly
defined (Table 23-5). The administration of opioid agonist-antagonist
or cattle and remains controversial.
OTHERPOTENTIALLYEFFECTIVEMETHODS
FORPRODUCINGANALGESIA
include electromagnetic and shockwave therapies and complementary
therapies including acupuncture therapy, chiropractic manipulation,
massage, and hydrotherapy.
REGIONALANALGESIA
Regional analgesia can be used as an alternative or adjunct to
side effects (Box 23-2). Many diagnostic and surgical procedures
can be performed safely and humanely in the standing horse and
cow using sedation, physical restraint, and regional analgesia. The
ability to produce effective anesthesia of the spinal nerves requires
a working knowledge of the local anatomy, an understanding of
the pharmacology of the analgesic drugs used, and the technical
       o
desensitize spinal nerves, analgesic drugs must be deposited in the
epidural or subarachnoid spaces.
EPIDURALANALGESIA
of the dura mater. Epidural analgesia is generally easier to perform than
subarachnoid anesthesia and has a reduced potential for nerve damage,
CHAPTER 23 ● Pain Management in Horses and Cattle
451
TABLE 23-5
Drug Antagonists
Drug
Intravenous Dose (mg/kg)
OPIDIDS
Naloxone 
0.01-0.02
Nalmefene 
0.001-0.005
(2-AGONISTS
Atipamezole
0.1-0.2
Tolazoline
2.0
Yohimbine 
0.075
BENZODIAZEPINE
Aumazenil
0.01
ANALEPTIC (STIMULANT)
Doxapram
0.5-1.0
BOX 23-2
Procedures Amenable to Regional Anesthetic Techniques
Standing surgery of the rectum, anus, perineum, tail, vuva, vagina, penis, and inguinal
region:
Rectal prolapses
Perirectal abscesses
Rectal tears
Rectovaginal lacerations
Ovariectomy
Removal of urinary calculi
Flank approach to the abdomen:
Abdominal exploratory
Abomasal displacement (cattle)
Cesarean section (cattle)
Uterine torsion
Loop colostomy
Surgical embryo transfer
Aid in the relief of postoperative straining
Obstetric manipulations during dystocia
Relief of inflammatory, traumatic, intraoperative and postoperative, or chronic pain
especially when the injection site is caudal (coccygeal-sacral) to the
termination of the conus medullaris. Drugs administered epidurally
have a longer duration of action but produce incomplete, inconsistent,
or asymmetric analgesia because of the presence of a septum within the
epidural space or the influence of fat accumulations.
452
PART FOuR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Drugs Used to Produce Regional Analgesia
TABLE 23-6
in Horses
Duration
Drug
Dosage (mg/kg)
Route
of Analgesia
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Mepivacaine HCI
0.20
S3-S4, S4-S5 (CE)
1-1% hours 
0.14-0.25
S2-S3, S3-S4,
1/-2hours
S4-S5 (CE)
Mepivacaine HCI
0.06
S2-S3 (CSA)
20-80 minutes
0.05-0.08
S2-S3 (CSA)
1-1% hours 
Lidocaine HCI
0.16-0.22
C01-C02 (CE)
30-60 minutes
0.22-0.44
1-21 hours
0.45
2-3 hours
Lidocaine HCI
0.28-0.37
S3-S4, S4-S5 (CE)
1y-3 hours
(2-AGONISTS
Xylazine
0.03-0.35
C01-C02 (CE)
3-5 hours
Detomidine HCI
0.06
S4-S5 (CE)
2-3 hours
OPIDID
Morphine 
0.05-0.10
C01-C02 (CE)
8-16 hours
COMBINATIONS
Lidocaine
0.22
C01-C02 (CE)
5/hours
xylazine
0.17
Lidocaine 
0.25
C01-C02 (CE)
 2/2 hours
 Butorphanol 
0.04
Morphine
0.20
S1-L6 (CE)
>6 hours
 Detomidine 
0.03
CE, Caudal epidural; CSA, caudal subarachnoid.
SUBARACHNOID ANALGESIA
Subarachnoid analgesia is produced by depositing local anesthetics
 d s q r    n 
more consistent response because the roots of the spinal nerves within the
and more predictable analgesic responses characterize subarachnoid
anesthesia. The technique,
, however, is more difficult to perform and
requires more sophisticated and expensive equipment.
REGIONAL ANALGESIC DRUGS
Historically, local anesthetics (e.g., lidocaine and mepivacaine) were the only
drugs used to produce caudal regional anesthesia (Tables 23-6 and 23-7).
CHAPTER 23 ● Pain Management in Horses and Cattle
453
TABLE 23-7
Drugs Used to Produce Epidural Analgesia
in Cattle
Duration
Drug
Dosage (mg/kg)
Onset of Action
of Analgesia
LOCALANESTHETICS
Lidocaine HCI
0.2
5 minutes
10-115 minutes
(2-AGONISTS
Xylazine
0.05
 20-40 minutes
2-3 hours
Clonidine
0.002-0.003
 9-19 minutes
3-5 hours
Medetomidine
0.015
 5 minutes
6/2 hours
DISSOCIATIVES
Ketamine
250 mg*
6/2 minutes 
17 minutes 
Ketamine
500 mg*
 5 minutes 
 34 minutes
Ketamine 
1000 mg*
 5 minutes
1 hour
COMBINATIONS
Morphine 
0.1
10 minutes
12 hours
Romifidine 
0.05
Lidocaine
80 mg*
10-15 minutes
Up to 8y hours
xylazine
20 mg*
*Total dose.
LOCALANESTHETICS
Local anesthetics provide profound relief from pain by preventing the
 transmembrane flux of sodium ions, thereby inhibiting depolarization
of the nerve membrane and the conduction of nerve impulses.
Unmyelinated Ao and C (pain) fibers are preferentially blocked by local
anesthetics because of their small size compared with the myelinated
Aα and Aβ fbers, which are responsible for proprioception, touch and
pressure sensation, and motor activity.
● Local anesthetic desensitization is dose dependent, nonspecific, and
not always predictable. Full analgesic effect occurs within 10 to 20
minutes of drug administration for epidurally administered local
anesthetics.
● Additional local anesthetic drug should not be administered during
this period ( 10 to 20 minutes) to prevent overdosing, which can result
in hypotension, and occasionally bradycardia, from sympathetic
blockade.
 Complete sensory and inadvertent motor blockade results in significant
ataxia and potentially recumbency.
454
 PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
α2-AGONISTS
Although local anesthetics are effective analgesics for regional anesthesia,
they can produce profound ataxia or recumbency as a result of their
nonselective blockade of motor and sensory neurons. Q-Adrenergic
receptors are located throughout the CNS and are found in great numbers
in the superficial laminae of the dorsal horn sensory fibers of the spinal
cord and brainstem nuclei. α-Agonists (e.g-, xylazine) produce effective,
long-term analgesia with a reduced incidence of ataxia. Additionally,
the notable sedative and cardiopulmonary effects of epidurally
administered xylazine are diminished compared with the response after
their intravenous or intramuscular administration. a-Receptors are
colocalized with opioid receptors in the CNS; thus when Q2-agonists are
coadministered with opioids, synergism frequently occurs.
· Epidural administration of xylazine (0.17 to 0.22 mg/kg of body
weight; 1% solution) at the first coccygeal interspace produces
surgical analgesia 30 to 45 minutes after administration, which lasts
31/2hours.
● Epidural administration of 0.06 mg/kg body weight detomidine
hydrochloride (1% solution) via an epidural catheter advanced to the
caudal sacral (S5 to S4) space produces variable analgesia extending
from the coccyx to spinal cord segment S1 and from the coccyx to
T16, respectively. Analgesia is achieved within 10 to 25 minutes after
drug administration and lasts for more than 2 hours.
● Sedation after subarachnoid administration of xylazine or detomidine
hydrochloride solution can be prominent.
OPIOIDS
Opioids have been successfully used in humans, dogs, and horses to
produce effective caudal regional analgesia with a low incidence of
systemic side effects. The use of opioids in horses and cattle, however,
relevant analgesia. Epidural opioids produce analgesia without motor
neuronal membranes.
● The onset of opioid drug effects is more rapid with the highly lipid-
soluble opiates (e.g-, fentanyl). Conversely, less lipid-soluble opiates
such as morphine are retained within the cerebrospinal fluid for
longer durations after single-dose administration, thereby producing
prolonged analgesia (Table 23-6).
CHAPTER 23·Pain Management in Horses and Cattle455
● Epidural opioid administration in horses has been limited primarily
to morphine and butorphanol administered alone or in combination
with lidocaine.
· Epidural opioid administration in cattle has been performed in
combination with romifidine.
"BALANCED'EPIDURALANESTHESIA
The selective combination of drugs that produce analgesia by different
mechanisms  (e.g-, Q2-agonists and opioids) with subanesthetic
concentrations of local anesthetics has the advantage of (1) reducing the
drug dose, (2) enhancing the degree of pain relief, and (3) reducing the
adverse effects produced bylarger doses of an individual drug. Functional
interactions may result from simultaneous drug effects at different sites.
For example, activation of presynaptic and postsynaptic mechanisms
simultaneously, by a combination of drugs, may magnify the effects of
one drug acting independently at one site.
 The combination of lidocaine with the Q-adrenergic agonist xylazine
produces a faster onset of analgesia than with xylazine alone and a
longer duration than with lidocaine alone (Table 23-6).
· Butorphanol added to lidocaine increases the duration of visceral and
cutaneous analgesia and extends the area of cutaneous analgesia.
agonist detomidine hydrochloride (30 μg/kg), produces profound hind
limb analgesia in horses with experimentally induced tarsocrural joint
synovitis. Long-term (14 days) administration of this combination is
without apparent adverse systemic effects.
· Ketamine, a noncompetitive NMDAantagonist, mayalso be aneffective
regional analgesic when administered epidurally in combination with
significantly decreases the amount of halothane required to maintain
anesthesia during pelvic limb stimulation in ponies.
REGIONAL ANESTHETIC TECHNIQUES
Various regional nerve blocks have been developed to produce caudal
analgesia in standing horses and cows, including caudalepidural analgesia,
continuous caudal epidural analgesia, continuous caudal subarachnoid
analgesia, segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid analgesia, and
segmental thoracolumbar epidural analgesia. These techniques can be
used to perform standing surgery of the rectum, anus, perineum, tail,
vulva, vagina, penis, and inguinal region; to allow a flank approach to
456
PART FOuR·Acute and ChronicPainManagement
TABLE 23-8
Equipment for Regional Analgesic Techniques
in Horses
Location of
Technique
Needle Placement
Equipment Required
 Caudal epidural
C01-C02
18-gauge, 5- to 7.5-cm spinal
needle
 Continuous caudal
C01-C02
18-gauge, 10.2-cm Tuohy needle
epidural
S1-L6
 20-gauge, 91.8-cm epidural
catheter
Or
17-gauge, 19.5-cm Huber-point
Tuohy needle
 30-cm Formocath polyethylene
catheter (0.095-cm 0D) with
spring guide (0.052-cm 0D)
Continuous caudal
S1-L6
17-gauge, 19.5-cm Huber-point 
subarachnoid
Tuohy needle
 30-cm Formocath polyethylene
catheter (0.095-cm 0D) with
spring guide (0.052-cm 0D)
Segmental thoracolum-
S1-L6
17-gauge, 17.5-cm Huber-point 
bar subarachnoid
Tuohy needle 
100-cm Formocath polyethylene
catheter (0.095-cm 0D) with
spring guide (0.052-cm 0D)
Segmental thoracolum-
S1-L6
17-gauge, 17.5-cm Huber-point
bar epidural
Tuohy needle
100 cm Formocath polyethylene
catheter (0.095-cm 0D) with
spring guide (0.052-cm 0D)
*Not recommended for clinical patient.
the abdomen; to aid in the relief of postoperative straining; to facilitate
obstetric manipulations during dystocia; or to relieve inflammatory,
traumatic, postoperative, or chronic pain.
GENERALCONSIDERATIONS
Different injection sites and equipment are required for the various
caudal regional anesthetic techniques (Table 23-8). The needle puncture
site should be clipped and a surgical, aseptic preparation performed.
The skin should be desensitized (superficial block) using a small-gauge
needle (25 gauge, 1 inch), and 1 to 2 ml of local anesthetic should be
CHAPTER23·PainManagementinHorsesandCattle
457
FlG. 23-7. Neuroanatomy and needle placement for caudal epidural anesthesia
(A and B), and needle and catheter placement at Co1-Co2 for continuous caudal
epidural anesthesia (C). Ventral nerve branches give rise to the following: a, sciatic
nerve; b, caudal cutaneous femoral nerve; c, deep perineal nerve; d, pudendal
nerve; e, distal cutaneous pudendal nerve; f, caudal rectal nerve; g. pelvic nerve;
h,caudal rectal nerve;i pelvic plexus. fnset, Stippled area delineates extent of
subcutaneous desensitization after caudal blockade.
injected subcutaneously to reduce any local discomfort associated with
the insertion of larger needles ( 18 to 16 gauge).
CAUDALEPIDURALANESTHESIA
Correctly performed, anesthetic deposited epidurally produces regional
anesthesia of the anus, rectum, vulva, vagina, perineum, urethra, and
bladder (Fig. 23-7; Table 23-9). Caudal epidural anesthesia is produced
by inserting a needle between the first and second coccygeal vertebrae
(Col to Co2). The first coccygeal interspace is readily located in most
horses and cows by palpating the first movable coccygeal articulation
with the finger while raising and lowering the tail. In obese or well-
muscled animals, the site may be difficult to palpate but can be located
at the point where the angle of the tail is the steepest, about 5 cm cranial
to the origin of the first tail hairs. The site may be ossified in older cows.
After desensitizing the skin, an 18-gauge spinal needle with fitted stylet
(5 to 7.5 cm) is inserted through the skin perpendicular to the contour
of the croup (Fig. 23-7, A). Alternatively, the 18-gauge needle may be
advanced at a 45-degree angle to the skin (Fig. 23-7, B). A distinct “pop"
is generally noted as the needle passes through the dorsal interarcuate
458
PART FOUR • Acute and Chronic Pain Management
TABLE 23-9
Regional Analgesic Techniques in Horses
Site of
Spinal Cord
Area
Drug
Segments
Technique
Blocked
Deposition
Affected
Indications
Caudal epidural
Caudal 
C01-C02
S2-coccyx
Standing surgery to the
region*
anal and perianal
regions; obstetric
 manipulations
 Continuous 
Caudal
S3-S5
S2-coccyx
 Extend surgery time for
caudal
region*
S2-S3
standing procedures,
epidural
relief of tenesmus,
 management of 
chronic pain
Continuous
Caudal
S2-S3
S2-cOccyx
 Extend surgery time for
caudal sub-
region*
 standing procedures
arachnoid
 of anal and perianal
regions
Segmental tho-
Flank
T18-L1
T12-L3
 Standing surgery for
racolumbar
 flank approach 
subarachnoid
Segmental tho-
Flank
T18-L1
T12-L3
Standing surgery for
racolumbar
flank approach
epidural 
 Not recommended for
dinical patients
*Caudal region includes the anus, rectum, vulva, vagina, perineum, urethra, and bladder.
ligament, which indicates that the needle is properly placed. Proper needle
placement is verified by applying (1) a drop or two of local anesthetic to
the hub of the needle, which should be drawn into the epidural space by
the negative pressure ("hanging drop technique"), or (2) by aspiration
followed by resistance-free injection of 3 to 5 ml of air or local anesthetic.
Aspiration of blood or cerebrospinal fluid suggests needle placement in
the subarachnoid space. If this occurs, the needle should be withdrawn
slightly and reaspirated.
· Caudal epidural anesthesia has the advantages of being relatively
simple to perform, requiring no special equipment, thus limiting cost
primarily to that of the drug itself.
The potential for nerve damage is minimized because the spinal cord
and its meninges end in the midsacral region, cranial to the injection
site (Fig. 23-7).
Disadvantages ofthe technique include inconsistent results, the limited
duration of analgesic action, and the possibility for the development of
CHAPTER23·PainManagementinHorsesandCattle
459
FlG. 23-8. Catheter introduction at the lumbosacral (L6-S1) intervertebral
of needle and catheter within the epidural space: a, epidural space with fat and
connective tissue; b, dura mater; c, subarachnoid space; d, pia mater; e, spinal
chord. Right inset, Stippled area delineates extent of subcutaneous desensitization
after caudal blockade.
are administered. This may induce an undesirable panic response in
horses. Lateral recumbency also hinders the surgical team.
CONTINUOUSCAUDALEPIDURALANESTHESIA
The limited duration of caudal epidural anesthesia can be overcome by
placement of a catheter to provide continuous caudal epidural anesthesia
(Table 23-9). The establishment of a route for repeated administration of
small doses of anesthetic drug extends surgery time, reduces the risk of rear
limb ataxia, and avoids the development of fibrosis of the epidural space
that results from repeated needle trauma. The disadvantages of catheter
placement include greater cost of equipment, complications associated
from kinking and curling of the catheter, and lack of documentation for
the optimal times and doses required for repeated spinal administration
of anesthetics. In the horse a 10.2-cm, 18-gauge thin-walled Tuohy needle
epidural catheter is advanced cranially toward the lumbosacral junction
to the desired level (Fig. 23-7, C). Alternatively, in horses and in cattle,
a 17.5- cm, 17-gauge Huber-point Tuohy directional needle can be used
to place and pass a catheter to the caudal portion of the sacral (S3 to S5)
epidural space from the lumbosacral intervertebral junction (Fig. 23-8).
460
PART FOUR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
FlG. 23-9. Catheter introduction at the lumbosacral (L6-S1) intervertebral
extent ofsubcutaneousdesensitization aftercaudal blockade.
● Introduction of morphine and detomidine into an epidural catheter
advanced to the lumbosacral region produces effective hind limb analgesia
to the tarsocrural joint, lasting more than 6 hours in the horse.
● The caudal epidural injection of 60 to 100 mg of mepivacaine hydro-
chloride in aqueous solution into a catheter placed at the caudal portion
of the sacral (S3 to S5) epidural space in the horse produces unilateral or
bilateral analgesia extending from spinal cord segment S1 to the coccyx.
CONTINUOUSCAUDALSUBARACHNOIDANESTHESIA
Continuous caudal subarachnoid anesthesia produces analgesia for
prolonged periods in standing horses (Table 23-9). The technique is similar
to that used to produce continuous caudal epidural anesthesia but provides
the added advantage of producing a faster onset of action and shorter
duration of effect with reduced drug doses. A 17.5-cm, 17-gauge Huber
point Tuohy needle with stylet is inserted into the subarachnoid space at the
lumbosacral (L6 to S1) intervertebral space. Proper placement of the needle
in the subarachnoid space is verified by the free flow of spinal fluid from the
needle hub. The stylet is removed, and a 20-gauge Teflon catheter (0.036
cm outside diameter) or polyethylene tubing (0.095 cm outside diameter)
reinforced with a stainless steel spring guide (0.052 cm outside diameter) is
advanced to the midsacral (S2 to S3) subarachnoid space (Fig. 23-9).
CHAPTER 23 + Pain Management in Horses and Cattle
461
FlG. 23-1O. Catheter introduction at the lumbosacral (L6-S1) intervertebral
needle and catheter within the subarachnoid space. Middle inset, Correctly
positioned catheter and spring guide at T18-L1 intervertebral space. Right inset,
Stippled area delineatesextentof subcutaneousdesensitization afterblockade
in the standing horse. a, Epidural space with fat and connective tissue; b, dura
mater; c, subarachnoid space; d, spinal cord.
● Continuous caudal subarachnoid anesthesia requires approximately
one third the amount of drug used to produce the same effect as
epidural anesthesia.
· The onset of drug effect is faster, and the duration of effect is
approximately half as long as that produced after epidural drug
administration, conferring the advantage of increased control over the
intensity of analgesia and associated side effects.
● Subarachnoid administration of drugs, however, carries the risk of
trauma to the conus medullaris and associated nerve fibers and is
much more difficult to perform than epidural anesthesia.
SEGMENTAL THORACOLUMBAR SUBARACHNOID
ANESTHESIA
Segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid anesthesia is used to produce
anesthesia for standing flank surgery in the horse and cow (Table 23-9).
Segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid anesthesia requires adherence to
462
PART FOuR·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
strict aseptic technique. A 17.5-cm, 17-gauge Huber-point Tuohy needle
with stylet is inserted into the subarachnoid space atthe lumbosacral (L6 to
S1) intervertebral space (Fig. 23-10). The L6 to S1 interspace is located 1 to
2 cm caudal to the cranial edges of the tuber sacral on the dorsal midline. A
100-cm-long catheter with a 0.095-cm outside diameter is passed through
the needle and advanced approximately 60 cm to the midthoracic area.
Desensitization of dorsal nerve roots T14 to L3 in the horse and T9 to L3 in
the cow is produced within 5 to 10 minutes by injecting 1.5 to 2 ml of 2%
mepivacaine hydrochloride and lasts for 30 to 60 minutes.
· Anesthesia can be prolonged by fractional bolus administration of half
the initial drug dose at approximately 30-minute intervals.
· The advantages of this technique include a rapid onset, minimal drug
dosage, and a selective analgesic effect.
       s
medullaris, kinking and curling of the catheter, loss of motor control
to the pelvic limbs, and meningitis if strict asepsis is not observed.
SEGMENTALTHORACOLUMBAR EPIDURALANESTHESIA
Segmental thoracolumbar epidural anesthesia is not commonly used
in the horse compared with cattle because it is difficult to perform,
provides variable results, and requires special equipment (Table 23-9).
Furthermore, the T18 to Ll epidural space can be catheterized from
the lumbosacral epidural space to desensitize spinal nerves T12 to L2.
Segmental (T12 to L2) analgesia involving the flank and extending
caudally to the area of the stifle is achieved in 10 to 20 minutes after the
injection of 80 mg (4 ml at 2% solution) mepivacaine hydrochloride,
with a duration of analgesia lasting approximately 1 to 1%2 hours. A
10.2-cm, 18-gauge Tuohy needle is inserted into the epidural space in
well-restrained cattle at the thoracolumbar or L1-L2 interspace. L1-L2 is
located 1.5 to 2 cm caudal to an imaginary line between the cranial edges
of the transverse processes of L2. T13-L1 can be identified between the
 last rib and the cranial edge of the transverse process of L1.
used in horses because, as stated previously, it is difficult to perform
and requires a specially designed catheter and wire guide.
● Catheter placement carries the risk of catheter kinking or curling at the
lumbosacral intervertebral space, causing the injectant to be deposited
in the region of the femoral and ischial nerves and predisposing the
horse to a loss of pelvic limb function and panic.
● Unilateral block may develop, and if the catheter tip passes into the
paravertebral space, an absence of blockade will be observed.
CHAPTER 23·Pain Management in Horses and Cattle
463
ANESTHESIA(CATTLE)
An alternative to simple infiltration of the incision line with local
anesthetic for standing laparotomy in cattle is proximal paravertebral
thoracolumbar anesthesia. The dorsal and ventral branches of spinal
nerves T13-L2 are blocked, along with L3-L4 if anesthesia of the caudal
paralumbar fossa is required (e.g-, cesarean section). The cranial aspect
of the transverse process of L1 is palpated. A spinal needle (4.25 to 15
cm, 18 gauge) is passed ventrally and walked off the bone cranially after
desensitizing the skin 2.5 to 5 cm from the dorsal midline. An initial 10
to 15 ml of 2% lidocaine is deposited ventral to the intertransverse fascia
before withdrawing the needle 1 to 2.5 cm and injecting another 5 ml in
order to anesthetize the ventral and dorsal branches of the spinal nerves.
Blockade is accompanied by scoliosis toward the side of anesthesia.
· This technique provides a wide, uniform area of anesthesia.
● The time required to perform the block is less than for a line block.
● Although technically more difficult, landmarks are easily palpated
except in fat cattle.
● Hind limb weakness may be seen with L3-L4 blockade.
● Scoliosis may make surgical orientation and closure of the incision
more difficult.
SIDEEFFECTS
Caudal regional anesthesia carries the risks ofnerve or spinal cord trauma,
infection and ataxia, and recumbency resulting from motor blockade.
Judicious use and application of regional anesthetic techniques, however,
provides a low-cost, safe, efficacious means of producing analgesia for
many standing surgical procedures and can be used as an adjunct to
general anesthesia to reduce the amount of injectable and/or inhalant
drug required to maintain surgical anesthesia.
CONCLUSION
The development of evaluation techniques, assessment tools, and treat-
ment options for pain in horses and ruminants lags behind recent advances
in small animal pain management. Current research into development of
pain scoring systems and scales, evaluation of newer tools such as pressure
algometry, evaluation of the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of
new drugs and reevaluation of established ones, and critical assessment of
the efficacy of complementary therapies should provide increased options
for treatment of pain in horses and cattle in the future.
464PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Some of the information in this chapter is reprinted from Grosenbaugh DA,
Skarda RT、Muir WW:Equine Veterinary Education 11:98-105、1999; Muir
WW: Equine Veterinary Education 10:335-340,1998. Where regional anesthesia
technique differs for cattle, it is noted in the text.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Anderson DE, Muir WW: Pain management in cattle, Vet Clin North Am Food
Anim Pract 21:623-635,2005
Ashley FH, Waterman-Pearson AE, Whay HR: Behavioral assessment of pain in
horses and donkeys: application to clinical practice and future studies, Equine
Vetf37:565-575,2005
Broom DM: Animal welfare: concepts and measurement, J Anim Sci 69:4167-
4175, 1991.
de Leon-Casasola OA, Lema MJ: Postoperative epidural opioid analgesia: what
are the choices? Anesth Anaig 83:867-875, 1966.
Dickenson AH: Mechanisms of the analgesic actions of opiates and opioids, Br
Med Bull 47:690-702,1991.
Doherty TJ, Geiser DR, Rohrbach BW: Effect ofhigh-volume epidural morphine,
ketamine, and butorphanol on halothane minimum alveolar concentration
in ponies,Equine Vet f29:370-373, 1997.
Eisenach JC, Kock MD、Klimscha W: α-Adrenergic agonists for regional
anesthesia, Aresthesiology 85:655-674, 1996.
Fikes LW, Lin HC, Thurman JC: A preliminary comparison of lidocaine and
Gan TJ, Ginsgerg B, Glass PSA et al: Opioid-sparing effects of alow-dose infusion
of naloxone in patient-administered morphine sulphate、 Anesthesiology
87:1075-1081, 1997.
Gaynor JS, Hubbell IAE: Perineural and spinal anesthesia, Vet Clin North Am
Equine Pract 7:501-519, 1991.
Green EM, Cooper RC: Continuous caudal epidural anesthesia in the horse, ∫ Am
Vet Med Assoc 184:971-974, 1984.
Grosenbaugh DA, Skarda RT, Muir WW: Caudal regional anesthesia in horses,
EquineVeterinary Education 11:98-105,1999.
Grubb TL, Riebold TW, Huber MJ: Comparison of lidocaine, xylazine for
perineal analgesia in horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1187-1190, 1992.
Haussler KK, Erb HN: Pressure algometry: objective assessment of back pain and
effects of chiropractic treatment, Proceedings of the American Association of
Equine Practitioners 49:66-70, 2003.
Haussler KK, Erb HN: Mechanical nociceptive thresholds in the axial skeleton of
horses,Equine Vet f38:70-75,2006.
intratesticular or mesorchial injection of lidocaine in standing horses
undergoing laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy, J Am Vet Med Assoc 229:1779-
1783,2006.
postoperative pain treatment,Anesth Analg 77:1048-1056, 1993.
CHAPTER 23·Pain Management in Horses and Cattle465
Knobloch M, Portier CJ, Levionnois OL et al: Antinociceptive effects, metabolism
and disposition of ketamine in ponies under target-controlled drug infusion,
ToxicolApplPharmacol216:373-386,2006.
 a od  a    s  
ketamine in healthy conscious horses,∫ Vet Pharmacol Ther 29:477-488,
2006.
LeBlanc PH: Regional anesthesia, Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 6:693-704,
1990.
LeBlanc PH, Caron JP: Clinical use of epidural xylazine in the horse, Equine Vet
∫22:180-181,1990.
LeBlanc PH, Caron SP, Patterson JS et al: Epidural injection of xylazine for
perineal analgesia in horses, / Am Vet Med Assoc 193: 1405-1408, 1988.
LeBlanc PH, Eberhart SW: Cardiopulmonary effects of epidurally administered
xylazine in the horse,Equine Vet f 22:189-191, 1990.
Lee I, Yamada H: Epidural administration of fixed volumes of xylazine and
lidocaine for anesthesia of dairy cattle undergoing flank surgery, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 227:781-744,2005.
Malone E, Ensick J, Turner T et al: Intravenous continuous infusion of lidocaine
for treatment of equine ileus, Vet Surg 35:60-66, 2006.
Mills PC, Cross SE: Regional differences in transdermal penetration of fentanyl
through equine skin, Res Vet Sci 82(2):252-256, 2007. Prepublished on Sep
29, 2006, as DOI 10.1016/j.rvsc.2006.07.015.
Muir WW: Anesthesia and pain management in horses, Equine Veterinary
Education10:335-340,1998.
Muir WW, Skarda RT, Sheehian WC: Hemodynamic and respiratory effects of a
xylazine-acetylpromazine drug combination in horses, Am / Vet Res 40:1518-
1522,1979.
Muir WW, Skarda RT, Sheehan WC: Hemodynamic and respiratory effects of a
xylazine-morphine sulfate in horses, Arm / Vet Res 40:1417-1420, 1979.
Natalini CC, Linardi RL: Analgesic effects of epidural administration of
hydromorphone in horses, Am ∫ Vet Res 67:11-15, 2006.
Orsini JA, Moate PJ, Kuersten K et al: Pharmacokinetics of fentanyl delivered
transdermally in healthy adult horses: variability among horses and its clinical
implications, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 29:539-546, 2006.
 Price J, Catriona S, Welsh EM et al: Preliminary evaluation of a behavior-based
sidoosaine dumoloy sasroq ul uid aaeiado-isod jo juaussasse roy uaiss
surgery, Vet Anaesth Analg 30:124-137, 2003.
Robertson S: The importance of assessing pain in horses and donkeys, Equine
Vetf38:5-6,2006
Schelling CG, Klein LV: Comparison of carbonated lidocaine and lidocaine
hydrochloride for caudal epidural anesthesia in horses, Am / Vet Res 46:1375-
1377,1985.
Skarda RT: Local and regional analgesic techniques: horses. In Thurman JC,
Tranquilli WJ,Benson GJ,editors: Lumb fones’veterinary anesthesia,ed 3,
Philadelphia, 1996, Williams & Wilkins.
Skarda RT, Muir WW:Segmental thoracolumbar spinal (subarachnoid) analgesia
in conscious horses, Am / Vet Res 43:2121-2128, 1982.
466PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Skarda RT, Muir WW: Segmental epidural and subarachnoid analgesia in
conscious horses: a comparative study, Am / Vet Res 44:1870-1876, 1983.
Skarda RT, Muir WW: Continuous caudal epidural and subarachnoid anesthesia
in mares: a comparative study, Am / Vet Res 44:2290-2298, 1993.
Skarda RT, Muir WW: Caudal analgesia induced by epidural or subarachnoid
administration of detomidine hydrochlonide solution in mares, Ar / Vet Res
55:670-680,1994
epidurally administered xylazine hydrochloride solution in mares, Am f Vet
Res 57:193-200,1996
Skarda RT, Muir WW: Comparison of antinociceptive、cardiovascular, and
ae sa u sql slad jo rosod pue sisoid peau siaa Aoienan
caudal epidural administration of xylazine and detomidine hydrochloride
solution, Am / Vet Res 57:1338-1345, 1996.
Skarda RT, Muir Ww, Ibrahim AL: Plasma mepivacaine concentrations after
caudal epidural and subarachnoid injection in the horse: a comparative study.
Arr fVet Res 45:1967-1971、1984.
 Solomon RE, Gebhart GF: Synergistic antinociceptive interactions among drugs
administered to the spinal cord, Anesth Anaig 78: 1164-1172, 1994.
Spadavecchia C, Arendt-Nielsen L, Anderson OK, et al: Effect of romifidine on
the nociceptive withdrawal reflex and temporal summation in conscious
horses, A / Vet Res 66:1992-1998, 2005.
Sylvester SP, Stafford KJ, Mellor D], et al: Behavioural responses of calves to
amputation dehorning with and without local anaesthesia, Aust Vet J 82:697-
700,2004.
Sysel AM, Pleasant RS, Jacobson JD et al: Efficacy of an epidural combination
of morphine and detomidine in alleviating experimentally induced hindlimb
lameness in horses, Vet Surg 25:511-518, 1996.
Sysel AM, Pleasant RS,Jacobson JD,et al: Systemic and local effects associated with
long-term epidural catheterization and morphine-detomidine administration
in horses, Vet Surg 26:141-149, 1997.
Taylor PM, Pascoe PJ, Mama KR: Diagnosing and treating pain in the horse:
where are we today?, Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 18:1-19, 2002.
Valverde A, Little CB, Dyson DH: Use of epidural morphine to relieve pain in a
horse, Can Vet f 31:211-212, 1990.
Wolf L: The role of complementary techniques in managing musculoskeletal pain
in performance horses, Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 18:107-115, 2002.
24
PAIN MANAGEMENT
FOR THE PET BIRD
JOANNEPAUL-MURPHY
RECOGNIZING PAIN BEHAVIOR IN PET BIRDS
All animals possess the neuroanatomic and neuropharmacologic
components necessary for the transduction, transmission, and
perception of noxious stimuli. It stands to reason, therefore, that all
n         s
of assessing emotion in birds, emotional behaviors may have been
    i n  os   
emotional display for some avian species, whereas for another there
may be benefit. For the purposes of this chapter, it is accepted that birds
 perceive and respond to noxious stimuli and that birds feel pain.
Birds are often undertreated for pain. Poor understanding of avian
behaviors makes it difficult to identify when birds are in pain and the
severity of their pain (Box 24-1). The diffculty is compounded when
bird's response to pain. Additionally, lack of scientific information about
appropriate therapies has hampered knowledge of avian pain management,
having the effect of minimizing veterinary treatment of avian pain.
BOX 24-1
Birds are often undertreated for pain. Poor understanding of avian
behaviors makes it difficult to identify when birds are in pain and the
severity of the pain.
Assessment of pain must consider the species, gender, age,
environment, and concurrent disease. When a bird is in pain, there
is a change or absence of one or more normal behaviors (Table 24-1).
Social interactions decrease in species of birds that have complex
467
468
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
TABLE 24-1
Effect of Chronic Pain on Pet Bird Behavior
Behavioral Changes
Examples
 Decreased social interactions
 Perching away from other birds
 Decreased grooming of self and/or
conspecifics
Decreased interactions with owner
Guarding behavior
Change in posture to protect a painful area
Decreased activity
Increased aggression
Toward conspecifics
Toward owner
Grooming behavior: at painful
Feather destructive behaviors
site or generalized
Self-mutilation
The effect of chronic pain on a bird’s behavior can be subtle. When an owner reports
dhanges in the bird's behavior such as listed above, consider the possibility of a painful
condition.
 e        s o
away from the flock, or might be more subtle, such as a reduction in
social grooming. When birds are housed as single pets, their social
guarding behavior, which may be manifested as antisocial behaviors,
to protect a painful area. Some forms of aggression have been linked to
painful conditions in birds when these aggressive behaviors dissipate
following treatment of the painful condition. A behavioral change in
feather grooming is common to solitary and social birds with painful
conditions. Decreased self-grooming is a withdrawal behavior that
can occur when a bird's focus is on pain; however, increased self-
grooming or grooming of cagemates has also been reported when birds
are stressed or painful. Grooming and feather picking may increase
over a specific area directly related to the region of discomfort. Studies
using chickens with induced sodium urate arthritis demonstrated
that shifting the bird's attention reduced the severity of pain and may
potentially reduce peripheral inflammation.2
PHYSIOLOGY OF AVIAN PAIN
The physiology of pain in all animals involves detection of a noxious
stimulus in the periphery (mechanical, thermal, or chemical) and
transmission of the impulses to the spinal cord, where they are modulated
and projected to the brain for central processing of the information,
which determines the perception of the noxious stimulus. Taxonomic
CHAPTER 24 +Pain Management for the Pet Bird
469
differences in central nervous system anatomy and complexity are
apparent, but anatomic, physiological, and biochemical studies in
nonmammalian vertebrates have found that pain perception is expected
to be analogous to mammals
Peripheral nociceptors have been studied in birds and include
high-threshold mechanothermal, mechanochemical, mechanical, and
thermal. Mechanothermal nociceptors are multifunctional and respond
     s    sn
with slow-conducting unmyelinated C-fiber components. Compared
with mammals, the receptive fields of some of the polymodal fibers are
greater in birds. As stimulus intensity increases, the number of responses
increases. Some fibers have continuous response up to 56° C, whereas
other fibers peak at lower temperatures, and increasing the thermal
stimulus above this peak results in a reduction of impulses.
Thermal and mechanical nociceptors are polymodal and can be Ao
or C fbers with discharge patterns and receptor field size similar to
          
peratures and have a greater threshold to high temperatures, perhaps
demonstrated polymodal nociceptors (mechanochemical) in the nasal
and oral mucosa of chickens similar to mammals, with chemical sensitivity
dorsal horn laminae of the spinal cord transmitting pain signals to the
midbrain and forebrain. The distribution of neurons in the nociceptive
spinothalamic tract cells is similar between birds and mammals.5
Peripheral sensitization occurs when inflammation at the site of
injury creates an increased response to a normally painful stimulus. Cell
damage and leakage leads to a series of responses resulting in increased
sensitivity of the peripheral receptors. Central sensitization is an
neurons not involved in pain perception under normal circumstances.
When stimulation from the peripheral nociceptors to the spinal cord
continues for an extended period, a wide range of spinal neurons
not been experimentally demonstrated in birds, mammalian studies
have demonstrated that when analgesics are given before a painful event
rather than after the start of the stimulation, the spinal excitability can
be dampened.7,8 The earlier pain is treated, the less total drug is required
to maintain analgesia during and after surgery (Box 24-2).
A study of pigeons undergoing orthopedic surgery demonstrated
that pigeons receiving butorphanol before and after surgery returned
470
PART FOuR·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
to normal behaviors sooner than pigeons receiving butorphanol in the
postoperative period only.9
BOX 24-2
aa lm bnp leiot ssa ieu os Aebuns buunp pue auojeg ued iot ieal
required to maintain analgesia during and after the procedure.
TREATMENT OFPAIN
Diagnosing the cause of pain can be challenging in birds, and
identification of the disease process or site of tissue damage affects
the choice of analgesic drugs and supportive care. Therapy should be
directed at resolving the injury or disease in addition to using analgesics
to decrease peripheral pain signals and their effect on the central neural
recognized before a diagnosis is reached, and in these cases, treatment
(Box 24-3). Election of analgesic drugs may need to be conservative when
the cause of pain is unknown.
BOX24-3
The patient's signs of pain may be recognized before a diagnosis
is reached. In these cases, treatment of the pain becomes a critical
component of the symptomatic therapy.
Combining analgesics that act by different mechanisms can augment
the pain relief. Administration of two or more analgesics frequently
produces a synergistic effect. Surgical analgesia commonly includes
a local anesthetic at the incision site, an opioid administered directly
before and affer surgery, and a nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug
(NSAID) given during surgery and for several days following the
procedure (Box 24-4). This combination of drugs usually allows the
dosage of each drug and the concentration of inhalation anesthetic to
be reduced, thereby reducing the side effects of each drug. Adjunctive
BOX24-4|MULTIMODALSURGICALANALGESIA
1. Local anesthetic (lidocaine) at incision site
2. Opioid (butorphanol) immediately before and after surgery
 3. Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug (NSAID; meloxicam) given intramuscularly
following induction
4. Oral NSAlD administration for 3 to 5 days following the procedure
CHAPTER 24 + Pain Management for the Pet Bird 471
drugs, such as tranquilizers, used in conjunction with analgesic drugs
can enhance the analgesia by reducing anxiety. The most common
sedatives used in avian medicine are the benzodiazepines, which calm
birds before handling for anesthesia.
Supportive care is important to the management of pain. This includes
keeping the avian patient warm, dry, and clean. Hospital environment
stressors such as barking dogs or strong smells of cats, ferrets, or other
  r e s e   aq ,
care. Gentle human contact and using a soothing voice are beneficial for
the pet bird.
REGIONAL ANESTHESIA AND ANALGESIA
Local anesthetics such as lidocaine and bupivacaine block sodium
channels in the nerve axon, which interferes with the conduction of
action potentials along the nerve. When local anesthetics are used
preoperatively, the number and frequency of impulses are reduced,
thereby reducing nociceptor sensitization, which has the beneficial effect
of minimizing central sensitization.
Regional infiltration using a local line or splash block is the most
common method used. A 25- or 27-gauge needle is used to make several
subcutaneous (SC) injections of small volumes of dilute solution into the
operative area. The SC space in the bird is very thin. A line block follows
the course of the intended incision by injecting a small bleb of dilute
anesthetic SC, then withdrawing the needle and reinserting it at the
edge of the bleb. Another bleb is made under the skin, and the process is
 repeated until the length of the incision is blocked.
Local anesthetic dosage recommendations for birds are lower
than mammals because birds may be more sensitive to the effects
of the drug (Box 24-5). Systemic uptake of the drug can be rapid in
birds, and metabolism may be prolonged, increasing the potential
for toxic reactions. Toxic side effects include fine tremors, ataxia,
recumbency, seizures, stupor, cardiovascular effects, and death. Toxic
effects can be acute if accidentally injected intravenously. Chickens
given intraarticular injections of high doses of bupivacaine (2.7 to 3.3
mg/kg) showed immediate signs of toxicity such as drowsiness and
BOX24-5
mammals because birds may be more sensitive to the systemic effects
of the drug.
472
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
recumbency.l0 The duration of action of local anesthetics depends on
time to effect nor duration of action has been determined for these
drugs in birds. In a study of bupivacaine using mallard ducks, the
absorption rate was slower than the elimination rate.1l
Dosage recommendations for lidocaine are 2 to 3 mg/kg; thus the
commercial preparation of 20 mg/kg should be diluted 1:10 with sterile
water. Using a 2-mg/kg concentration of lidocaine increases accuracy
of dosing and provides the volume needed for blocking a surgical site
(Box 24-6). The commercial preparation of bupivacaine is a 0.5%
solution (5 mg/ml). No bupivacaine dosage has been established for
birds, but 1 mg/kg total dose has been safely administered to large birds.
Dilution of bupivacaine is also recommended to increase the volume
for administration. Intraarticular administration of bupivacaine (3 mg
in 0.3 ml saline) was studied for its analgesic effects in chickens with
experimentally produced acute arthritis. Chickens given bupivacaine
were able to feed, peck, and stand on the affected limb similar to birds
without arthritis.l0 Topical benzocaine has been used for minor wound
repair in small birds.12 Topical bupivacaine/dimethyl sulfoxide mixture
applied to the amputation site of beak-trimmed chickens provided 4
hours of analgesia.i13
BOX24-6
Dosage recommendations for lidocaine are 2 to 3 mg/kg. The
commercial preparation of 20 mg/kg should be diluted 1:10 with sterile
water. Using a 2-mg/kg concentration of lidocaine increases accuracy
of dosing and provides the volume needed for blocking a surgical site.
Local anesthetics in the form of transdermal patches and transdermal
creams have not been studied for use in birds. Additionally, epidural
infusions, spinal blocks, intravenous blocks, and peripheral nerve blocks
are difficult to perform in birds; therefore the use of local anesthesia
through these applications has not been reported.
OPIOIDS
nervous system. Opioids vary in their receptor specificity and effcacy
in mammals, which results in a wide variety of clinical effects in
different species. Clinical effects are also influenced by the commercial
preparation of opioid and the dose and route of administration to the
species receiving the drug. It stands to reason that the type of opioid
CHAPTER 24 + Pain Management for the Pet Bird
473
and the dose also have a wide range of clinical effects in different avian
species. The distribution, number, and type of opioid receptors are
conserved across vertebrate species in the brainstem and spinal cord but
vary substantially in the forebrain. Autoradiography was used to identify
μ, K, and 8 opioid receptors in the forebrain of rats, mice, and humans,
and K-receptors represented 9%, 13%, and 37% of the total opioid
        
multiple physiological functions in the bird, and the analgesic function of
these receptors still needs further investigation.
Physiological and analgesic effects of butorphanol have been studied
in parrots using the isoflurane-sparing technique. With this method,
healthy birds are anesthetized with isoflurane with determination of the
minimum anesthetic concentration (MAC) by using a noxious stimulus
(toe pinch) and observing a withdrawal response with a cognitive
movement. Each bird is then treated with butorphanol (1 mg/kg), and
the MAC is redetermined. If the concentration of isoflurane can be
lowered, then this “sparing effect" is considered to be due to the analgesic
effects of butorphanol. Butorphanol (1 mg/kg) was administered to three
species of parrots, and the isoflurane MAC could be significantly lowered
A higher dosage of butorphanol may be necessary to demonstrate an effect
in Amazon parrots. When turkeys were given a low dose of butorphanol
(0.1 mg/kg) in a similar gas anesthesia-sparing model, the halothane
MAC was not changed. A similar type of study using chickens compared
three dosages of morphine (0.1, 1.0, and 3.0 mg/kg) and an experimental
K-opioid. Both drugs had isoflurane-sparing effects in this study. 17
The effect of different opioids on conscious parrots was evaluated by
studying the change in withdrawal threshold from noxious electrical and
parrots were given butorphanol 1 mg/kg intramuscularly (IM), 50% of
the birds had significant analgesia; and when given 2 mg/kg, a greater
percentage of birds experienced significant analgesia. Butorphanol
dosages of 3 to 6 mg/kg had similar analgesic effects on Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots. Doses of 3 mg/kg demonstrated significant analgesia.
but increasing the dosage to 6 mg/kg did not increase the effect.18,19
Buprenorphine at 0.1 mg/kg IM in African grey parrots did not show
an analgesic effect when tested by analgesiometry, but pharmacokinetic
analysis suggests that this dose may not achieve effective plasma levels.20
Pigeons given 0.25 and 0.5 mg/kg buprenorphine showed an increased
 ss       
and 5 hours, respectively.21 Fentanyl 0.02 mg/kg was evaluated using
474
PART FouR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
cockatoos, and it did not affect the withdrawal threshold ofthe cockatoos.
A tenfold increase in the dosage of fentanyl (0.2 mg/kg SC) did produce
an analgesic response, but ma ny birds were hyperactive for the first 15 to
absorption and rapid elimination in parrots, with mean residence times
of less than 2 hours.
Butorphanol 1 to 3 mg/kg IM is the current recommendation for
opioid analgesia in parrots, but it needs to be administered every 2 to 3
hours (Box 24-7).
B0X24-7
Butorphanol 1 to 3 mg/kg intramuscularly is the current
NONSTEROIDAL ANTINFLAMMATORY DRUGS
Cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes initiate a cascade of reactions that result in
 polyunsaturated acids being converted to eicosanoids such as prostaglandins
and thromboxane.22 These eicosanoids are released at sites of tissue injury
and cause inflammation and sensitization of nerve endings. NSAIDs
inhibit COX enzymes, thereby disrupting eicosanoid synthesis and
reducing inflammation at the site of injury. NSAIDs also decreases
sensitization of nerve endings and have a modulating effect within the central
nervous system. The relative expression of COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes
inflammation and in spinal pain transmission, but more information is
NSAIDs are used to relieve visceral and musculoskeletal pain, acute
pain associated with trauma, and chronic pain such as arthritis and
to decrease inflammation and sensitization associated with surgery.
The most common NSAIDs used in current avian medicine are
meloxicam, carprofen, ketoprofen, piroxicam, and celecoxib (Table
24-2). Specific NSAIDs such as diclofenac and flunixin meglumine are
not recommended for birds because of significant toxic effects reported
in vultures and quail, respectively.23,24 The inhibition of COX enzymes
can have potential unwanted effects and should be monitored and
evaluated in each patient. In birds, toxic effects include renal impairment
and hepatic enzyme elevations; therefore, increased monitoring is
indicated with high-risk patientsestablishing a baseline of plasma uric
acid, phosphorous, and hepatic enzyme concentrationsbefore NSAID
administration and reevaluation of these parameters at fixed intervals.
CHAPTER 24 + Pain Management for the Pet Bird
475
Anecdotal clinical application. Wide species variation in
sadsns sead asn rspa lss u asn pepu
 Higher dose effective in ducks; effective period may be 
 only 30-70 minutes. Mortality associated with male 
 is essential; use only for short duration; potential
Aters taste/smell of water and may not be well
 Anecdotal use for neuropathic gastric dilation 
 Anecdotal application for chronic osteoarthritis; 
Raised pain threshold for 90 minutes
 prolonged therapy well tolerated 
 pharmacokinetic studies.
 Pharmacokinetic in chickens
Anecdotal clinical application 
Anecdotal clinical application 
nephrotoxicity
 accepted
symptoms
Comments
Eiders.
studies.
Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs Used in Birds
Change water every
Every 8-12 hours
Every 12-24 hours
Every 8-12 hours 
Every 12-24 hours
Every 8-10 hours
Every 12-24 hours
Every 8-12 hours
Every 8-12 hours
Every 24 hours 
Every 12 hours 
Frequency
8hours
Unless Otherwise
Dosage(mg/kg
Stated)
0.5-1.0
325 mg
1.0-3.0
1.0-5.0
0.5-2.0
5-10
 drinking water
Per 250 ml 
Route
2.
P
3.3
PPMP
MNP
MSPP
TABLE 24-2
 Acetylsalicylic acid 
Funixin meglumine 
 Phenylbutazone 
Indomethacin
Carprofen
Celecoxib
lbuprofen 
Ketoprofen 
 Meloxicam
 Piroxicam
Drug
476
PART FOuR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
NSAIDs should not be used if there is any indication of renal impairment,
birds when they are not fed meat products. Use one NSAID at a time,
and change to a different formulation of NSAID if the response is
diminishing. For treatment of mild to moderate chronic pain, NSAIDS
can be given on an as-needed basis. Safety of meloxicam was studied in
three vulture species at dosages as high as 2 mg/kg, and serum uric acid
concentrations were not increased.25
Analgesic efficacy of NSAIDs related to dose and frequency
Pharmacokinetic trials in several species of birds have found NSAID
serum concentrations to be highly variable between species, and
information is lacking about any parrot species.
Three NSAIDs (sodium salicylate, flunixin, and meloxicam) were
species of birds (chickens, ostriches, ducks, turkeys, and pigeons).26
The half life of 0.5 mg/kg meloxicam was three times longer in chickens
and pigeons than other avian species tested, 3.2 hours and 2.4 hours
respectively, compared to 13.7 hours in humans.26 Pharmacokinetics of
ketoprofen 2 mg/kg given orally, IM, and intravenously to quail (Coturnix
japonica) showed a very short half-life and low bioavailability orally
(24%) and IM (54%) compared with humans and dogs.27 An analgesia
study using mallard ducks undergoing a skin incision found no detectable
analgesia using ketoprofen at 0.5 to 2.0 mg/kg.28 However, ketoprofen 5
mg/kg IM administered to wild mallard ducks anesthetized with isoflurane
had an analgesic effect 30 to 70 minutes after administration.29 A field
anesthesia study using ketoprofen, propofol, and bupivacaine in Eider
ducks, associated ketoprofen administration with mortality of males with
histopathologic renal lesions.30 A carprofen dose of 1 mg/kg SC given to
chickens raised their threshold to pressure-induced pain for at least 90
minutes.3l Another study using chickens concluded that 30 mg/kg IM
carprofen was required to eliminate behaviorsassociated with experimental
arthritis.32 Carprofen (1 mg/kg) given to chickens with chronic lameness
improved their ability to walk and navigate a maze with peak plasma levels
occurring at 1 to 2 hours after SC administration.33 Unfortunately, plasma
concentrations do not have a direct correlation to physiological activity of
the NSAID because NSAIDs tend to accumulate in areas of inflammation.
In mallard ducks, 5 mg/kg flunixin and 5 mg/kg ketoprofen significantly
suppressed thromboxane B2 levels within 15 minutes of intramuscular
administration and maintained this physiological effect for 4 hours.34
CHAPTER24·PainManagementforthePetBird
477
CHRONIC PAIN
Assessment of analgesia is challenging when the condition is progressive,
such as chronic degenerative joint disease or neoplasia. Response to
analgesia therapy is based on evaluation of a set of behaviors particular
for each bird.
NSAIDS are the first course oftherapy for chronic disorders because they
have no sedative effect and have a longer duration of analgesic effect than
opioids. Carprofen or meloxicam are the current drugs of choice because
of the widespread use and low incidence of reported toxicities. Both can be
orally administered once daily, but meloxicam has an advantage because
it is available in an oral suspension and can be easily dosed for small birds
NSAIDs are initiated at the low-end dosage and monitored for response to
Monitoring the complete blood count and renal (uric acid, phosphorous)
and hepatic (aspartate aminotransferase and creatinine kinase) plasma
values every 2 to 4 months is recommended, especially in the older bird. If
pain recurs following several months of treatment, the next set of options
includes changing to another NSAID such as piroxicam. Piroxicam may
have synergistic action with anticancer drugs and is also an effective NSAID
for degenerative joint disease in birds. Piroxicam is noted for renal toxicity
and gastric ulceration in mammals. In a study using chickens with ascites
syndrome, a high dose of piroxicam (0.6 mg/kg) caused gastrointestinal
ulceration.35 However, long-term use of low-dose piroxicam (0.1 mg/kg)
has been administered and closely monitored for several consecutive
months to captive cranes with chronic degenerative joint disease and has
not caused clinical problems.36 If pain persists or increases, especially with
ss        o
acting, was shown to reduce painful behaviors associated with chronic
arthritis in turkeys.37 Unfortunately, parenteral forms of recommended
opioids are only effective for a few hours. Experimental studies using long-
acting liposome-encapsulated butorphanol in parrots with experimental
arthritis showed effectiveness for 3 to 4 days and greater efficacy at reducing
pain and lameness than NSAIDs.38 No information is available regarding
Orally administered opioids in birds, but in mammals, much higher dosages
are required for oral administration to reach effective plasma levels.
CONCLUSION
Avian analgesia is finally recognized as a critical component of avian
medicine and surgery. The need to recognize pain and to provide
478
PART FoUR •Acute and Chronic Pain Management
extrapolated from other companion animals have developed. Several
published research investigations, using several species of birds, have
begun to provide avian analgesia therapeutics with empirical information
for clinical application. The challenge is to continue pushing this research
forward with appreciation that there are approximately 10,0o0 known
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodymamics to each analgesic drug.
REFERENCES
1. Jones RB, Harvey S: Behavioral and adrenocortical responses of domestic
chicks to systematic reduction in group size and to sequential disturbances
of companions by experimenter, Behav Processes 14:291-3030, 1987.
2. Gentle MJ, Tilston VL: Reduction in peripheral inflammation by changes in
attention,Physiol Behav 66(2):289-292,1999.
3. Gentle MJ, Hunter LN, Waddington D: The onset of pain-related behaviors
following partial beak amputation in the chicken, Neurosci Lett 128:113-116,
1991.
4. McKeegan DEF: Mechano-chemical nociceptors in the avian trigeminal
mucosa,Brain Res Rev 46:146-154,2004.
5. Zhai XY, Atsumi S: Large dorsal horn neurons which receive inputs from
numerous substance-P like immunoreactive axon terminals in the laminae
I and 1I of the chicken spinal cord, Neurosci Res 28:147-154, 1997.
6. Roughan JV,Flecknell PA: Effects of surgery and analgesic administration on
spontaneous behavior in singly housed rats, Res Vet Sci 69:283-288, 2000.
7. Woolf Cj: A new strategy for the treatment ofinflammatory pain: prevention
or elimination of central sensitization, Drugs47(suppl 5):1-9, 1994; discussion,
pp 4647.
8. Woolf CJ, Chong MS: Preemptive analgesia: treating postoperative pain
by preventing the establishment of central sensitization, Anesth Anaig
77(2):362-379,1993.
9. Paul-Murphy J: Unpublished data.
10. Hocking PM, Gentle MJ, Bernard R et al: Evaluation of a protocol for
determining the effectiveness of pretreatment with local analgesics for
reducing experimentally induced articular pain in domestic fowl, Res Vet Sci
63:263-267、1997.
11. Machin KL, Livingston A: Plasma bupivacaine levels in mallard ducks
(Anas platyrhyncos) following a single subcutaneous dose. Proceedings of
the Joint Conference of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians,
American Association of Wildlife Veterinarians, Association of Reptilian
and Amphibian Veterinarians, and National Association of Zoo and Wildlife
Veterinarians, Orlando, Fla, pp 159-163, 2001.
12. Clubb SL: Round table discussion: pain management in clinical practice,
J Avian Med Surg 12(4):276-278, 1998.
13. Glatz PC, Murphy LB, Preston AP: Analgesia therapy of beak-trimmed
chickens,Aust Vet f69(1):18,1992.
CHAPTER 24 +Pain Management for the Pet Bird479
14. Mansour A, Khachaturian H, Lewis ME et al: Anatomy of CNS opioid
receptors, Trends Neurosci 11(7):308-314, 1988.
15. Curro TG, Brunson D, Paul-Murphy J: Determination of the ED50 of
isoflurane and evaluation of the analgesic properties of butorphanol in
cockatoos (Cacatua spp.), Vet Surg 23:429-433, 1994.
16. Curro TG: Evaluation of the isoflurane-sparing effects of butorphanol and
flunixin in psittaciformes, Proc Assoc Avian Vet pp 17-19, 1993.
17. Concannon KT, Dodam JR, Hellyer PW: Influence of a mu and kappa
opioid agonist on isoflurane minimal anesthetic concentration in chickens,
Am fVet Res 56:806-812、1996.
18. Paul-Murphy IR,Brunson DB, Miletic V: Analgesic effects ofbutorphanol and
buprenorphine in conscious African grey parrots ( Psitacus erithacus erithacus
and Psittacus erithacus timneh),Am fVet Res 60(10):1218-1221,1999.
19. Paul-Murphy J, Ludders J: Avian analgesia, Vet Clin North Am Exot Ani
Pract 4(1):35-45,2001.
20. Paul-Murphy J, Hess J, Fialkowski J: Pharmacokinetic properties of a single
l sid  u u auo  asp rss
erithacus erithacus),fAvian MedSurg 18(4):224-228,2004.
21. Gaggermeier B, Henke J, Schatzmann U, et al: Investigations on analgesia
in domestic pigeons (C. livia, Gmel., 1789, var. dom.) using buprenorphine
and butorphanol, Proc Eur Assoc Avian Vet 70-73, 2003.
22.Vane JR, Bakhle YS: Blotting RM: Cyclooxygenases 1 and 2、Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol 38:97-120,1998.
23. Oaks JL, Gilbert M, Virani MZ et al: Diclofenac residues as the cause of
vulture population declines in Pakistan, Nature 427:630-633, 2004.
24. Klein PN, Charmatz K, Langenberg I: The effect of flunixin meglumine
(Banamine) onthe renal functionin northernbobwhite (Colinus virginianus):
an avian model. Proceedings of the Association of Reptilian and Amphibian
Veterinarians and American Association of Zoo Veterinarians, Pittsburgh,
pa, 1994, pp 128-131.
25. Swan G, Naidoo V, Cuthbert R et al: Removing the threat of diclofenac to
critically endangered Asian vultures, PLoS Biol 4(3):66, 2006.
26. Baert K, De Backer P: Comparative pharmacokinetics ofthree non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs in five birds species, Comp Biocherm Physiol C
134:25-33,2003.
27. Graham JE, Kollias-Baker C, Craigmill AL et al: Pharmacokinetics of
ketoprofen in Japanese quail (Coturnix japonica)、 J Vet Pharmacol Ther
28:399-402,2005.
intraabdominal transmitter placement. Proceedings of the Joint Conference
of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians and American Association
of Wildlife Veterinarians, Omaha, Neb, 1998, pp 470-473.
29. Machin KL, Livingston A: Assessment of the analgesic effects of ketoprofen
in ducks anesthetized with isoflurane, Am f Vet Res 63(6):821-826, 2002.
30. Mulcahy DM, Tuomi P, and Larsen SR: Differential Mortality of Male
Spectacled Eiders (Somateria fischeri) and King Eiders (Somateria spectabilis)
Subsequent to Anesthesia With Propofol, Bupivacaine, and Ketoprofen,
fAvian Med Surg 17:117-123,2003.
480 PART FOUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
31. Danbury TC, Weeks CA, Chambers JP et al: Self-selection of the analgesic
drug carprofen by lame broiler chickens, Vet Rec 146( 11):307-311, 2000.
32.Hocking YR: Effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on pain-
related behaviour in a model of articular pain in the domestic fowl, Res Vet
Sci 78(1):69-75,2005.
33. McGeown D, Danbury TC, Waterman-Pearson AE et al: Effect of carprofen
on lameness in broiler chickens, Vet Rec 144:668-671, 1999.
34. Machin KL, Tellier LA, Lair S, Livingston A: Pharmacodynamics of flunixin
and ketoprofen in mallard ducks, / Zoo Wildl Med 32:22-29, 2001.
35. Valle K, Dian-Cruz A, Avila E et al: Antioxidant action of piroxicam on
liver, heart and lung in broiler chicks, J Vet Pharrnacol Ther 24(4):291-293,
2001.
36. Paul-Murphy J, Sladky K, Krugner-Higby L: Evaluation of butorphanol
and carprofen for arthritic pain in parrots. Proceedings of the American
Association of Zoo Veterinarians. Tampa, Fla, 2006, p 273.
37. Buchwalder T, Huber-Eicher B: Effect of the analgesic butorphanol on
activity behaviour in turkeys (Meleagris gallopavo), Res Vet Sci 79(3):239-
244.2005.
38. Sladky KK, Krugner-Higby L, Meek-Walker EB et al: Serum concentrations
and analgesic efficacy of liposome-encapsulated and standard butorphanol
tartrate in Hispaniolan parrots (Amazona ventralis), Am f Vet Res 67(5):775-
781,2006.
25
CLINICAL APPROACHES TO
ANALGESIA IN REPTILES
CRAIGMOSLEY
Ahe analgesic management of reptiles can be challenging because of
their unique physiological, anatomic, and behavioral adaptations.
 Although reptile pain and nociception have not been extensively
studied, there is strong evidence that reptiles are capable of nociception.
The neuroanatomic components necessary for nociception have been
described.l,2 In addition, endogenous antinociceptive mechanisms23
and a demonstrable modulation of nociception with pharmacologic
agents known to be analgesics in other species have been demonstrated.4-8
In lizards (Gekko gecko), spinal projections originating in the brainstem
region (nucleus raphes inferior) that project to the superficial layers of
the dorsal horn have been identified, and these structures suggest the
presence of tracts, similar to those found in mammals, that mediate
descending inhibition of nociception. Neurotransmitters that are
important in nociceptive modulation in mammals have been identified in
reptiles.? Although endogenous opioids and opioid receptors involved in
reproduction and thermoregulation have been identified in reptiles, little
is known about the role of opioids in nociception.9-12 This information
suggests that, at least at the physiological level, reptiles are capable of
responding to noxious stimuli in a manner similar to mammals. The
question of whether reptiles can “feel" pain or what significance pain
or nociception has for physiological homeostasis is a far more complex
question to answer. Until further evidence is available, it would seem
most ethical to assume that reptiles are capable offeeling pain and to treat
or manage pain when there is reasonable evidence that pain is present.
Interestingly, in a recent survey of the membership of the Association
of Reptile and Amphibian Veterinarians, 98% of the respondents
indicated their belief that reptiles do feel pain. However, only 39% of
respondents in this survey reported using analgesics in more than 50%
of their patients.l3 The reasons for failure to use analgesics were not
481
482PART FoUR •Acute and Chronic Pain Management
specifically addressed in this study. However, some possibilities include
a failure to recognize painful patients, lack of effcacy data, concern of
adverse effects, and little or no experimentally determined drug dose or
pharmacokinetic information.
Reptiles are capable of nociception. Analgesic techniques to minimize
The benefits of providing adequate analgesia are well recognized
in mammals. The consequences of untreated pain are consistent with
impaired patient homeostasis. These alterations can result in negative
energy balance, lead to immune system compromise, inhibit healing.
         
Chapter 3).14,15
The benefits of preemptive analgesia have also been demonstrated
and not only does it reduce postoperative pain by decreasing central
sensitization but also may facilitate healing and prevent and/or limit
the actions of detrimental neurohumoral responses to pain.l6,17 In
addition, the use of analgesics as part of a balanced anesthetic protocol
can reduce the doses of other anesthetics. This may help reduce the
negative cardiopulmonary effects of general anesthesia. Overall, it has
been demonstrated in humans and other mammals that appropriate
analgesia is an important part of complete medical care in health and
disease.
ASSESSINGPAININ REPTILES
enging endeavor. Pain is defined as a sensory or emotional experience.
Adult humans can express their individual level and significance of
pain. In nonverbal humans and animals, behavioral assessment tends
to be the best indicator of pain.l8-20 However, with more than 8000
different reptile species identified that exhibit a wide range of unique
physiological and behavioral adaptations, it is exceedingly difficult to
assess behavioral changes in these animals. This makes the identification
of behavioral alterations that may be associated with pain particularly
difficult. Recognition of abnormal behavior in reptiles requires careful,
often time-consuming observation, and changes may be subtle. An
approach similar to pain assessment in other veterinary species can be
adapted for use in reptiles (Box 25-1). If possible, it is probably best
to observe reptiles remotely (using a remote camera) because evidence
indicates that reptiles may suppress some pain behaviors when an
CHAPTER 25+Clinical Approaches toAnalgesia in Reptiles
483
BOX 25-1
An Approach to Pain Assessment in Reptiles
A. Behavior
Species Considerations
Requires proper species identification and familiarity with species-specific
behaviors. Basic species differences affect behavioral patterns, and these are
important when attempting to differentiate normal from abnormal behaviors.
●Predominant activity pattern (diurnal, nocturnal)
·Predated or predator species
●Habitat (arboreal, aquatic, terrestrial, fossorial)
ndividual PatientConsiderations
· Stage of ecdysis
· Some may become more aggressive during this time.
● Hibernation status
responsive than normal.
·Socialization
●Altered response to human interaction (normally docile animal to biting) occurs; poor
response to caregiver occurs.
· Concurrent illness
●Patient may be incapable of exhibiting behaviors associated with pain, or behaviors
associated with disease may be mistaken for pain behaviors.
· Owner assessment
●Owners are often more familiar with their animal's normal behavior; however, owners
conditions.
Environmental Considerations
·Enclosure
●Home enclosures often more “interesting" compared with hospital enclosures, providing
animal with plenty of opportunity to exhibit normal behaviors.
·Preferred optimal body temperature
● Ambient environmental temperature is one of the main determinants of metabolic rate
in resting reptiles, and consequently normal behavior may influenced by alterations in
metabolic rate.
Observer
● Good evidence that reptiles may suppress behaviors and activity that may be associated
with pain in the presence of an observer (i.e., may not withdraw from painful stimulus)
Locomotor Activity
·Posture
●Hunched, guarding of affected body area, not resting in normal posture
·Gait
Other
● Excessive scratching or flicking foot, tail, or affected area
●Unwillingness to perform normal movements (look up, step up, thrash with tail)
●Exaggerated flight response
—Continued
484
PART FouR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
BOX25-1
An Approach to Pain Assessment in Reptiles-cont'd
Miscellaneous
· Appetite
● Reduced appetite may be related to underlying disease but may also be related
to pain.
Eyes
● Eyelids may be held closed when animal is painful or ill.
Colorchange
· Abnormal respiratory movements
the muscles and tissues involved in respiration.
B. Anticipated Level of Pain
The anticipated level of pain is commonly used to evaluate pain in reptiles and is
based on the likelihood and severity of tissue trauma associated with a particular
procedure or condition. This is a well-accepted approach in veterinary medicine,
particularly when dealing with less familiar species.41 However, in addition
t significant species differences, significant individual differences in response
to therapy and response to tissue trauma can be seen.
C. Physiological Data
Most physiological parameters have been shown to be poor indicators of pain in most
species. Physiological parameters can be influenced by disease and excitement. In
addition, the physiological parameters of reptiles may be influenced by a number of
metabolic processes, such as activity level, temperature alterations, and feeding.
D. Response to Palpation
However, in reptiles this may be less sensitive because most reptiles withdraw from
touch regardless of whether the animal is experiencing pain.
observer is present.2l This behavior may be a protective response similar
to that seen in some reptiles subjected to brief physical restraint and
is likely a normal protective behavioral response to a perceived threat,
similar to that found in many other vertebrate species.22 In a survey
of reptile veterinarians, it was found that the anticipated level of pain
extrapolated from other species (76%), behavioral changes (66%),
anticipated level of pain based on prior experience in reptiles (57%),
and physiological changes (32%) were commonly used to evaluate pain
in reptiles.13
understanding of normal reptile behavior, physiology, and unique
species-specific adaptations. An approach similar to pain assessment
in other veterinary species can be adapted for use in reptiles. Remote
CHAPTER 25 + Clinical Approaches to Analgesia in Reptiles
485
ANALGESIC THERAPY IN REPTILES
A carefully designed analgesic plan should include not only the specific
analgesic drugs and route of drug administration but also steps to
supportivepatient care.
ROUTE OF DRUG ADMINISTRATION
It is probably important to consider the route of drug administration
in reptiles for many reasons, including ease of drug administration,
unique anatomic or physiological structures, and variability in drug bio-
availability and uptake among various routes of drug administration.
Intramuscular drug administration is commonly used in reptiles.
Historically, hind limb and tail injection sites have been avoided because
of concerns related to the first-pass effect associated with passage of
any administered drug through the kidneys via the renal portal system.
However, at least in some species, this may be more of a theoretical than
practical concern because only a small amount of blood from the hind
limbs and tail passes through the kidney,23,24 whereas in other species
a small amount from the hind limbs passes through the renal portal
system but a substantial amount of blood from the tail passes through
metabolized or excreted by the kidneys. Some recent evidence from
the green iguana indicates that the bioavailability of intramuscularly
    e  aq   
may vary depending on the absorption rate of the drug from the site
properties of the drug, tissue blood flow, and cardiac output. Oral drug
analgesic therapy, for most become intolerant of repeated intramuscular
injections. Oral drug administration can be difficult in some patients,
although the use of feeding tubes can greatly simplify and facilitate this
process. A more important consideration when contemplating oral drug
administration may be the considerable differences in gastrointestinal
function among reptile species. Many are strict carnivores (snakes) and
may fast for days to months between meals, whereas others are primarily
herbivores (turtles, tortoises, and some lizards) and tend to feed more or
less continuously. These differences presumably affect the bioavailability
species. However, recently a study in green iguanas found that the
486PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of meloxicam given orally to be
essentially the same as intravenous drug administration.27 Although
intravenous drug administration is not always feasible in reptiles, the
combination of good technique, practice, appropriate patient selection,
and skilled physical restraint can facilitate predictable venous access.
Intravascular injection ensures complete bioavailability of a drug and
may avoid the tissue irritation associated with some drugs when given
intramuscularly.
Significant pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic differences exist
between reptiles and mammals, making the extrapolation of drug
dosing difficult. When available, species-specific analgesic drug studies
 in reptiles can provide valuable insight to help guide analgesic therapy.
However, critical evaluation is required to interpret the results of these
studies accurately.
DRUGS
The three primary classes of analgesic drugs used in reptiles are local
anesthetics, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and opioids
(Table 25-1).
CLASSES OF ANALGESIC DRUGS COMMONLY USEDIN REPTILES
ARE THE FOLLOWING:
·Opioids
● Local anesthetics
●Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs
OPIOIDS
It is well documented that reptiles have opioid receptors in the central
nervous system and that the proopiomelanocortin system (one of the
three molecular systems from which all naturally occurring opioids are
of the different opioid receptors in modifying pain perception is far
  r s   s  e a si  5
assessed for clinical analgesic properties in reptiles. However, each study
should be carefully evaluated for the quality of experimental design and
strength of its conclusions. Based on recent studies, butorphanol (despite
its frequent use) does not appear to produce significant analgesic effects
in some reptiles.8,21,30 However, other studies suggest that butorphanol,
at least at some doses, may reduce the intensity of motor reactions in
response to an electrical stimulus applied to the tails of green iguanas.31
CHAPTER 25·Clinical Approaches to Analgesia in Reptiles
In the same study, buprenorphine (0.02 and 0.04 mg/kg IM) did not
significantly alter the motor reaction in response to an electrical stimuli
compared with saline. Evidence indicates that morphine may be effective
as an analgesic in at least some reptile species.5,6.,8,3l It should be noted
(sou g on z) pnond aq on siadde uoe po pasuo rog a e
following morphine administration and that the duration of effect may
vary considerably among species.5,6,8 Delayed onset of action may be
   s  s     n
intramuscular or subcutaneous injection site. Opioids appear to be safe
for use in reptiles, producing no discernible alterations in heart rate
and behavior (sedation or excitement), but they do cause significant
respiratory depression in some species.8
LOCALANESTHETICS
Local anesthetics act by interrupting transmission of sensory and motor
neurons. In reptiles, local anesthetics are commonly used to facilitate
minor surgical interventions, but they can also be used as analgesics.
Recently, a technique has been described to block the mandibular
nerve in crocodilians.32 The limited duration of analgesic effect and
accompanying motor paralysis associated with local anesthetics limit
their use primarily to the immediate perioperative period or when
hospitalized. Local anesthetic toxicity can be avoided by careful attention
to total dose of local anesthetic administered to a patient. It must be kept
 ss   s a a sd n  n  
administered accidentally. In general, the toxic doses of local anesthetics
in mammals (dogs) should not be exceeded: for example, lidocaine
(toxic dose 10 to 22 mg/kg) and bupivacaine (toxic dose 5 mg/kg).33
Additionally, excessive dilution of local anesthetics may decrease their
efficacy. Dilution of commercially available concentrations of local
anesthetics should probably not exceed 50% on a per volume basis. A
1% lidocaine solution is available commercially and may be preferred
for use in patients at greater risk for local anesthetic toxicity (i.e., small
patients).
NONSTEROIDALANTIINFLAMMATORYDRUGS
The role of cyclooxygenase in the pathophysiology of pain and
inflammation of reptiles has not been studied. However, reported
clinical experience strongly supports the efficacy of NSAIDs in
reptiles, and they continue to be popular. Recent studies examining
the pharmacokinetics of meloxicam in the green iguana showed
488
PART FOuR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
References
36, 37, 39, 41
5, 6, 8, 31
8, 30, 31 
34, 35
3
3
High doses are associated with anesthesia
May not be effective as an analgesic in
May not be effective as an analgesic in
Ceiling effect seen at 0.3 mg/kg in Nile
 a dn yay nsisiad kew uogoe po uogeing
Ceiling effect seen at 2 mg/kg in Nile
 crocodiles (C. niloticus africana)
Dosages of Drugs with Potential Analgesic Effects in Reptiles
 24 hours in turtles 
Comments 
africana)
 reptiles
 reptiles
0.05-4.0 mg/kg (crocodiles)
1.0 mg/kg (green iguanas)
1.5-6.5 mg/kg (turtles)
(sasiouon) 6y/6n 00 L-09
150-300 μg/kg (aquatic)
0.4-1.0 mg/kg
10-100 mg/kg
1-1.25 mg/kg
1-8 mg/kg
1-4 mg/kg
Dosage
lizards)
IM, IV, SC
 IM, IV, SC 
 IM,IV, 10 
Route
IC, IM 
M
M
TABLE 25-1
Buprenorphine*
Medetomidine 
Butorphanol*
Morphine 
Meperidine
Ketamine
Xylazine*
Drug
CHAPTER25·ClinicalApproaches toAnalgesiainReptiles
489
27, 42
26, 42
42
2
Bioavailability and pharmacokinetics for oral
 and intravenous administration in green
 Dilute to 0.25% to increase volume
Dilute to 0.5% to increase volume
iguanas fguana iguana)
tRepeat dosing pharmacokinetics has not been studied and is based on extrapolation.
0.1-0.2 mg/kg g24-48ht
0.1-0.5 mg/kg q24-48ht
 recommend <5 mg/kg
recommend <2 mg/kg
Toxic dose unknown;
Toxic dose unknown;
2 mg/kg 924-48ht
2
Local infiltration 
Local infiltration 
 IM,IV, PO 
IM, IV, SC 
3
IC, Intracoelomic; IO, intraosseous.
M
Funixin meglumine*
Bupivacaine (0.5%)*
Lidocaine (2%)*
Meloxicam
Carprofen*
Ketoprofen
490
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
excellent bioavailability of this drug given orally.27 There is also
some evidence of enterohepatic or possibly urinary resorption
of meloxicam. The results suggest that plasma levels associated
with analgesia are maintained for 24 hours after a single dose.
However, it should be noted that plasma levels of NSAIDs do not
always correspond to their clinical effect, and thus it is difficult to
recommend effective and safe dosing intervals. A pilot examination
of the pharmacokinetics of ketoprofen administered intravenously
and intramuscularly in green iguanas has also been completed and
revealed that bioavailability (78%) was decreased when ketoprofen
was administered intramuscularly and that terminal half-life was
 s  s n s   n  
suggest that dosing intervals in reptiles should be greater compared
with mammals. This recommendation is routinely followed for
other drugs in reptiles, especially those associated with significant
toxicity. Limited toxicity studies involving meloxicam were not
associated with any clinically apparent abnormalities, nor were there
any histopathologic lesions that could be associated with toxicity
present at necropsy. However, mild biochemical and hematologic
abnormalities were noted that could not be clearly explained.27
Thus, until further studies in reptiles become available, it is probably
still best to consider the possibility that side effects similar to those
seen in mammals (gastrointestinal irritation, renal compromise,
platelet inhibition) may occur in reptiles. Therefore, hydration
status, concurrent medications (steroids), presence of coagulopathy,
gastrointestinal disease, and renal disease should be addressed before
administering these drugs.
OTHERDRUGS
Ketamine administered at subanesthetic doses is being used as an
analgesic in many mammalian species, but its analgesic potential in
reptiles has not been studied. Ketamine alone and used at anesthetic
doses is associated with hypertension, tachycardia, bradypnea, and
hypoventilation.35-37 Ketamine may be a useful analgesic adjunct in
select cases. The Qa-agonists produce analgesia, sedation, and muscle
relaxation in mammals. The analgesic effects of α2-agonists have not
been evaluated in reptiles, but clinical impressions suggest that they
may be capable of producing an analgesic effect. Medetomidine induces
cardiopulmonary effects in reptiles similar to those seen in mammals:
bradycardia, hypertension, and a reduction in arterial oxygen partial
CHAPTER 25 ● Clinical Approaches to Analgesia in Reptiles 491
gabapentin, ama ntadine, the tricyclic antidepressants, and various forms
but may have a role to play as our understanding of nociception, pain,
and analgesic treatments in reptiles increases.
CONCLUSION
Reptiles are a unique and diverse class of animals that have developed
distinctive mechanisms not found in most other animals for managing
alterations in body temperature and metabolic rate. An approach to
pain management based on current understanding of reptile physiology,
nociception, pain, and analgesia represents a generalized approach
to pain management in this class of animals. As our knowledge and
understanding increase, itis likely that our approach to pain management
in this class of animals will also be modified and refined to address reptile
pain more specifically. New information should be evaluated objectively
and without the influence of personal bias or beliefs. Reptiles are likely
to have evolved unique mechanisms for managing pain and avoiding the
understand.
REFERENCES
1. Liang YF、 Terashima S: Physiological properties and morphological
characteristics of cutaneous and mucosal mechanical nociceptive neurons
with A-delta peripheral axons in the trigeminal ganglia of crotaline snakes,
Comp Neurol328:88-102、1993.
2. Stoskopf MK: Pain and analgesia in birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish,
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 35:775-780,1994.
3. Gans C, Gaunt AS: Muscle architecture and control demands, Brain Behav
Evol 40:70-81,1992.
4. Mauk MD, Olson RD, LaHoste GJ et al: Tonic immobility produces
hyperalgesia and antagonizes morphine analgesia, Science 213:353-354, 1981.
5. Kanui TI,Hole K,Miaron JO: Nociception in crocodiles: capsaicin instillation,
formalin and hot plate tests, Zoofogical Science 7:537-540,1990.
6. Kanui TI, Hole K: Morphine and pethidine antinociception in the crocodile,
fVet Pharmacol Ther 15:101-103, 1992.
7. ten Donkelaar HJ, de Boer-van Huizen R: A possible pain control system in
a non-mammalian vertebrate (a lizard, Gekko gecko), Neurosci Lett 83:65-70,
1987.
 8. Sladky KK, Miletic V, Paul-Murphy I,et al: Analgesic efficacy and respiratory
effects ofbutorphanol and morphine inturtles. /Am Net Med Assoc 230:1356-
1362,2007.
9. de la Iglesia JA, Martinez-Guijarro FI, Lopez-Garcia C: Neurons of the
medial cortex outer plexiform layer of the lizard Podarcis hispanica: Golgi
and immunocytochemical studies,/ Comp Neurof 341:184-203, 1994.
492PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
10. Reiner A: The distribution of proenkephalin-derived peptides in the central
nervous system ofturtles, / Comp Neurol 259:65-91, 1987.
11. Lindberg I, White L: Reptilian enkephalins: implications for the evolution of
proenkephalin, Arch Biochem Biophys 245:1-7,1986.
12. Ng TB, Hon WK, Cheng CH et al: Evidence for the presence of
adrenocorticotropic and opiate-like hormones in the brains of two sea
snakes,Hydrophis cyanocinctusand Lapemishardwickii,Gen CompEndocrinol
63:31-37, 1986.
13. Read MR: Evaluation of the use of anesthesia and analgesia in reptiles, ∫ Am
Vet Med Assoc 224:547-552,2004.
14. Kona-Boun JJ,Silim A, Troncy E: Immunologic aspects of veterinary
anesthesia and analgesia, / Am Vet Med Assoc 226:355-363, 2005.
15. Muir WW: Pain and stress. In Gaynor J, Muir WW, editors: Handbook of
veterinary pain management, St Louis, 2002, Mosby.
16. Lascelles BD, Waterman AE, Cripps PJ et al: Central sensitization as a result
of surgical pain: investigation of the pre-emptive value of pethidine for
ovariohysterectomy in the rat, Pain 62:201-212,1995.
17. Woolf CJ, Chong MS: Preemptive analgesia: treating postoperative pain
by preventing the establishment of central sensitization, Anesth Anaig 77:
362-379, 1993.
18. Holton L, Reid J,Scott EM et al: Development of a behaviour-based scale to
measure acute pain in dogs, Vet Rec 148:525-531, 2001.
19. Pritchett LC, Ulibarri C, Roberts MC et al: Identification of potential
after exploratory celiotomy for colic、Applied Animal Behaviour Science
80:31-43, 2003.
20. van Dijk M, de Boer JB, Koot HM et al: The association between physio-
logical and behavioral pain measures in 0- to 3-year-old infants after major
surgery,J Pain Symptom Manage 22:600-609,2001.
21. Fleming GJ, Robertson S: Use of thermal threshold response to evaluate the
antinociceptive effects of butorphanol in juvenile green iguanas (lguana
iguana), Tampa, Fla, 2006, American Association of Zoo Veterinarians.
22. Porro CA, Carli G: Immobilization and restraint effects on pain reactions in
animals,Pain 32:289-307、1988.
23. Holz P, Barker IK, Burger JP et al: The effect of the renal portal system
on pharmacokinetic parameters in the red-eared slider (Trachermys scripta
elegans)、fZoo Wildl Med28:386-393,1997.
       ia       
renal portal system in the red-eared slider (Trachemys scripta elegans),/ Zoo
Wildl Med 28:378-385, 1997.
25. Benson KG, Forrest L: Characterization of the renal portal system of the
Wildl Med 30:235-241, 1999.
26. Tuttle AD、Papich M,Lewbart GA et al: Pharmacokinetics of
venous and intramuscular injections,J Zoo Wildl Med 37:567-570,
2006.
CHAPTER 25 ·Clinical Approaches to Analgesia in Reptiles493
27. Hernandez-Divers SJ, McBride M, Koch T, et al: Single-dose oral and
intravenous pharmacokinetics of meloxicam in the green iguana (Iguana
guana). Naples、Fla,2004,Association of Reptilian and Amphibian
Veterinarians.
28. Zagon IS, Sassani JW, Allison G et al: Conserved expression of the opioid
growth factor, [Met5]enkephalin, and the zeta (zeta) opioid receptor in
vertebrate cornea,Brain Res 671:105-111, 1995.
29. Polzonetti-Magni A, Facchinetti F, Carnevali O et al: Presence and
steroidogenetic activity of beta-endorphin in the ovary ofthe lizard, Podarcis
s. sicula raf, Biol Reprod 50:1059-1065,1994.
30.Mosley CA,Dyson D,Smith DA: Minimum alveolar concentration of
isoflurane in green iguanas and the effect of butorphanol on minimum
alveolar concentration, JAm Vet Med Assoc 222:1559-1564, 2003.
31. Greenacre CB, Takle G,Schumacher JP et al: Comparative antinociception of
morphine, butorphanol, and buprenorphine versus saline in the green iguana,
Iguana iguana, using electrostimulation,/ Herp Med Surg 16:88-92,2006.
32. Wellehan FX, Gunkel CI, Kledzik D et al: Use of a nerve locator to facilitate
administration of mandibular nerve blocks in crocodilians, / Zoo Wildl Med
37:405-408,2006.
33. Liu PL, Feldman HS, Giasi R et al: Comparative CNS toxicity of lidocaine,
etidocaine, bupivacaine, and tetracaine in awake dogs following rapid
intravenous administration, Anesth Analg 62:375-379, 1983.
34. Custer RS, Bush M: Physiologic and acid-base measures of gopher snakes
during ketamine or halothane-nitrous oxide anesthesia, J Am Vet Med Assoc
177:870-874、1980.
35. Schumacher J, Lillywhite HB, Norman WM et al: Effects of ketamine HCl on
cardiopulmonary function in snakes, Copeiα pp 395-400, 1997.
36. Sleeman JM, Gaynor I: Sedative and cardiopulmonary effects of
medetomidine and reversal with atipamezole in desert tortoises (Gopherus
agassizii),J Zoo Wildl Med 31:28-35,2000.
37. Dennis PM, Heard DJ: Cardiopulmonary effects of a medetomidine-
ketamine combination administered intravenously in gopher tortoises,∫Am
Vet Med Assoc 220:1516-1519, 2002.
38. Bennett RA: Reptile anesthesia, Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 7:30-40,1998
39. Greer LL, Jenne KJ, Diggs HE: Medetomidine-ketamine anesthesia in red-
eared slider turtles (Trachermys scripta elegans), Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci
40:9-11,2001.
40. Chittick EJ, Stamper MA, Beasley JF, et al: Medetomidine, ketamine, and
sevoflurane for anesthesia of injured loggerhead sea turtles: 13 cases (1996-
2000), f Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1019-1025,2002.
41. Lock BA, Heard DJ, Dennis P: Preliminary evaluation of medetomidine/ket-
amine combinations for immobilization and reversal with atipamezole in
three tortoise species,Bull Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet 8:6-9, 1998.
42. Funk R: Reptile formulary. In Mader D, editor: Reptile medicine and surgery.
ed 2, St Louis, 2006,Saunders Elsevier.
26
CLINICAL APPROACH
TO ANALGESIA IN
FERRETS AND RABBITS
MATTHEWIOHNSTON
ver the past 10 to 15 years, the standard of care for treatment of
small and exotic mammals has been steadily increasing. During
this same period, there has been a growing surge of interest
and research in the field of veterinary pain management. Unfortunately,
however, only a limited number of publications relate to analgesia in pet
small mammals such as rabbits and ferrets. Most of the literature dealing
with pain in rabbits and ferrets relates to these animals as laboratory
specimens, and focus on pets has been mostly overlooked. No doubt,
however, rabbit and ferret ownership continues to increase, and it follows
that more and more often, veterinarians are being asked to provide these
animals with the same quality of care given to more traditional pets.
Several excellent reviews have been written on analgesia in small
mammals,l-3 but none of these reviews focus especially on rabbits and
ferrets, and none are written from the standpoint of these animals as pet
species. The goal ofthis chapter isto focus on a practical, clinical approach
because of the shortage of published studies relating to analgesia in these
two species, the author is drawing from his own clinical experience and
extrapolating from what is known in other species. Whenever possible,
reference is made to published information.
RECOGNITION OF PAIN
In some circumstances, it is not difficult to recognize when a rabbit or ferret
is in pain. Stimuli that cause pain in other animals such as surgery or tissue
trauma should be assumed also to cause pain in these species. Though
299-335,2005
494
CHAPTER 26 · Clinical Approach to Analgesia in Ferrets and Rabbits
495
this concept seems simple, in a survey of British veterinarians published
in 1999, only 22% of veterinarians administered some form of analgesia
perioperatively to small mammals. Additionally in this survey, veterinary
surgeons were more likely to administer analgesics torabbits than to ferrets.4
Though surgical pain should be easy to identify, some stimuli that cause pain
in ferrets and rabbits are more difficult to recognize, and an understanding
Stimuli that are known to cause pain in other species should be
assumed to also cause pain in ferrets and rabbits.
Ferrets and rabbits could not be any more different from a physiological
and behavioral standpoint. Ferrets are strict carnivores and predators that
generally have a boisterous and gregarious demeanor, even when in an
unfamiliar environment such as a veterinary hospital. Rabbits, however,
are strictly herbivorous prey animals that are generally quiet and reserved
and can be anxious when in unfamiliar territory. Observations of normal
ferrets and rabbits help the practitioner gain insight into behaviors
associated with pain. Some behaviors are not specific for pain but could
be associated with an underlying disease process, so the patient's entire
clinical picture should be taken into account when assessing pain.
Painful ferrets may prefer to stay curled into a ball and exhibit aggressive
biting behavior or teeth-bearing when disturbed. Additionally, ferrets with
visceral pain may have a decreased appetite and exhibit bruxism when
presented with food. A hunched abdominal posture as seen in Fig. 26-1
is not adequate. Uncomfortable ferrets may shiver despite a normal body
temperature. Other signs of pain in ferrets include a bristle tail, when the fur
when handled; lameness; and general disinterest in the surroundings.
Signs of pain in ferrets include the following:
Immobility
Bruxism
·Shivering
·“Botle brush" tail
         e  
are normally grazing animals that eat continuously, and when painful, this
grazing behavior ceases. Painful rabbits also grind their teeth, especially
when visceral or dental pain is present. Though most painful rabbits choose
to sit motionless in a far corner of a cage, some rabbits may have fits of rapid
496
PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
FIG. 26-1. Exhibition of abdominal pain in a ferret following laparotomy for a left
adrenalectomy. Note the hunched posture and tucked abdomen characteristic of
this species when experiencing moderate to severe abdominal pain.
and uncontrolled locomotion whien handled. Painful rabbits may vocalize or
exhibit a decreased respiratory rate characterized by a pronounced nasal flare
and deep breathing pattern. Rabbits normally have a very rapid respiratory
 pattern characterized by short, shallow breaths. The painful rabbit may
appear unkempt because of a lack of grooming behavior and may avoid
Tu ss ue odid sn i i ii si pu si uo dn ua
discharge are sometimes present in rabbits that are in severe acute pain.
Signs ofpaininrabbits include thefollowing
·Anorexia
Bruxism
·Nasal flaring
●Immobility
ACUTE AND CHRONIC PAIN
As is true in most traditional pets, in general, it is easier to recognize the
signs of acute pain in ferrets and rabbits. However, besides surgical and
traumatic pain, there are several medical conditions that lead to acute
CHAPTER26·ClinicalApproach toAnalgesia inFerrets andRabbits
497
pain that are often overlooked. Analgesic management should be part
For example, otitis interna is an acute infectious/inflammatory medical
condition that is common in rabbits. This condition is likely painful
based on the degree and extent of inflammation that is present within
the ears, as well as the orthopedic postural abnormalities that result from
the severe torticollis; furthermore, most rabbits with the condition are
anorectic. However, many practitioners skip pain management in the
treatment of this condition. At our hospital, we have found that rabbits
with this condition benefit clinically from the administration of analgesic
drugs, specifically nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs. In rabbits,
ileus leads to gastric and cecal dilation, which activates nociceptive
fibers associated with the stretch receptors in the gastrointestinal tract.
A similar pain pathophysiology occurs in ferrets with gastrointestinal
foreign bodies or trichobezoars. Both conditions lead to acute pain,
but in many instances, analgesia is not part of the veterinarian's initial
treatment regimen. Experimentally in rabbits, several opioids were shown
to decrease painful behaviors following colorectal distention, suggesting
that this class of drugs may be useful for managing pain during these
clinical presentations. Clinically, at our hospital, we have found that
constant rate infusions of butorphanol (rabbits) or fentanyl (ferrets) can
reduce the outward signs of pain associated with these gastrointestinal
problems.
Conditions that lead to chronic pain are often harder to recognize in
ferrets and rabbits.A thorough history from the caretaker that suggests
changes in behavior may hint at chronically painful conditions. Neoplasia,
arthritis, and dental problems are three common causes of chronic pain
in ferrets and rabbits. Though some of these conditions cannot be cured,
the quality of life of the pet can be greatly increased when analgesia is used
to help manage these conditions. Often, simple corrections of husbandry
can lead to alleviation of the pain, and pharmacologic intervention is
not always necessary. For example, geriatric rabbits with stifle and
coxofemoral arthritis may benefit from a heavily bedded cage, whereas
ferrets with chronic periodontitis may be kept comfortable by feeding of
a softened food.
PREVENTIONOFPAIN
Several modalities may help prevent the cascade of factors that lead to
pain. Gentle surgical technique leads to a reduction in inflammation and
498PART FOUR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
the central nervous system when the animal is anesthetized. However,
these noxious stimuli lead to central nervous system changes that are
exhibited as painful behaviors upon recovery from anesthesia.6
Known in humans and assumed to be true in animals is that memory
of a painful stimulus correlates strongly with the maximal intensity of
pain. Therefore, if therapy can intervene and prevent central stimulation,
     s       
preemptive analgesia, or administration of antinociceptive drugs before
the noxious stimulus in order to improve postoperative analgesia.6
Preemptive analgesia should be a part of the anesthetic regimen for
all rabbits and ferrets undergoing procedures that may lead to pain
postoperatively.
Preemptive analgesia such as opioid premedicants and preincisional
of reducing or blocking the sensation of pain, making for a more
ANALGESICAGENTS AND THEIR
APPLICATIONINFERRETSANDRABBITS
Table 26-1 gives dosage information on drugs discussed in the text.
OPIOIDS
The use of opioid drugs remains a mainstay of analgesic therapy,
especially when facing situations of moderate to severe acute,
postsurgical or traumatic pain. Opioids exert their effects via inhibition
of pain transmission in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, activation of
inhibitory pathways from the brain, inhibition of supraspinal afferent
nerves, and by causing a decrease in the release of neurotransmitters ir
the spinal cord.7 Some examples of opioids commonly used in ferrets and
rabbits are butorphanol, buprenorphine, morphine, hydromorphone,
oxymorphone, and fentanyl.
The beneficial analgesic effects of opioids in ferrets and rabbits far
outweigh the potential for side effects. Side effects can be minimized
infusions.
Some practitioners have been wary of using this class of drugs because
of its potential for adverse side effects such as sedation, respiratory
depression, and ileus. However, the beneficial analgesic properties of
CHAPTER 26·Clinical Approach to Analgesia in Ferrets and Rabbits
499
Doses of Analgesic Drugs for Ferrets
TABLE 26-1
and Rabbits
Drug
Ferret
Rabbit
 Butorphanol
0.1 -0.4 mg/kg q2-4h N, IM, or SC
0.5 mg/kg q2-4h IV or SC
0.1 -0.2 mg/kg per hour Iv CRI*
 0.1-0.3 mg/kg per hour
 CRl*
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.03 mg/kg q6-10h Iv, SC,
0.01-0.05 mg/kg
 or transmucosallyt
q6-10h IV or SC
Morphine
0.2-2 mg/kg IM single dose
0.5-5 mg/kg IM single
preoperatively
dose preoperatively
 0.1 mg/kg epidurally
0.1 mg/kg epidurally
Hydromorphone
0.1 -0.2 mg/kg Iv, IM, or SC
0.05-0.2 mg/kg V, IM, or 
q6-8h
SC q6-8h
0.005-0.015 mg/kg per hour
IV CRI
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.2 mg/kg IV, IM or SC q6-8h 
0.05-0.2 mg/kg v, IM or
SC q6-8h
Fentanyl
20-30 μg/kg per hour IV CRl* during
20-30 μg/kg per hour
anesthesia to reduce volatile
V CRI*during
inhalant concentrations
anesthesia to reduce
1-4 μg/kg per hour Iv cRI* for
volatile inhalant
analgesia
concentrations+
1-4 μg/kg per hour Iv
CRI* for analgesiat
25 μg/h transcutaneous
patcht
Meloxicam
0.1-0.2 mg/kg SC or P0 q24h
0.1-0.5 mg/kg SC or PO
q12-24h
Lidocaine
<2 mg/kg SC
<2 mg/kg SC
4.4 mg/kg epidurally
Bupivacaine
<1.5 mg/kg SC
<1.5 mg/kg SC
1.1 mg/kg epidurally
Ketamine
 0.5 mg/kg IV before surgery
0.5 mg/kg IV before
(analgesic)
10 μ/kg per minute IV CRr during 
surgery
surgery
10 μg/kg per minute IV
2 μg/kg per minute IV CRIl* for
CRI* during surgery
24 hours postoperativelys
2 μg/kg per minute IV
CRl* for 24 hours
postoperativelys
opewe.
5 mg/kg P0 q1 2h
5-10 mg/kg P0 q12-24h
Note that many of these dosages are based on clinical experience and extrapolation from
other species. The attending veterinarian is responsible to monitor for adverse effects
associated with administration of these drugs.
*CRI, Constant rate infusion.
tAdminister directly into space between molars and buccal mucosa.
+May be associated with ileus; generally not recommended.
SMust be combined with an additional analgesic agent such as an opioid to provide
adequate analgesia.
00G
PART FouR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
these drugs far outweigh the potential adverse effects in the majority of
cases. Ferrets seem especially sensitive to the sedative and respiratory
depressant effects of opioids, so lower dose ranges and careful monitor-
ing shiould be used with this species. The ileus-inducing effects of opioids
are a major concern for practitioners working on rabbits; however, pain-
induced ileus is much more difficult to treat than that brought on by the
administration of opioids, so this concern does not justify their exclusion
from analgesia protocols. Usually the institution of forced feedings and
adequate fluid therapy is enough to counteract the motility-slowing
effects of opioids. In addition, because there are several different opioids
    e e  s n  n 
found.
Opioids are classified as mixed agonist-antagonists, pure agonists,
and pure antagonists. Pure antagonists are not discussed in this chapter
because they are used primarily to reverse the effects of the other two
classes and by themselves have no analgesic properties. Three different
classes of opioid receptors are recognized: μ, K, 8. The μ receptors are
further broken down into μ- 1, μ-2, and μ-3 subgroups. In mammals, μ- 1
and k receptors are the primary receptors responsible for analgesia.7
The most commonly used mixed agonist-antagonists are butorphanol
and buprenorphine. Butorphanol has agonisteffects mainlyat K-receptors
with minimal to no μ effects, hence its classification as a μ-antagonist.
Pharmacokinetic data are available for rabbits for this drug and suggest
that a 0.5-mg/kg dose intravenously results in a half-life of elimination
of just over 1l2 hours. The same dose given subcutaneously resulted in
an elimination half-life of just over 3 hours.8 No pharmacologic studies
are available for this drug in ferrets. Butorphanol is suitable for mild-
moderate pain in rabbits because of its K effects, but the frequency of
administration makes it impractical for many situations. However,
         
this method of administration is especially good at addressing visceral
pain associated with gastrointestinal disorders. In ferrets, butorphanol
is mainly used for its sedative effects because the analgesic effects seem
limited in this species.
Buprenorphine is classified as a partial μ-agonist and K-antagonist.
Buprenorphine binds strongly to the μ-receptors, and because of
this, buprenorphine can be difficult to reverse.' Buprenorphine, like
butorphanol, is suitable for management of mild to moderate pain.
last longer, though no pharmacologic data are available in ferrets or
rabbits. Clinically, analgesic effects seem to persist for 6 to 10 hours
CHAPTER 26 · Clinical Approach to Analgesia in Ferrets and Rabbits
501
in both species following subcutaneous administration. However, one
study demonstrated that behavior attributed to pain in rabbits was
not diminished after administration of buprenorphine.? In addition,
buprenorphine has been shown to have transmucosal absorption in
cats,l° and this route is used with clinical success in ferrets. Because
transmucosal absorption of buprenorphine depends on the pH of the
saliva, it would make sense that animals with similar digestive physiology
(cats and ferrets) should respond similarly, though no studies have been
done to back up this assumption.
Morphine is considered the prototype opioid to which all other opioids
are compared. Morphine has the added benefit of being inexpensive,
hence its use as the primary opioid in most veterinary practices.7 Because
of its rather large array of side effects, especially respiratory depression
in ferrets and induction of ileus in rabbits, repeated systemic dosing of
morphine is rarely performed. Morphine is used commonly as a one-time
premedication before noxious stimulus to provide preemptive analgesia.
However, epidurally administered morphine can be an excellent analgesic
technique for abdominal and hind limb procedures in both species. In
ferrets and rabbits, epidural or spinal morphine administration is known
Formore complete
analgesia, a local anesthetic such as lidocaine or bupivacaine may be
combined with the morphine and administered epidurally. The analgesic
effects of epidurally administered morphine last approximately 12 to 24
hours, and the adverse effects noted before are virtually eliminated.
The procedure for lumbosacral epidural puncture in ferrets and
rabbits is similar to that described for dogs and cats,13 except that there
Landmarks used for lumbosacral epidural puncture in both species are
the wings of the ileum and the dorsal prominence of the first sacral
vertebra. The three landmarks form a triangle, and the lumbosacral space
is in the center of this triangle, directly on midline. Epidural puncture
can be performed with the ferret or rabbit in ventral recumbency or in
lateral recumbency. In both positions the coxofemoral and lumbosacral
joints should be hyperflexed to help open up the space (Fig. 26-2). It
should be noted that in rabbits, the spinal cord continues caudally into
the sacral vertebrae, so the potential for accidental spinal puncture during
in the hub of the needle during epidural puncture, half of the volume of
drug should be administered because the drug will be confined to the
subarachnoid space and may distribute further cranially.
 o  s s an oo n od
discussed together. Currently, hydromorphone is significantly less
502
PART FoUR •Acute and Chronic Pain Management
FlG. 26-2. Epidural injection in a ferret. Note the positioning with the hind
of thefirstsacralvertebra.
expensive than oxymorphone and so is used more frequently in veteri-
nary practice. The analgesic effects of both drugs are similar to morphine,
but both have the advantage of decreased adverse side effects.7 Both
drugs have been used extensively by the author in ferrets and rabbits,
with minimal adverse side effects. No data are available for either drug
in either species short of anecdotal clinical reports. Hydromorphone
and oxymorphone can be used as premedications to provide preemptive
analgesia, postoperatively to manage moderate to severe pain, or as
primary analgesics following trauma or painful medical conditions.
In ferrets, both drugs cause profound sedation, making assessment of
their analgesic properties difficult. In ferrets and rabbits, subcutaneous
a   o so ie d  ss 
the sedative effects of the hydromorphone seem attenuated when it is
used as an intravenous CRI along with ketamine.
Fentanyl is a very short-acting pure μ-agonist with analgesic effects similar
to morphine. The effects of fentanyl last less than 30 minutes after a single
intra venous injection.7 Fentanyl is used commonly in ferrets intraoperatively
as a CRI to decrease volatile inhalant anesthetic concentrations and as a
CRI to provide analgesia for moderate to severe pain. A fentanyl CRI is the
most commonly used analgesic modality for ferrets in the immediate
postoperative period at our hospital. Fentanyl is also available as a
transdermal patch, the use of which has been evaluated in rabbits. Though
CHAPTER 26 + Clinical Approach to Analgesia in Ferrets and Rabbits
E09
this study reported therapeutic blood concentration using a 25-μg/h patch
in rabbits, it also reported a loss in body weight of the fentanyl-treated
rabbits.l5 This observation correlates with the author's experience with
fentanyl in rabbits, whether administered transcutaneously or intravenously.
Rabbits administered fentanyl seem to have a severely decreased appetite,
and management of ileus associated with fentanyl can be diffcult. For this
reason, fentanyl is used sparingly in rabbits at our hospital.
NONSTEROIDALANTIINFLAMMATORYDRUGS
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as a class share
common therapeutic actions, including antinflammatory, analgesic,
and antipyretic effects. This discussion focuses on the analgesic effects.
NSAIDs are the most commonly used analgesic drugs in veterinary
medicine, owing to the fact that they are effective for acute and chronic
pain and have few side effects. NSAIDs exert their analgesic effects via
inhibition of the cyclooxygenase enzyme, which thereby decreases tissue
inflammation.l6 NSAIDs are contraindicated in ferrets or rabbits that are
pregnant, have hepatic or renal dysfunction, are in shock or have other
conditions limiting perfusion, or have known gastrointestinal ulceration.
Many NSAIDs have been used in rabbits and ferrets throughout
the past 10 to 15 years, but by far the most commonly used NSAID
today in these animals is meloxicam. The increased use of meloxicam
in ferrets and rabbits is primarily because of its relative safety,
ease of administration, and apparent effectiveness. Meloxicam is a
cyclooxygenase-2-selective NSAID, which means that clinically its
side effects are minimal, though usually gastrointestinal when seen.
Meloxicam is available as a palatable liquid 1.5-mg/ml solution
(Metacam, Boehringer Ingelheim, St. Joseph, Missouri) that is readily
accepted by ferrets and rabbits. Though caution should be used with
long-term administration of NSAIDs in ferrets, owing to their apparent
sensitivity to certain NSAIDs,17 it appears that meloxicam is safe to use
for short-term administration. Any ferret or rabbit receiving a long-term
NSAID regimen should have plasma liver enzymes, blood urea nitrogen,
and creatinine monitored periodically to ensure that toxicosis is not
occurring. Rabbits seem to tolerate meloxicam especially and NSAIDs
generally very well, with minimal adverse effects. Meloxicam has been
used in numerous rabbits with chronic painful conditions (dental root
overgrowth, arthritis, neoplasia) for long periods at doses higher than
that for dogs with apparent clinical efficacy and no changes in plasma
biochemistry values or gastrointestinal signs. It is always prudent to use
the lowest possible clinically effective dose, however, until further studies
504
PARTFOuR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
on safety and efficacy are performed. One clinical study involving
meloxicam in rabbits was performed to assess the isoflurane-sparing
effects of meloxicam in rabbits, and the results of this study showed
that when used alone, meloxicam was not successful in reducing the
minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane. However, a meloxicam-
butorphanol combination had greater isoflurane-sparing effects than
butorphanol alone, suggesting that meloxicam indeed has analgesic
effects in rabbits.l8 A second study looked at single dose and repeated-
dose pharmacokinetics of oral meloxicam administration in rabbits. This
study concluded that a dose of greater than 0.3 mg/kg given once daily
d  e  s d o    
This latter study supports the higher dose regimen recommended in
Table 26-1.
(NSAlD) in ferrets and rabbits. Rabbits seem particularly resistant to
any of the side effects of NSAIDs. Monitoring of gastrointestinal health
and for renal and hepatic parameters should be performed on any ferret
or rabbit receiving NSAID therapy long term.
LOCALANESTHETICS
Local anesthetics such as lidocaine and bupivacaine are also commonly
used in veterinary practice. Local anesthetics work to provide regional
anesthesia by reversibly blocking the transmission of nociceptive
topically, via direct infiltration into soft tissue containing nerve endings,
intraarticularly (not practical in ferrets or rabbits), intravenously, or
epidurally.20 Care must be taken when using these drugs in small patients
such as rabbits or ferrets to avoid reaching toxic drug concentrations.
When injecting subcutaneously, always aspirate back on the syringe to
ensure that the drugis not being accidentally administered intravenously.
Practically, for bupivacaine and lidocaine, use less than 1.5 and 2 mg/kg,
respectively, of drug to avoid accidental toxicosis. When used epidurally,
bupivacaine may lead to motor weakness in the hind limbs for up to 12
hours after injection. This motor weakness can be agitating to rabbits
and may lead to increased morbidity postoperatively. For this reason,
our hospital uses bupivacaine epidurally in ferrets only. One of the best
uses of local anesthetics is as a line block before surgical incisions. For
abdominal procedures, a 2/-inch spinal needle with the trocar removed
is used to infltrate the subcutaneous tissue with lidocaine before incision.
Care should be taken not to puncture the abdominal wall and viscera
accidentally when performing this technique.
CHAPTER 26 · Clinical Approach to Analgesia in Ferrets and Rabbits
505
KETAMINE
Ketamine is known primarily for its sedative properties. Ketamine is
used frequently in ferrets and rabbits as a premedication and has recently
been used to augment analgesia by administration of a microdose CRI
intraoperatively and postoperatively. Recently, ketamine has been shown to
act as preemptive analgesic byinhibitingthe N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor in the central nervous system NMDA stimulation has been shown
to increase central nervous system sensitization. Therefore, blockade of this
studies confirm this effect in rabbits or ferrets and that ketamine alone is not
an acceptable analgesic in most instances. However, a ketamine CRI may
allow a lower dosage of an opioid or other analgesic to be administered.
TRAMADOL
Tramadol has recently become popular in veterinary medicine as
           
popularity of tramadol stems from the fact that it is efficacious in certain
circumstances, is not controlled, and is cost-effective. The mechanisms
have opioid-like properties and serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake
inhibition.2l Though evidence of the use of tramadol is limited in clinical
applicability for rabbits22 and is nonexistent for ferrets, tramadol has been
used with variable clinical efficacy in both of these species. Doses have
  s    s o   
One important consideration when administering tramadol to ferrets and
rabbits is its palatability. Tramadol is intensely bitter, and because rabbits
and ferrets generally require medications to be compounded into a liquid
formulation, a strong flavoring agent is necessary to mask this bitter taste.
REFERENCES
1. Flecknell PA: Analgesia of small mammals, Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
Pract 4:47-56, 2001.
2. Flecknell PA: Analgesia in small mammals, Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet
Medicine 7:41-47,1998.
3. Flecknell PA: Pain relief in laboratory animals, Lab Arim 18:147, 1984
4. Lascelles BDX, Capner CA, Waterman-Pearson AE: Current British
veterinary attitudes to perioperative analgesia for cats and small mammals,
Vet Rec 145:601-604, 1999.
5. Borgbjerg FM, Frigast C, Madsen JB et al: The effect of intrathecal opioid-
receptor agonists on visceral noxious stimulation in rabbits, Gastroenterology
110:139-146,1996.
506PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
6. Muir WW: Physiology and pathophysiology of pain. In Gaynor JS, Muir
WW, editors: Handbook of veterinary pain management, St Louis, 2002,
Mosby.
7. Wagner AE: Opioids. In Gaynor JS, Muir WW, editors: Handbook of
veterinary pain management, St Louis, 2002, Mosby.
8. Portnoy LG, Hustead DR: Pharmacokinetics of butorphanol tartrate in
rabbits,Am ∫Vet Res 53:541-543,1992
9. Robinson AJ, Muller WJ, Braid AL et al: The effect of buprenorphine on
the course of disease in laboratory rabbits infected with myxoma virus, Lab
Anim 33:252-257,1999.
10. Robertson SA, Taylor PM, Sear JW: Systemic uptake of buprenorphine by
cats after oral mucosal administration, Vet Rec 152:675-678, 2003.
11. Sladky KK, Horne WA, Goodrowe KL et al: Evaluation of epidural morphine
for postoperative analgesia in ferrets (Mustela putorius furo), Conterp Top
Lab Anim Sci 39:33-38, 2000.
12. Kero P, Thomasson B, Soppi AM: Spinal anaesthesia in the rabbit, Lab Anim
15:347,1981.
13. Gaynor JS, Mama KR: Local and regional anesthetic techniques for
alleviation of perioperative pain. In Gaynor JS, Muir WW,editors: Handbook
of veterinary pain management, St Louis, 2002, Mosby.
14. Greenaway JB, Partlow GD, Gonsholt NL et al: Anatomy ofthe lumbosacral
spinal cord of rabbits, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:27-34, 2001.
15. Foley PL、 Henderson AL、 Bissonette EA et al: Evaluation of fentanyl
response,Comp Med 51:239-244,2001.
16. Budsberg S: Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs. In Gaynor JS, Muir WW,
editors: Handbook of veterinary pain management, St Louis, 2002, Mosby.
17. Richardson JA, Balabuzsko RA: Ibuprofen ingestion in ferrets: 43 cases,
fournal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 11:53-39, 2001.
18. Turner PV, Kerr CL, Healy AJ et al: Effect of meloxicam and butorphanol
on minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in rabbits, Am ∫ Vet Res
67:770-774,2006.
19. Turner PV, Chen HC, Taylor WM: Pharmacokinetics of meloxicam in
 -: d s lo du  as ae s
20. Mama KR: Local anesthetics. In Gaynor JS, Muir WW,editors: Handbook of
veterinary pain management, St Louis, 2002, Mosby.
21. Gaynor JS: Other drugs used to treat pain. In Gaynor JS, Muir WW, editors:
Handbook of veterinary pain management, St Louis, 2002, Mosby.
22. Kicik A, Kadioglu Y, Celebi F: Investigation of the pharmacokinetics and
chromatography-diode array detector method using liquid-liquid extraction,
fChromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed LifeSci 816:203-208,2005.
27
PHYSICAL THERAPY AND
REHABILITATION IN DOGS
DARRYLL.MILLIS
Ahe use of physical modalities in the treatment of acute and chronic
 pain has received little attention. The focus of pain management
has largely relied on the pharmacologic management of pain,
with application of these agents in a number of ways. However, there
are other modalities that appear to be efficacious in treating pain, alone
or in combination with pharmaceuticals. Commonly used physical
therapeutic exercises, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, low-
level laser, massage, pulsed electromagnetic field therapy, static magnet
therapy, and extracorporeal shock wave treatment. Although most ofthese
have their greatest application in the management of chronic pain, such as
osteoarthritis, some modalities are also useful as adjunctive management
of acute pain. This chapter reviews the use of these modalities, evidence
for efficacy, indications, contraindications, and application.
In humans, there is limited but positive evidence that some physical
modalities are effective in managing chronic pain associated with specific
conditions, with the most support for the modality of therapeutic exercise.
Different physical modalities have similar magnitudes of effects on chronic
pain. The effect on pain by various modalities is generally strongest in the
short-term immediately after the intervention, but effects can last as long
as 1 year after treatment. Veterinarians applying physical modalities should
obtain training that includes the risks and precautions for these modalities. If
 practitioners lack training in the use of physical modalities, it is important to
consult with other health care professionals who have specialized training.
CRYOTHERAPY
Cryotherapy is used to reduce inflammation, pain, and edema, which facili-
tates improved mobility. Cryotherapy decreases tissue blood flow by causing
vasoconstriction and reduces fissue metabolism, oxygen use, and muscle
507
809
PART FOuR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
Cryotherapy
Cold aids pain relief. Cryotherapy has effects locally and at the level of the spinal cord
via neurologic and vascular mechanisms.
· Cold raises the activation threshold of tissue nociceptors.
●Nerve cooling also increases the duration of the refractory period, the time when a
nerve cannot be stimulated by a second impulse.
● Cold reduces the nerve conduction velocity of pain nerves. This effect is thought to be
linear until 10° C, when neural transmission is blocked.
● Cold receptors may be overstimulated by cryotherapy, resulting in pain control at the
spinal level by preventing pain transmission to higher centers via the spinal gate control
theory of pain transmission.
· The result is a local anesthetic effect called cold-induced neuropraxia.
spasm. Treatment with ice provides short-term analgesia and minimizes hema-
toma formation. Cryotherapy following contusion reduces the number of
leukocytes adhering to endothelial cells and should therefore reduce edema.
INDICATIONSFORCRYOTHERAPY
Cryotherapy is best applied during the acute inflammatory phase of
tissue healing and after exercise to minimize any inflammatory response.
Cryotherapy is effective in reducing pain, particularly acute postoperative
pain. In addition, cryotherapy is effective in reducing edema when
combined with compression and elevation. Cold also decreases the
metabolic rate of reactions involved in tissue injury and healing. At
joint temperatures of 30° C (86° F) or lower, the activity of cartilage
degrading enzymes—including collagenase, elastase, hyaluronidase, and
proteaseis inhibited.
Precautions and Contraindications for Cryotherapy
·If there is a history of frostbite to the area, further cold application is contraindicated.
nerves because cases of cold-induced nerve palsy of the ulnar and superficial peroneal
nerves have been reported in humans.
● Cold should also not be used in patients with generalized or localized vascular
young or old dogs.
CHAPTER 27·Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation in Dogs
509
APPLICATION OF CRYOTHERAPY
Topical cold treatment decreases the temperature of the skin and
underlying tissues to a depth of 2 to 4 cm. Techniques for cryotherapy
include the application of cold or ice packs, ice bath immersion, and
massage with ice over painful areas or acupoints. Cryokinetics combines
cryotherapy with motion (passive, active-assisted, or active) to facilitate
normal, pain-free movement and to reduce edema through muscle pump
action to return lymphatic fluid to the vascular system. The primary
pain-free exercise as long as the level of exercise remains below levels
that cause further injury.
To prevent frostbite or cold-induced injuries, it is critical to observe
the skin for response to cold. Near the end of a 20-minute treatment,
the skin may normally be erythematous, but pale or white skin is an
indication that cold-induced tissue damage may be occurring. The
range of expected sensations during cryotherapy include an initial
sensation of cold, followed by burn, sting, and ache, and finally a
numb sensation. Because animal patients cannot describe these
sensations, careful observation of the animal's behavioral responses
and skin condition every few minutes during the treatment session is
critical.
Ice Packs
The simplest method of ice application is to wrap a freezer bag
containing crushed ice in a thin damp cloth (such as a pillow case)
and apply it directly over the affected area. Another ice pack may be
made by combining one-third part isopropyl alcohol and two-thirds
part water and placing it in a resealable plastic bag and then in a freezer.
The resulting slush more easily conforms to irregular dog extremities
(Fig. 27-1). A compression wrap to secure the bag to the body results in
more effective tissue cooling. Cold compression units are commercially
available and combine compression with cryotherapy. Cold water
circulates in a fabricated sleeve that is applied to provide compression
to the area. If crushed ice is not available, cold packs may be prepared
by mixing three parts water to one part rubbing alcohol and double
bagging with sealed bags and placing in a freezer. The resulting slush
may then be molded around irregular body parts. To prevent skin
damage, apply a towel or cloth to prevent direct contact ofthe ice pack
 on e  nn  n  s  n 
minutes at a time, inspecting the tissue for its response after the first 5
to 10 minutes. Monitor closely for signs of frostbite.
510
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
FlG. 27-1. An ice pack may be wrapped in a thin towel before placing it on a
dog's limb.
Cold Immersion Baths
Cold immersion results in the greatest decrease in tissue temperature
because it exposes the greatest body surface area to cold. The body part
 n ai an no id se a , an  u psni 
following injury. The analgesia from the immersion allows the animal to
perform cryokinetics with relative ease.
IceMassage
Ice massage is a quick and effective method of applying cryotherapy to
the affected area with the muscle in a position of gentle stretch. Placing
tongue depressors in paper cups flled with water and freezing them is a
to the muscle fibers. The pressure from the ice massage stimulates
mechanoreceptors more than other forms of cryotherapy. This technique
is particularly useful for small, irregular areas. Treatment time is generally
5 to 10 minutes or until the affected area is erythematous and numb.
TREATMENTDURATIONANDFREQUENCY
 as a  pp a g a pe  a
the injury, the area of injury, and the desired outcome. Treatment times
may be cycled to 20 to 45 minutes on, followed by an equal amount of
511
Thermotherapy
Heat therapy may reduce pain.
+Heat causes vasodilation, which increases blood flow. This effect may reduce tissue
ischemia by supplying oxygen and nutrients while simultaneously removing metabolites
that accumulate during tissue damage or exercise.
·Thermoreceptor afferent input may act via the gate control theory of pain control by acting
on the dorsal horn of the spinal cord to block transmission of pain to higher pain centers.
● Heat causes general relaxation of painful muscle spasms.
to nerve endings and muscle spindles. This results in a net inhibition of motor neurons,
which helps to break the pain-spasm-pain cycle.
time off. Practically, cryotherapy is typically administered two to six
minimize reactive swelling and pain.
THERMOTHERAPY
Heat therapy, which can be superficial or deep, is like cryotherapy in that
 a i     s n
thermotherapy increases tissue temperature, blood flow, metabolism,
and connective tissue extensibility, aids muscle relaxation; and reduces
stiffness. Because heat increases circulation to the affected area, there is
some concern that this may worsen inflammation and edema.
INDICATIONS
Heat therapy is indicated for patients with chronic pain, especially pain
due to muscle spasm. Heat is also beneficial for patients where stretching
is indicated to help enhance collagen extensibility.
APPLICATION OFHEAT THERAPY
Superficial thermal therapy may be applied using commercially available
packs containing cornhusks, gel material that can be used for hot or cold
application, or packs containing iron filings (activation of such packs
produced heat for several hours following a chemical reaction resulting
in oxidation; Fig. 27-2). Commercially available wraps may also be used
for heat application by placing heat packs inside the wraps.
512
PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Contraindications and Precautions for Superficia
Heat Applications
●Superficial heat is contraindicated during acute inflammation because it may
eacerbate the inflammatory process, over an area of subcutaneous or cutaneous
hemorrhage, if thrombophlebitis is present, or over mali gnant tissue.
●Superficial heat should be used with caution in patients with poor thermoregulatory
capacity, edema, impaired circulation, or over open wounds.
● A tissue burn may result if the patient is not able to dissipate the heat load via
asodilation or if too much heat (too hot or too long) is applied. Burns can be avoided
by using materials that cool as the treatment progresses, increasing the insulation layer
between the patient and the hot pack, or limiting the initial temperature increase.
● Caution should be used with products generating high-intensity heat (greater than
45° C), such as with Hydrocollator packs or electric heating pads.
●Monitor the skin condition before, during, and after treatment for any adverse effects.
FlG. 27-2. A hot pack applied to a dog.
TREATMENT DURATION AND FREQUENCY
The duration and frequency of thermal treatment depend on the severity
of the injury, the stage of tissue healing, the area of the injured part, and
the desired outcome. Treatment times may be cycled to 30 to 45 minutes
on, followed by an equal amount of time off. Thermal modalities should
be applied to support the goal of pain-free function to obtain the best
results in the shortest time.
CONTRAST THERMOTHERAPY
in cold water followed by immersion in hot water, is commonly used
in rheumatic conditions and regional pain in humans. Contrast baths
induce cyclic vasodilation and vasoconstriction to facilitate flushing
debris and inflammatory mediators from the injured area. However,
some authors do not agree with this proposed mechanism.
Few research studies have been performed regarding the efficacy of
contrast thermotherapy for management of pain, but it is commonly
used for sports injuries. Two well-controlled studies have shown that
contrast thermotherapy has no effect on muscle tissue temperature.
INDICATIONSANDCONTRAINDICATIONS
FORCONTRAST THERMOTHERAPY
Contrast baths are most appropriate during the early phase of tissue
healing, or in cases of chronic edema. Clinically, it may be appropriate
to use contrast baths during the transition from acute to subacute injury
management. Contrast baths are not indicated in the immediate acute
inflammatory phase.
APPLICATION OF CONTRAST BATHS
The body part is immersed in alternating cold and hot baths, in a ratio
anywhere from 4 minutes cold, 1 minute hot near the end of the acute phase
of inflammation to 2 minutes hot, 2 minutes cold in the chronic phase of
injury. This cycle is repeated three to five times for a total of 15 to 30 minutes.
Ifthe injury is relatively acute, the final cycle should be in the cold bath to help
reduce edema formation and the cold-to-hot ratio should be weighted toward
longer times in cold. If contrast baths are used before exercise in subacute or
chronic conditions, then the final cycle should be in the hot bath.
PHYSICAL REHABILITATION
ANDTHERAPEUTICEXERCISES
Active and passive exercise programs have been recommended for
treatment of chronic pain, particularly OA. Reduced activity and
deconditioning lead to decreased muscle mass and strength, loss of
endurance, increased joint stiffness, and loss of cardiovascular fitness.
Exercise treatment in OA is useful to reduce pain and disability. This
is achieved through improvement of muscle strength, stability of joints,
514PART FOuR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
ROM, and aerobic fitness. These functions are often impaired in patients
with OA, presumably contributing to pain and disability. Improving
these functions is assumed to reduce pain and disability.
APPLICATION OFPHYSICALREHABILITATION
A specific exercise program must be developed for each patient that
addresses the patient's impairments and functional needs. Therapeutic
exercise should include stretching and ROM, aerobic conditioning,
muscle strength and endurance training, and correction of gait
abnormalities if possible. Baseline values should be established for
exercise time and intensity. Exercise duration and intensity may then be
increased in a stepwise fashion until aerobic activityis maintained for 25
to 30 minutes per session. Goals should also be set for any strengthening
activities. Although the program should be monitored by the veterinary
team, owners are encouraged to participate in a home exercise program
with their pet. A log of the home exercise program should be maintained
by the owner and reviewed by the veterinary team at regular intervals.
JOINTMOBILITY
The normal ROM should be established as much as possible. Joint
mobility, muscle tightness, and muscle weakness must be addressed to
establish more normal ROM. OA often results in joint stiffness, and
muscles secondarily become stiff and shortened. Ifthis process continues,
there is a cycle of continued weakness, tightness, abnormal movement,
and pain. Treatment consists of ROM and stretching exercises.
PASSIVERANGE OFMOTION
● Treatment should be administered in a quiet and comfortable area,
away from distractions, such as loud noises, other pets, and other
persons that are not helping with the treatment.
● A muzzle should be applied for initial treatments or if the dog is
painful, resistant to treatment, or overly anxious.
· The patient is placed in lateral recumbency with the affected limb up.
Help may be required to restrain the animal and to help keep it quiet and
relaxed. In all forms of ROM activities, the therapist should be comforta
ble and use proper body mechanics to avoid injury to himself or herself.
the limb below the affected joint. Be certain that the entire limb is
supported to avoid any undue stress to the involved joint (Fig. 27-3).
CHAPTER 27·Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation in Dogs
515
FlG. 27-3. Placement of hands for passive range of motion to a dog's stifle.
· Begin by slowly and gently flexing the joint. The other joints of the
limb should be allowed to remain in a neutral position (a position as
if the animal were standing). Try not to move the other joints while
working on the affected joint because some joints may be restricted
by the position of the joints above or below the target joint. Slowly
continue to flex the joint until the patient shows initial signs of
discomfort, such as tensing the limb, moving, vocalizing, turning the
head toward the therapist, or trying to pull away, but do not cause
undue discomfort.
● With the hands maintained in the same positions, slowly extend the
joint. Again, try to keep the other joints in a neutral position and
minimize any movement of the other joints. Slowly continue to extend
the joint until the patient shows initial signs of discomfort.
● Alternatively, a number of joints may be simultaneously placed
through a ROM, a technique sometimes referred to as ROM functional
 patterns. This form of ROM exercise may be appropriate as an animal
nears active use of a limb. Flexing and extending all of the joints of
a limb in a pattern that mimics a normal gait pattern may also be
beneficial for neuromuscular reeducation.
● For most routine conditions, 15 to 20 repetitions, performed 2 to
4 times per day, are adequate. As the ROM returns to normal, the
frequency may be reduced.
● Also important is to maintain normal ROM in the other joints of the
affected limb.
516
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
STRETCHING
Stretching is often combined with ROM exercises to increase flexibility
of tissues. Performance of some low-intensity active exercise is beneficial
before stretchingif possible. Application of superficial heat or therapeutic
ultrasound before stretching may improve tissue extensibility. If the
           
combination of muscles, tendons, skin, and joint capsule should be
considered, and their relative contributions to restricted motion should
be assessed. For example, the target tissue for lengthening a muscle that
is contracted is the muscle belly, not the tendon
● The patient should be in a comfortable position, which is generally in
lateral recumbency, and should be on a padded surface. The patient
should be as relaxed as possible, and in some cases, mild sedation or
tranquilization may be beneficial.
● One hand should stabilize the bone proximal to the joint, and the other
should stabilize the bone distal to the joint. The distal bone should be
moved relative to the proximal bone.
· The affected joint should be slowly placed through one end of a ROM
(usually beginning in flexion) until a restriction to motion is felt. Very
gentle traction may be applied to the joint while slowly stretching to
the point of initial restriction.
● The patient may indicate that it feels mild discomfort, such as turning
the head or mildly tensing the muscles in the affected limb. Under no
circumstances should more severe pain be inflicted, which might be
indicated by vocalizing, trying to move away, or attempting to bite.
●The stretch should be prolonged, ideally for at least 15 seconds. During
the stretch, a conscious effort should be made to try to increase the
joint excursion without increasing the level of discomfort. There
should be no bouncing motions during the stretch.
● Following the stretch at one end of the motion range, the pressure
is slowly released and the opposite end of the ROM should be
stretched.
● Each muscle group should be stretched three to five times in a session
before other activities begin.
 The therapist should be patient and not try to achieve full ROM in one
or two sessions. The ideal daily frequency of stretching is unknown for
dogs. In general, two to four sessions per day may initially be required,
with the frequency decreased as normal ROM and tissue extensibility
improve. The process must be applied consistently and regularly to
obtain good results, and it may take 2 to 3 weeks to see noticeable
improvement.
ACTIVERANGE OFMOTION
More active ROM exercises may be initiated to encourage voluntary
joint motion through a wider range than is typically achieved with only
walking or trotting. Joint ROM is limited during normal walking and
trotting, so the joints do not go through a complete normal ROM. If
that encourage a more complete ROM.
but walking in water maintains relatively normal active joint extension
while increasing joint flexion, resulting in greater overall joint ROM.
● Other activities that may be performed include walking in snow, sa nd,
or tall grass, and crawling through a play tunnel.
● Climbing stairs may increase joint excursion while also increasing
strength.
· Walking over cavaletti rails is an excellent method of achieving normal
limb extension for walking while increasing joint flexion and overall
ROM of the elbow, stifle, and tarsal joints as the dog negotiates the
rails. In addition, the rails may be raised or lowered to encourage
increased or decreased joint flexion, based on the needs of the
individual patient.
THERAPEUTICEXERCISES
Strength and endurance improve if the level of exercise provides stress
to tissues so that adaptation occurs while avoiding excessive loading
that may exacerbate structural weaknesses. In general, endurance,
cardiovascular fitness, and obesity are initially addressed through
endurance activities. It is critical to be certain that joints are stable before
exercises on a limb with a cranial cruciate ligament rupture hastens the
development of OA.
The level of activities is modified by first increasing the frequency of the
activity, with adequate rest periods between sessions.
● Owners should be warned that patients may initially experience
increased soreness, discomfort, and fatigue for the first week or two as
a result of muscle soreness, but care should be taken to be certain that
joint inflammation is not exacerbated.
● After appropriate adaptation and conditioning have occurred at this
level of activity, the length of the activities may be increased to provide
further challenges.
518
PART FoUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
· Finaly, additional strength and conditioning may be achieved by
Dailyexercise is preferableto exercise only once or twice a week. Caution
should be used early in the exercise period to avoid overuse injuries and pain
affer exercise. In general, patients should initiate a conservative exercise
program. Depending on the level of the disability and deconditioning,
    s       sd  
exacerbated at this level, exercise may be increased to three periods per day
the next week, and four periods per day the following week, being certain
that lameness and pain do not increase.
Chronic pain is not a static condition, and exercise periods must
adapt to occasional“bad days."The level ofactivity should be decreased
on days of worsened pain or lameness because forced exercise may
exacerbate the inflammatory process in arthritic joints. When the
degree of pain and lameness return to previous levels, the activity may
be increased more gradually. The next step should be to increase the
length of the walks.
A reasonable rule of thumb is to increase the length of activity by 10%
to 15% per week, being vigilant for any exacerbation of pain or lameness;
if pain or lameness is noted, the level of activity is decreased by 50% until
the patient returns to baseline, and then the level of activity is increased
more gradually.
 Controlled leash walking, walking on a treadmill, jogging, swimming, and
going up and down stairs or ramp inclines are excellent low-impact exercises.
The length of the exercise should be titrated so there is no increased pain
after activity. Also, it is better in the early phases of training to provide three
bursts of activity helps avoid acute inflammation of arthritic joints.
SlowWaiks
● Slow leash walks are perhaps the most important therapeutic exercise
for patients with debilitating chronic diseases. These walks are also
frequently performed incorrectly.
● Leash walks must be performed very slowly to allow the dog to bear
weight without undue stress on painful joints.
Leash walks must be performed for the speed of the dog, not the handler.
● Leash walks are performed for only 5 minutes, two or three times daily
to begin. If the lameness or limb use is not worse after the first couple
of days, the length and time of the walks may be gradually increased by
1 to 3 minutes per session every few days.
● Dogs may be walked up and down inclines, hills, or ramps to add more
challenges and to encourage muscular and cardiovascular fitness.
519
TreadmillWalking
conditions, such as the pain of hip extension in dogs with hip dysplasia or
the pain of stifle extension following repair of a cranial cruciate ligament.
●Most dogs trained to leash readily take to treadmill walking.
● Many treadmills are available, and some models for humans may be
adapted for canine use.
●A harness to provide support and prevent falls, side walls to prevent step-
ping off the treadmill, variable speed of the treadmill, a timer, and the abi-
lity to change the incline angle are useful features for canine treadmills.
● Do not face the treadmill toward a wall; have it face down a hallway or
toward the middle of a room.
● One person may be in front of the dog to encourage it or provide treats.
● One person may stand over the dog to help keep it moving straight.
● A sling may be used to help support especially weak dogs.
● The treadmill may be angled up or down to reduce or increase stress
on the forelimbs or rear limbs.
· Joint motion is similar between walking on a treadmill and normal
walking over ground, but the treadmill provides some active assistance
for movement of painful joints. In addition, the stance time of weight
bearing is greater on a treadmill.
Ramp Waiking and Stair Climbing
● Ramp walking and stair climbing are useful to improve power in rear
limb extensors.
● The dog may begin ramp walking or stair climbing if the dog is consis-
tently using the limb at a walk with decreasing lameness over time.
● Exercises must begin slowly to encourage proper use of rear limbs. The
dog should step up with each limb rather than skipping up steps or
jumping up steps by using both rear limbs ("bunny hopping"; Fig. 27-4)
● This therapy is best started with ramp walking, then low, gradually
rising steps, and progressing to increasingly steeper steps.
● Begin with ramp walking for 5 minutes, then five to seven steps, and
increase to two to four flights once to three times daily.
Jogging
● Jogging may be initiated in many cases in dogs that are walking on the
limb with minimal lameness and pain.
●Begin jogging slowly to improve muscle strength and cardiovascular
fitness 2 to 3 minutes two or three times daily, and increase up to 20
minutes two to four times daily.
520
 PART FouR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
FlG. 27-4. Dogs may begin slowly walking up low-rise stairs in the early phases
the dog is increasingly less lame with lower-level rehabilitation activities such as
leash walking.
● Be certain that lameness is not worse after jogging. If so, the dog
should rest for several days and receive antinflammatory medication;
and when jogging is reinitiated, it should be at slower speeds and for
less time.
Sd ou ae an  na ia r s n o  op  s
jogging on flat surfaces.
Sit-to-StandExercises
● Sit-to-stand exercises help to strengthen hip and stifle extensors
without causing extension of the hip, stifle, and hock more than is
achieved with walking. The exercises may be beneficial for dogs with
hip dysplasia, in which full extension of the hips is painful.
Sit-to-stand exercises should be combined with training, occasionally
using a low-calorie treat.
● It may be easier to back the dog into a corner, with the affected leg
against a wall. This encourages the dog to push up evenly with both
rear limbs when rising, and not pushing up with a good leg while
pushing the affected leg out away from the body (Fig. 27-5).
· The handler should concentrate on having the dog sit and stand
correctly, with both rear limbs flexing equally while sitting, and
pushing off evenly with both rear limbs to stand.
● Start with 5 to 10 repetitions once or twice daily and work up to 15
repetitions 3 to 4 times daily.
CHAPTER 27·Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation in Dogs
521
FlG. 27-5. Proper positioning for sit-to-stand exercises.
Wheelbarrowing
● Wheelbarrowing exercises are designed to improve use ofthe forelimbs
and strengthening of the weight-bearing muscles.
·The rear limbs are lifted off of the ground, and the dog is moved
forward. Dogs with normal proprioception will move the forelimbs so
that they do not fall.
● Some dogs with weakness of the forelimbs may require support to
 prevent them from collapsing.
● As dogs become stronger and endurance improves, dogs may be
wheelbarrowed up and down inclines for greater effect.
Dancing Exercises
● Dancing exercises are designed to improve use and strength of the rear
limbs.
 o      n r   h  
affected limb, it is recommended to apply a muzzle to the dog.
● The forelimbs are lifted off the ground, and the dog is moved forward
or backward. Dogs with normal proprioception will move the limbs so
that they do not fall.
· Most dogs dance forward, but others may stretch until they are nearly
on the ground. In these situations, the handler should get behind the
dog and place the arms under axillary region of the dog to support it
and walk forward.
522
 PART FouR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
FlG. 27-6. Walking over cavaletti rails increases active flexion of the elbow,
stifle, and tarsal joints.
Forward dancing results in less extension of the hip joint and may
be beneficial for dogs with painful hips. Backward dancing results in a
more vertical position of the dog, and hip joint extension is much greater
compared with forward dancing.
and down inclines for greater effect
Cavaletti Rails
● Cavaletti rails are raised rails or poles that are spaced apart on the
 ground. In some cases a ladder that is laying on the ground may act as
cavaletti rails (Fig. 27-6).
Cavaletti rails are useful to help with increasing stride length, limb use,
and active ROM of joints.
● The height of the rails may be raised to encourage greater active flexion
and extension of the elbow, stifle, and tarsal joints, but care should be
taken to prevent jumping over the rails.
· The rails are spaced equally or with varying widths. Initially, it is a
good idea to space the rails equally, somewhat less than the normal
stride length of the patient. As the animal improves, the rails may be
  e a n      e 
length.
CHAPTER 27·Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation in Dogs
523
PoleWeaving
· Weaving back and forth between vertical poles is an exercise that
is useful for encouraging lateral flexion of the spinal column,
use of limbs and strengthening of muscles in preparation for more
challenging exercises, such as turning sharply while running.
·A series of vertical poles is placed in a straight line.
· The distance between the poles should be less than the length of the
dog to encourage lateral bending of the spinal column and weight
shifting-
MUSCLESTRENGTHENINGACTIVITIES
Exercises that concentrate on strengthening muscles are designed to
improve power and speed. These exercises include pulling or carrying
weights, working against elastic bands, playing ball, and running for
short distances at high speed.
Pulling or Carrying Weights
● Pulling or carrying weight is a method of increasing the force that
muscles must use and encourages muscle strengthening. These
exercises are similar to weight lifting in humans.
· Many harnesses are available to pull sleds or carts. The harnesses
should be well-designed and padded and should fit the patient very
well to avoid problems with pressure sores. Dogs may pull various
weights, depending on the stage of recovery and the dog's strength.
● The position of the dog's head and neck is important when pulling
weight. If strengthening of the forelimb muscles is desired, the dog's
head should be lower than the back to encourage transfer of weight to
forelimbs to allow pulling; if strengthening of the rear limb muscles is
desired, the dog's head should be higher than the back to encourage
transfer of weight to the rear limbs to allow the animal to drive off of
the rear limbs for pulling weight.
● Backpacks are also available, and various weights may be placed in the
backpack to allow strengthening of multiple muscle groups.
● Strap-on leg weights may be used to help strengthen flexor muscles
during gait. Initially, the weights should be placed relatively proximal
on the limb to reduce the muscle force and stress on joints during
the early rehabilitation period. As strength and stamina improve, the
weights may be moved further distally to provide more challenges. In
general, 0.25-kg, 0.5-kg, 1-kg, and 2-kg weights may be used for small,
medium, large, and very large dogs, respectively.
524
 PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
FlG. 27-7. Elastic bands may be placed on a dog's limb while walking on a
treadmill to provide resistance while walking.
Elastic Bands
· Various stiffnesses of elastic bands are available that may be fastened
to a dog's limb to provide resistance while walking.
+Itis important that the resistance not be so great that the normal gait is
hindered; rather, the therapist should provide mild resistance to allow
the dog to walk or jog normally.
● The band should be held parallel and close to the ground to allow
normal joint flexion and extension.
●Elastic bands may also be used with treadmill walking (Fig. 27-7).
Controlled Ball Playing
● Controlled ball playing is a fun activity for dogs and their owners and is
an excellent method to establish strength and speed. However, control
and gradual introduction of ball playing are essential to avoid reinjury.
● Begin ball playing on a relatively short leash or in an enclosed kennel or
● Progress to ball playing in an enclosed area, such as a small dog run or
room.
● As the animal nears full return to function, activity on a long leash is
instituted, and if there are no problems, off-leash activity is introduced
in a safe environment.
Swimming and walking in water are some of the best activities for
dogs with chronic OA (Fig. 27-8). The buoyancy of water is significant
525
FlG. 27-8. Walking on an underwater treadmill provides buoyancy for painful
joints and results in increased active joint movement compared with walking over
ground.
and limits the impact on the joint while promoting muscle strength
and tone and joint motion. Training in an underwater treadmill may
increase peak weight bearing forces by 5% to 15%, which is comparable
to achievements obtained using medication in many patients.
Following exercise, a 10-minute warm-down period allows muscles to
cool down. A slower-paced walk may be initiated for 5 minutes, followed
by ROM and stretching exercises. A cooldown massage may help decrease
pain, swelling, and muscle spasms. Finally, cryotherapy may be applied to
painful areas for 15 to 20 minutes to control postexercise inflammation.
TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE
STIMULATION
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is an inexpensive,
safe, noninvasive modality with few side effects that can be used to treat
a variety of painful conditions. The clinical application of TENS involves
the delivery of an electrical current, usually from a small battery-operated
device, to the skin by surface electrodes. A variety of stimulators are available
with a wide range of stimulation parameters to choose from, including
frequency, intensity, pulse duration, and electrode placement sites.
526
PART FoUR ·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation
· Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) provides analgesia by several
potential mechanisms of action.
● Conventional TENS provides peripheral stimulation with electrical impulses that activate
nonnoxious large myelinated afferent Aβ nerve fibers in the skin and inhibit small
unmyelinated “C" fibers within the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
of the spinal cord that regulates the flow of pain signals that are ascending by small-
dameter afferent nerve fibers and descending from higher levels of the brain for central
processing, thus reducing the perception of pain.
● Most devices have a stimulation of approximately 100 Hz, which is thought to be 
comfortable to most persons. Individuals describe a "pins-and-needles" sensation
under the electrodes, resulting in paresthesia.
● Some TENS units produce a more noxious high-intensity stimulus at 2 Hz. This
stimulates small-diameter afferent fibers and results in the release of endogenous
opiates and pain relief by stimulating the descending pain-inhibiting pathway.
· Different frequencies of TENS may act through different neurotransmitter systems.
●Low-frequency TENS analgesia may be mediated by activation of serotonin and
μ-opioid receptors, whereas conventional TENS activates &-opioid receptors. However,
conclusive evidence regarding the more effective method of TENS is lacking. Five
studies comparing conventional TENS and low-frequency TENS found no differences in
pain-reducing effect.
● Pulse duration and stimulus intensity are also factors in providing analgesia. Greater
analgesia has been achieved by increasing the stimulus intensity or pulse duration.
· Electrode placement may also influence the effectiveness of TENS. In general,
electrodes are placed over the painful region.
Three important factors that determine the quality ofTENS application
include (1) the type of device (e.g-, stimulators, electrode type, and
design); (2) the wave form of the device, which is modified by adjusting
the amplitude, rate, and width controls; and (3) the proper location of
electrodes. Although four types of TENS device settings are currently used
      -    
microsecond pulse width, low to moderate intensity) or conventional
TENS stimulators are most commonly used in animals because they are
more comfortable and create less anxiety in small animal patients.
INDICATIONSFORTENS
TENS is a form of neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES). TENS is
used for pain control, primarily in chronic conditions, but there may also
be use for acute conditions. Other forms of NMES are commonly used in
the rehabilitation of patients that have had orthopedic or neurologic injury,
such as fracture repair, cruciate ligament reconstruction, and meniscal
CHAPTER 27·Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation in Dogs
527
Precautions and Contraindications for Transcutaneous
Electrical Nerve Stimulation
● Contraindications include high-intensity stimulation directly over the heart, animals with
pacemakers, animals with seizure disorders, over infected areas or neoplasms, over the
●Precautions include application over areas with impaired sensation; over abdominal, lumbar,
and pelvic regions during pregnancy; over areas of skin irritation or damage, or possible
interference with electronic sensing devices such as electrocardiographic monitors.
cerebrovascular accidents, closed head injuries, spinal cord injuries, or other
neurologic disease involving paralysis or paresis may also benefit from NMES.
NMES has been used to increase joint mobility, decrease joint contracture,
decrease edema, enhance circulation, minimize disuse atrophy, improve
decrease spasticity, diminish pain, and correct gait abnormalities.
APPLICATION OF TENS
In determining whether to use TENS in a patient, the use of other
concurrent methods of pain control should be assessed. Some patients
cannot tolerate medications, and in these cases, TENS may provide an
acceptable alternative. In other patients, the use of TENS may provide
additional pain control.
The hair over the area to which electrical stimulation will be applied
must be clipped to lower impedance. The skin may be cleaned with
alcohol before treatment. Carbon electrodes may be placed over the
d q  sa     e  r  
over the affected area. If four electrodes are used, they are typically
placed in a crossed fashion. Water-soluble electrode gel may be applied
as a coupling agent, and the electrodes may be further secured with
nonadhesive bandage material or Velcro straps.
For TENS application, premodulated electrical stimulation (70 Hz)
is applied to the affected area. In some situations, interferential current
may be applied with four electrodes.
animal and should be reduced if gross movement of the area is noted or if
the animal displays any signs of distress or discomfort including turning
its head in recognition of the stimulus or becoming agitated. Amperage
may be reduced to a level just below that which produces these signs.
Although the optimum time of treatment and the frequency of treatment
528
PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
are unknown, most clinicians believe that TENS should be applied to the
desired area(s) for 30 minutes, three to seven times per week.
Precautions should be taken to avoid injury to the handler and animal.
A muzzle should be applied, and the animal should be placed in lateral
may be necessary if the animal is anxious. It is recommended that
treatment only be given under the supervision of trained personnel.
LOW-LEVELLASER THERAPY
Low-level laser therapy (LLLT) is a light source that consists of pure light
ofa single wavelength and has been recommended for managing chronic
pain, especially in those with chronic OA. The effect is not thermal but is
related to photochemical reactions in the cells.
Until recently, LLLT devices were not widely used in the United States,
but several have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) in recent years. The effectiveness of laser therapy is still unclear, and
the interpretation of studies regarding the efficacy of LLLT is hindered by
specifics regarding thie wavelengthis and dosages of laser.
The results of studies regarding pain management with the use of
laser have been controversial. However, studies performed have resulted
in FDA approval of 635-nm low-level lasers for the management of
chronic, minor pain such as OA and muscle spasms.
Low-Level Laser Therapy
several mechanisms of action have been postulated.
● Laser therapy may have some analgesic effects by blocking pain transmission to the
brain. Some studies have shown changes in the conduction of the radial and median
nerve after low-level laser therapy, but others have shown no effect.
● Laser treatment may also increase the release of endorphins and enkephalins, which
may further provide analgesic benefits
·Laser therapy has been used to stimulate muscle trigger points and acupuncture points,
which may provide pain relief.
● Nociceptive stimulation may be affected. The effects of diode laser irradiation (830 nm,
40 mw, 3 minutes, continuous wave) on peripheral nerves was examined by monitoring
neuronal discharges elicited by application of various stimuli to the hind limb skin of
pinch, cold, and heat stimulation. Injection of a chemical irritant into the hind paw skin
elicited neuronal discharges in the ipsilateral dorsal root, and these discharges were
significantly inhibited or abolished by laser irradiation. These results suggest that laser
irradiation may selectively inhibit nociceptive neuronal activities.
CHAPTER 27·Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation in Dogs
529
Precautions and Contraindications for Low-Level
Laser Therapy
●Protective eye gear should be worn to prevent damage to the retina if the laser shines
into the area.
+Pregnant women should avoid laser treatment.
· Laser should not be applied to open fontanels.
●Do not apply laser directly into the cornea.
·Avoid laser application over tattoos because of the high absorption of laser light by
pigmented areas.
● Do not apply laser over growth plates of immature animals.
●Do not apply laser over photosensitive areas of the skin.
APPLICATION OF LOW-LEVER LASER THERAPY
The area should be clipped because 50% to 99% of the laser light may
be absorbed by hair. Little is known about the transmission of laser light
to deeper tissues in darker dogs, but HeNe laser energy is likely to be
absorbed because of the pigment. Any iodine or povidone-iodine should
be washed off the area to allow greater transmission of light. Drugs, such
as cortisone, that reduce inflammation may have a negative effect on
healing. The therapist should wear protective eye wear because damage
may occur to the retina if the laser shines into the eyes.
The three variables for lasers used for LLLT are (l) the wavelength,
(2) the number of watts or milliwatts, and (3) the number of seconds
to deliver joules of energy. With these factors known, the length of time
needed to hold the laser on a point to deliver the appropriate joules of
energy must be calculated. For example, if a 904-nm laser with a maxi
mum output power of 250 m W is used, it will take 4 seconds to deliver 1 J.
Unfortunately, the optimal wavelengths, intensities, and dosages have not
been adequately studied in animals, and information in humans is diffi
cult to interpret because of different conditions and treatment regimens.
Wavelengths of low-power lasers commonly used are 632.8 nm
(HeNe, gas) in the visible light range, 810 nm (Ga/Al/As, diode), and
904 nm (Ga/As, diode) in the infrared region of the light spectrum.
Other wavelengths are used in surgical settings. The wavelength is the
deeply (630 to 740 nm) are suitable for acupuncture point stimulation
and wound healing but have not proved their clinical efficacy with deep-
seated musculoskeletal conditions. Infrared lasers (750 to 1500 nm)
penetrate more deeply and are used to treat trigger points, ligaments,
joint capsules, and intraarticular structures.
530
PART FOuR·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Power is measured in watts and is often expressed as milliwatts. One
watt is equivalent to 1 J/s. Power density is the power delivered under
the area of the probe. Energy density is the amount of energy, or dose,
per square centimeter of tissue. The greater the power density and higher
the wavelength, the deeper the penetration through tissues. More laser
dosage is not better, however, and overdosing may retard the desired
effect.
The following example illustrates how to calculate the number of
laser energy for a laser delivering 250 mW/s, for a total dose of 1 J:
0.250 W = 1 J/X seconds
(0.250 W)(X seconds) = 1 J
X seconds = 1 J/0.250 W
X= 4 seconds
With this particular laser, it is necessary to hold the laser on one point
for 4 seconds to deliver 1 J of energy. The following doses have been
suggested for treating pain:
Analgesic effect:
Muscle pain: 2 to 4 J/cm2
Joint pain: 4 to 8 J/cm2
Antinflammatory effect:
Acute and subacute: 1 to 6 J/cm?
Chronic: 4 to 8 J/cm2
LLLT is generally administered with a handheld probe, with a small
dde aq  a ias ss s ien on as s i ae a
with the laser probe in contact with the skin, which eliminates reflection
for the skin and minimizes beam divergence, or with the probe not held
in contact (Fig. 27-9). With the noncontact method, it is necessary to hold
the probe perpendicular to the treatment area to minimize wave reflection
B d pde a  s ae a aa  p
areas by administering the calculated dose to each site in a grid fashion
or by slowly moving the probe over the entire surface, being certain to
distribute the energy evenly to each site. In any case, the probe should be
held perpendicular to the skin. A coupling medium is not necessary, as in
ultrasound, because the laser beam is not attenuated by air.
MASSAGE
Massage has been reported to relieve pain, aid relaxation, and promote
a feeling of well-being in humans. In addition to helping to improve
lymphatic drainage, circulation, and tissue movement, soft tissue massage
is also thought to provide symptomatic relief of pain.
531
FlG. 27-9. Application of a low-level laser.
Massage and Pain Relief
Suggested mechanisms of pain relief include the following:
·Relaxation
●Increasing the pain threshold through the release of endorphins and the gate control
theory of pain
· Increase in pain threshold
Massage causes traction at tissue interfaces. Horizontal plexuses lie at interfaces in the
tissues, and gente pulling on these vessels may stimulate the accompanying sympathetic
nerves, which supply the mechanoreceptors. These receptors may be distorted by the mas-
sage, possibly lowering mechanoreceptor sensitivity and reducing pain and tenderness.
The flushing effect of massage on tissue fluids and removal of inflammatory
mediators may increase the speed at which the inflammation resolves in humans with
delayed-onset muscle pain following exercise.
INDICATIONS FOR MASSAGE
Massage may be indicated for dogs having surgery to maintain mobility
and ease pain, after exercise to reduce muscle soreness, in patients with
edema, and in patients with chronic OA to help ease muscle tension.
Precautions and Contraindications for Massage
· Massage is contraindicated in patients with open wounds, unstable fractures, severe
pain, coagulation disorders, infections, or neoplasia
532   PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
APPLICATION OFMASSAGE
● Select a quiet area that is free of interruptions.
● Provide a soft, padded surface for the patient.
Work in a systematic way.
● The therapist should relax and maintain proper body posture.
● Use larger muscles such as the shoulder muscles instead of the hands
to minimize fatigue.
· Massage may be performed to isolated areas or to the entire
limb and body. If the dog has a specific condition, local massage
may be appropriate on a regular basis. General massage helps
with treatment of compensatory conditions and biomechanical
changes.
MASSAGETECHNIQUE
Stroking
· Use good technique to start the treatment.
● Run hands over the dog from neck to tail and down the limbs with
medium pressure.
● This aids relaxation of the dog and allows assessment of tissues; note
muscle tone, any swelling, masses, or temperature differences between
body areas.
Effeurage
● Beginning at a distal area, such as the foot, the hands move proximally,
using medium pressure.
● This helps to move fluids to the lymph nodes and aids drainage.
Petrissage
● Petrissage promotes muscle relaxation, decreases muscle stiffness,
increases blood flow.
● One rolls or kneads the soft tissues (Fig. 27-10).
● Muscle bellies may be lifted and rolled.
Trigger Point Therapy
● Trigger point therapy is used for small areas of spasm felt within a
muscle belly.
● Nodules are located, and ischemic compression is applied using one
or two fingers.
● Compression is held for approximately 20 seconds and released for 10
seconds before reapplying compression.
 Generally, three or four repetitions may be required.
FlG. 27-10. Applying petrissage massage technique to the caudal thigh
muscles of a dog.
STATICMAGNETICFIELD THERAPY
The use of static magnets for medical purposes is relatively common in
humans and is becoming more popular in animals. Owners can purchase
magnets that are embedded in wraps, collars, or pet beds. Static magnets
provide a continuous magnetic field that is thought to alter physiological
processes, including an increase in local blood flow.
Static Magnetic Field Therapy
 Proposed mechanisms for pain relief include the following:
●Possible release of endorphins
●Antinflammatory effects
INDICATIONSFORTHEUSEOFSTATICMAGNETS
Static magnets may be used as a complementary modality to other forms
of OA treatment.
Precautions and Contraindication to the Use of Static
Magnets
● No specific contraindications or precautions exists for use of static magnets, with the
exception that they should not be used in patients with pacemakers.
534
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
USEOFSTATICMAGNETS
Static magnets are cheap and are easy to apply. The strength of static magnets
is measured in gauss. Therapeutic magnets are in the range of 2500 to 6000
gauss, whereas the earth's magnetic field is 0.5 gauss. Magnetic resonance
imaging units produce magnetic fields that are 2 to 4 times greater than
therapeutic magnetic pads. In contrast, common refrigerator magnets are
about 50 to 200 gauss. In general, the amount of gauss delivered to the skin
is less than that directly in contact with the magnet because the magnetic
field decreases rapidly with distance. In fact, the amount delivered to the
skin may be only about one third of the amount of the magnet.
Static magnets may be combined with other treatments. The magnets must
beplaced directlyoveraffected joints because oftherapid decrease in magnetic
field over short distances. However, it may be difficult to maintain them over
the affected area(s). Static magnets should be considered as a complement to
           
       si s s  
result in progression of disease or result in undue discomfort
EXTRACORPOREALSHOCKWAVETREATMENT
Extracorporeal shock wave treatment (ESWT) involves the application of
high-energy,high-amplitudeacousticpressurewavestotissues.Shock waves
are characterized by an extremely short build-up time of approximately
5 to 10 nanoseconds with an exponential decay to baseline. Shock waves
behave like sound waves in tissue, in that the waves travel through soft
tissue and fluid and release their energy into the tissues when a change
in tissue density is encountered, such as the interface between bone and
ligament. This energy release is thought to stimulate healing. Two primary
methods are used to deliver the energy. Focused shock waves have the
ability to focus the energy to different tissue depths. The shock waves are
focused by means ofa parabola to deliver an intense shock to a small area
with a focused depth, up to 110 mm. Radial shock waves are delivered
to the surface of the body. From there, the shock waves rapidly disperse
through the tissues, releasing their energy rapidly to a wide area. Because
of the energy dissipation, it is difficult to deliver energy to deeper tissues.
Orthopedic applications of ESWT in humans include delayed or
nonunion fractures, plantar fascitis, lateral epicondylitis, Achilles and
patella tendinitis, and with limited experience, OA. Focal ESWT is currently
FDA approved in the United States for use in chronic heel pain (plantar fas-
citis) and tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis). Other potential applications
include the use of EsWT to provide analgesia for humans with avascular
s   sn   n   a  si
and to stabilize loose press-fit total hip replacements. Patients with humeral
epicondylitis or plantar fasciitis tend to respond better to ESWT if the con-
dition is chronic (>35 months) rather than more acute (3 to 12 months).
In veterinary medicine, ESWT has been used in horses for the
treatment of suspensory ligament desmitis, tendinopathies, navicular
disease, back pain, OA, and stress fractures. Although the treatment of
dogs with shock wave therapy is new, tendinitis, desmitis, spondylosis,
nonunion fractures, and OA have been treated.
Extracorporeal Shock Wave Treatment
the mechanisms of action are unclear. The following effects have been described that
may contribute to analgesia:
●Reduced inflammation and swelling
●Short-term analgesia
·Production and release of growth factors
●Stimulation of nociceptors that may inhibit afferent pain signals
INDICATIONSFORESWT
ESWT may be beneficial to patients with chronic OA of the major
joints, especially if they cannot tolerate NSAIDs or other forms of
form of adjunctive treatment along with medical management to
obtain additional improvement. In addition, patients with OA of the
       r   
chronic nonunion fractures.
APPLICATION OF ESWT
Heavy sedation or anesthesia is required for focused ESwT. Because
many patients requiring treatment are geriatric, adequate health
screening should be performed before treatment, including a complete
physical examination and appropriate ancillary tests such as radiographs,
complete blood count, serum chemistry profile, and urinalysis.
A complete understanding of the anatomy of the treatment area
and the spatial relationships of various anatomic landmarks is critical
because ESWT is a localized treatment. Because shock waves may cause
petechiation and bruising, aspirin and other non-cyclooxygenase-
drugs inhibit platelet function and may worsen the bruising.
536
PART FOuR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Precautions and Contraindications for Extracorporeal
Shock Wave Treatment
●Dogs with immune-mediated joint disease or neurologic deficits should not be treated
with extracorporeal shock wave treatment (ESwT) because this treatment has no
known effects on these conditions.
Neoplastic joint disease,infectious arthritis,and diskospondylitis should not be treated
with ESwT because of the risk of spreading the disease process with treatment.
· Acute unstable fractures and patients with unstable hardware are also not candidates
for ESwT, even though this treatment has shown efficacy in treating nonunion fractures,
because some stability of the fracture must be present to allow bone healing.
Shock waves can have adverse effects if they are applied at excessively high energy
levels, if a large number of shocks are used, or if they are focused on structures
sensitive to their effects. Excessive and violent cavitation can lead to the production of
free radicals, which can cause chemical or thermal damage to cells and tissues.
●Concurrent use of nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs that affect platelet function is
mot recommended before ESwT because of the risk of petechiation and bruising.
● Shock waves should not be delivered over the lung field, brain, heart, major blood
vessels, nerves, neoplasms, or a gravid uterus.
The treatment area should be clipped, and the skin should be cleaned
with alcohol if it is excessively oily. Ultrasound gel is liberally applied to
the area (Fig. 27-11). Do not use other lotions or creams because these
contain too much air, and this attenuates the sound waves.
At this time, the optimal energy level or number of shocks for various
conditions are not known. Based on the manufacturer's directions and the
area(s) to be treated, the energy level and number of shocks to be delivered
are selected. In general, treatments should not be repeated more frequently
than every 2 weeks. Most conditions are treated two or three times.
When treating joints, it is important to direct the probe at the
insertion sites of the joint capsule, not the articular cartilage. If treating
the supraspinatus or biceps tendons, direct probe over these areas from
          o   
treating conditions of the forelimbs. Patients may be a bit sedate for
 s dn    r   g sn 
be sore for several days after treatment and then have relative relief from
pain. During this time, consider use of NSAIDs or other medications to
 provide analgesia. Continued improvement may be seen for up to several
  s e    e    
may respond well, whereas stifles may not respond to the same extent.
Anecdotally, initial response rates of up to 80% may be seen, and the
effects may last as long as I year.
537
FlG. 27-11. Application of extracorporeal shock wave treatment
SUGGESTED KEADINGS
Beckerman H, de Bie RA, Bouter LM et al: The efficacy of laser therapy for
musculoskeletal and skin disorders: a criteria-based meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials,Phys Ther 72:483-491,1992.
Carreck A: The effect of massage on pain perception threshold, Manipulative
Physiotherapist 26(2):10-16,1994.
Collacott EA, Zimmerman JT, White PT, Rindone JP: Bipolar permanent magnets
for the treatment of chronic low back pain, fAMA 283:1322-1325, 2000.
 Harlow T, Greaves C, White A et al: Randomised controlled trial of magnetic
bracelets for relieving pain in osteoarthritis of the hip and knee, BMf 329:1450-
1454,2004.
Meeusen R, Lievens P: The use of cryotherapy in sports injuries, Sports Med
3:398-414,1986
Nadler SF, Weingand K, Kruse RJ: The physiologic basis and clinical applications
of cryotherapy and thermotherapy for the pain practitioner, Pain Physician
7:395-399,2004.
Sluka KA, Walsh D: Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation: basic science
mechanisms and clinical effectiveness, J Pain 4:109-121, 2003.
Sutton A: Massage. In Millis DL, Levine D, Taylor RA, editors: Canine physical
therapy and rehabilitation, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
Wittink H, Cohen LJ, Michel TH: Pain rehabilitation: physical therapy treatment.
In Wittink H, Michel TH, editors: Chronic pain management for physical
therapists, ed 2, Boston, 2002, Butterworth and Heinemann.
of treatment for osteoarthritis of the knee, Am f Acupunct 27:133-140, 1999.
28
REHABILITATION METHODS
AND MODALITIES
FOR THE CAT
SANDRAHUDSON
· The field of feline rehabilitation has been slow to take hold because of
the perceived idea that the cat will not cooperate with the modalities or
perform exercises.
in cats, provided that feline behavior and personality are taken into
account.
● Cat owners have begun to enjoy increased expectations for the health
from human physical therapy to enhance recovery from injuries, to
reduce pain, and to improve the daily life of their cat.
PRINCIPLES OF REHABILITATION
· Physical therapy is the application of techniques that help restore
function, improve mobility, relieve pain, and prevent or limitpermanent
physical disabilities of patients suffering from injuries or disease.
● Identical modalities and similar exercises used in the human field can
be applied to the animal.
Rehabilitation for the cat provides controlled activitiesand therapeutic
modalities that enhance the recovery of the cat.
● Feline rehabilitation is designed to provide the most complete return
to function possible while reducing the risk of additional injury.
training, management of chronic pain, and conservative management for
certain conditions or as an alternative to some surgeries (Table 28-1).
538
CHAPTER 28 • Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat
539
TABLE 28-1
PrimaryAreasofRehabilitation
Phase
Primary Goals
Type
Example
mmediate 
Reduce pain,
 Passive
Oryotherapy
postoperative
swelling, and 
(cat may still be
edema
recovering from
Maintain range
anesthesia)
of motion
 and muscle 
mass
Early
Improve strength,
Passive and active
Passive range
postoperative/
increase range
αf motion 
early weight
of motion,
 Balance board 
bearing
improve
exercises
(Non-weight
proprioception
bearing
to toe
touching)
Progressive weight
Increase muscle
Passive and active
Therapeutic
bearing
 strength and 
ultrasound 
endurance,
Underwater 
joint range of
teadmill
 motion, and 
proprioception
Gait training
Return to
Active
 Cavaletti rails,
normal stride
 inclines or 
length and 
declines
gait pattern 
Conditioning
Improve body 
Active
Underwater
 composition 
teadmill
BOX28-1
Factors That Facilitate Productive and Safe Rehabilitation
Session for the Cat
·Quiet environment free of other animals
●Owner presence
·Patience
● Confident application of modality or introduction of exercise
 Sedation
I the second attempt at an exercise is more difficult than the first, it is best to wait until
another session.
540PART FOuR·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE CAT
· Effective rehabilitation of the cat requires special attention and
consideration of the individual animal's personality (Box 28- 1).
· It is recommended to have several alternative ways to reach
rehabilitation goals.
OBJECTIVES OF REHABILITATION
● The goal of rehabilitation is the restoration of the quality of life and
function for the cat through improvement of the bones, joints, and
muscles.
· The five primary objectives of rehabilitation are as follows:
· Pain management
· Strength
· Endurance
· Range of motion
· Proprioception
PAIN MANAGEMENT
● Pain management techniques assist in reducing the suffering
a critical element in the pursuit to regain the function that has been
lost.
● Pain can cause a cat to stop moving because it may fear that increased
 movement will increase the pain.
 si    d      s   
 start moving in a relaxed and low-stressed manner.
STRENGTH
● Atrophy can occur because of disease, injury, lack of use, or lack of
nerve impulse.
· Strength activities increase the size of muscle fibers. Increasing strength
can improve the stability of an injured joint.
ENDURANCE
· Prolonged contraction of a muscle leads to muscle fatigue because of
the inability of the metabolic process of the fibers to supply nutrients
at the level required for the workout.
CHAPTER28·RehabilitationMethods and Modalitiesfor theCat541
· Endurance exercises increase the oxidative capacity of the muscle.
makingitmoreresistanttofatigue.
●Improving endurance facilitates the cat's return to its normal level of
activity.
RANGE OF MOTION
spectrum of movements.
● Range of motion of a joint can be passive or active.
● Passive range of motion can be defined as the range of motion that is
achieved when an outside force (such as a therapist) causes movement
of a joint and is usually the maximum range of motion that a joint can
move.
● Active range of motion is the range ofmotion that can be achieved when
opposing muscles contract and relax, resulting in joint movement.
For example, the active range of motion to allow the elbow to bend
requires the biceps to contract while the triceps muscle relaxes. Active
range of motion is usually less than passive range of motion.
● Range of motion therapy is beneficial in healing and in recovery from
soft tissue and joint lesions, maintaining existing joint and soft tissue
mobility, minimizing the effects of contracture formation, assisting
neuromuscular reeducation, and enhancing synovial movement.
● Observation of the cat's gait can help determine gross deficits in range of
motion. However, the evaluation of the quality of the resistance of the joint
as the end point of a passive movement of the joint provides information
about the complete range of motion for that joint (Table 28-2).
PROPRIOCEPTION
● Proprioception and kinesthesia, the sensation of joint motion and
acceleration, are the sensory feedback mechanisms for motor control
and posture.
● These mechanisms along with the vestibular system help the body
remain oriented and balanced.
REHABILITATIONPROGRAM
· The rehabilitation program begins with the evaluation of the cat.
●The owner is the key factor in providing information for the optimal
outcome for the cat because the cat rarely behaves or moves as it does
in its own environment.
542
PART FOuR ·Acute and ChronicPain Management
TABLE 28-2
Joint End Feels
Example
Example
End Feel
Description
(Normal)
(Abnormal)
Bone on bone
 Abrupt halt to
Carpal extension
Shoulder flexion
movement
Cervical extension
when two hard
surfaces meet
Capsular
Elastic arrest of
 Hip flexion 
movement with 
Shoulder flexion
some give
 Hip extension 
Shoulder
 extension 
 Empty 
Unable to reach
All joints
end range 
because of
 painful reaction 
of cat; no tissue
tension felt 
Spasm
Muscle spasm
 All joints 
actively
occurs when
attempting 
range of motion
Springy block
Rebound of both
Common with
extreme ends
 meniscal injury
of range of
 motion because
of intraarticular
 displacement
Tissue
 Range of motion 
Stifle flexion
approximation
stopped
because of
secondary
engagement
against a
muscle
OWNER-PROVIDED HISTORY
● Age, breed, and the general appearance and disposition of the cat help
determine how cooperative the cat will be.
animal has been favoring a leg, and any pertinent medical history may
indicate that an exercise or modality should or should not be used.
CHAPTER 28 · Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat 543
· The presence of other pets is also a consideration because in the
early to middle phase of rehabilitation it is often necessary to restrict
unsupervised activity with other animals to reduce the risk of
injury.
● The cat's baseline activity level helps determine the cat's condition
and the owner's expectation of what the cat should be able to do after
rehabilitation.
·Identification of medication and supplements the cat is currently
      n  o n   
be helpful in assessing benefits from rehabilitation.
● Questions should be asked to help determine whether the cat's normal
activities have changed.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
● Lameness evaluation
● Evaluation of the cat in standing and sitting positions
●Ability to rise
· Evaluation of the appearance of the scar and any discoloration,
swelling, edema, or warmth of the affected tissue before range of
motion of the affected and unaffected joints is measured to determine
any loss of movement
· Evaluation of passive and active range of motion
REHABILITATION GOALS
 go aq an  s asn ps n  st 1 
rehabilitation program.
+ Thorough evaluation and assessment of the cat's current condition, the
expectations of the cat's owner, and the commitment of the owner to
the rehabilitation program provide necessary information to develop
the proper program for each cat.
● Expectations vary greatly. Owners should be given the information
  s  rd  a   
cat.
· Goals can be set for each phase of the rehabilitation.
● Phase I (within 1 week): Strengthen pelvic limbs so that cat is
able to bear weight for a minimum of 20 seconds without outside
support.
● Phase II: Strengthen pelvic limb so that cat is able to walk.
544   PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS
● Ensure that rehabilitation goals are being met.
       s
possible.
● Providethe information neededto improve or changethe rehabilitation
 protocol to ensure the most benefit for each cat.
Provide progress information to owner, therapist, and veterinarian.
PASSIVE RANGEOF MOTION
· Passive range of motion is measured with a goniometer. A goniometer is
a protractor-like instrument with two blades that are attached to a 360-
degree marked hinge that pivots to measure the angle forrmed by two
bones across a joint. The two bones are moved to extreme flexion and
extension, and a measurement is taken at each extreme. Limited range
can be at flexion only, extension only, or both. Measurements taken in
the conscious cat can indicate pain-free range of motion. Measurements
        s   
sedated.
● Initial goniometry measurements can provide information needed
to decide the rehabilitation exercises and modalities to be used
and to measure the effectiveness of the interventions. Affected and
nonaffected joints are measured. Range of motion can be limited by
pain or a mechanical problem such as contracted muscle (Fig. 28-1).
FlG. 28-1. Measuring flexion of hock of cat with goniometer.
CHAPTER 28 · Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat 545
ACTIVERANGE OF MOTION
● Active range of motion is evaluated by encouraging or allowing the cat
to sit, rise, and lie down.
The cat can be asked to climb stairs or walk over poles for additional data.
MUSCLEMASS
● Measurement of thigh or arm circumference helps assess changes in
muscle mass throughout the rehabilitation program.
● Measurement of the circumference is taken with a special measuring
tape called an oliometer.
· The special gauge at the end ofthe tape ensures that the same amount
and to help give accurate results (Fig. 28-2).
BODY COMPOSITION
● Body composition is a term used to describe the percentage ratio of
body fat to lean muscle.
GAITANALYSIS
● Motion is a result of a combination of nerves stimulating muscle to
move bone.
● Abnormal motion occurs when this chain of events is disrupted.
FlG. 28-2. Measurement of thigh circumference using the oliometer.
546PART FOuR ●Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Locomotion of the cat is described as its gait.
● Chronic pain or traumatic injury can cause a cat to alter its movement.
Alteration in gait may cause pain or injury to unaffected limbs.
● Gait-training techniques and exercise focus on returning the cat to as
near normal movement as possible.
· Therapists and owners must identify the specific limitations of the
individual cat. In some cases, improvements can be made, but the cat
may never return to normal movement. Gait analysis can also be used
to assess any subclinical factors that might affect performance.
LAMENESSEVALUATION
● Lameness is defined as a difference from normal gait.
 The walk and trot are the easiest gaits to evaluate for lameness because
of the symmetric movement of the trot and walk.
● Evaluation ofthe gait is called gait analysis.
· Subjective gait analysis is the most common diagnostic tool to assess
lameness. Analysis is best done before ever touching the cat. Analysis
starts by observing the animal while it is still. The analyst looks for
conformation abnormalities such as turned out toes or abnormalities
in stance such as the cat holding one leg up or putting most of its
body weight on a particular leg. After these observations are noted, the
animal is analyzed while moving.
● Gait analysis ofthe catshould be done in a closed room. The evaluation
of normal movement ofa cat may only be possible through a videotape
of the cat in its home environment.
TYPES OFREHABILITATIONMODALITIES
Rehabilitation can be divided into two specific categories:
●Passive rehabilitation modalities, which require no participation from
the cat
● Active rehabilitation, which requires the cat to participate in the
therapy
PASSIVE REHABILITATION MODALITIES
Therma! Agents
● The application of heat or cold is used to increase or decrease the
temperature of the tissue around a joint and can be used throughout a
rehabilitation program.
· The use of heat versus cold is determined by the stage of recovery ofthe
tissue.
CHAPTER 28 +Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat 547
●Heat and cold treatments can reduce the stiffness and pain, especially
for joint problems such as arthritis.
The application of cold is used to do the following:
·Reduce bleeding
● Reduce inflammation
· Decrease pain
Specific indications for the use of cold include the following:
Musculoskeletal injury
●Following orthopedic surgery
● Treatment of muscular pain
● Postexercise soreness
Application of Cold Therapy
· Place a thin layer of material between the cold pack and the cat's
skin to increase the comfort level.
· Place a towel over the cold pack to avoid loss of cold to the
environment.
· Cold therapy is usually applied for 20 minutes, 1 to 4 times a day.
● Even one application of cold during the first 24 hours of trauma has
been shown to be beneficial in reducing swelling and pain in the
human patient.
· Immediately postoperative, while the cat is still under anesthesia,
application of cold may be the only application tolerated by the cat
(Fig. 28-3).
● Subsequent applications are best performed with cat resting in the
lap of therapist with a blanket wrapped around the cat.
Contraindications. Cold should not be applied if the cat has the
following:
· Cold hypersensitivity
· Decreased or absent sensation
FlG. 28-3. Application of cold pack to limb following orthopedic surgery while
cat still recovering from anesthesia.
548
· Compromised circulation (Do not place cold directly over these
areas.)
 Application of Heat Therapy. Superficial heat therapy is used
to do the following:
· Increase metabolism
· Increase soft tissue extensibility
· Decrease pain
Heat should be used only after signs of inflammation are gone. Specific
uses for heat include the following:
· Subacute and chronic traumatic and inflammatory conditions
● Muscle spasm
·Tissue tightness
·Adhesions
· Pain
 In the management of osteoarthritis, heat may be used to help loosen
tight muscles around a joint to improve flexibility.
· Superficial heat can be applied using heat packs (Fig. 28-4).
· Application time is 20 minutes 2 to 4 times per day. Inspect the skin
at least every 5 minutes.
· Remove the heat source if the cat shows any signs of discomfort.
Contraindications.
· Heat therapy should not be used if any signs of inflammation are
present, such as redness or swelling.
· Heat should not be used on animals with decreased or absent
sensation, over malignancies, or over an active infection.
FlG. 28-4. Most cats tolerate application of heat well.
ElectricalStimulation
Electrical stimulation recruits muscle fibers to reverse volitional
contractions. Electrical stimulation recruits the fast-twitch fibers first.
● Electrical stimulation can be used to do the following:
· Increase muscle strength
· Attenuate atrophy
· Reduce pain
· Reduce edema
Contraindications
· Cats with pacemakers or seizure disorders
● Over the trunk of pregnant females
·In patients that cannot give feedback
·Over infected areas
· Over areas of thrombosis
·Any time active motion is contraindicated
Animal reaction to electricalstimulation should be carefully monitored.
Two types of current are generally recommended for use on felines:
· Continuous alternating current for pain and edema
· Pulsed current for strengthening and edema
The area to be stimulated must be clipped and cleaned before the
electrodes can be properly applied.
Electrical Stimulationfor Pain Management. Two wave forms
are generally used for the management of pain caused by posttraumatic,
postoperative, or chronic pain:
· Interferential waveform consists of two channels, each with a
sinusoidal waveform, one fixed and one of variable frequency. The
electrodes are positioned so that the two chiannels cross each other
to stimulate large-impulse fibers. These frequencies interfere with
the transmission of pain messages at the spinal cord. Interferential
stimulation allows for a deep penetration of the tissue with more
comfort and therefore more compliance than a transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation application.
· A premodulated waveform is an amplitude-modulated sine wave
that is similar to the beat frequency created by the interferential
current. This waveform is often used when four electrodes cannot
be placed.
· The electrode placement should cover the entire area suspected
of pain. Specific frequency and phase duration of the stimulation
varies with each patient and condition. Many electrical stimulation
units are available with a variety of variables and recommended
parameters.
550PART FOUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
 Electrical Stimulation for Attenuation of Muscle Atrophy
· Two waves that can be used for muscle contraction are high volt and
Russian.
· Locate the area where the motor nerve enters the muscle. This
location allows for optimum muscle contraction with as low a
current as possible to increase the comfort level of the treatment.
· Apply the gel to the skin of the cat, and place the electrode over the
expected area of the motor point.
· Turn the unit on and move the electrode until the desired contraction
is observed.
· Once identified, the motor points can be marked on the cat with a
indelible marker for subsequent treatments.
· Optimum time and frequency of treatment are unknown.
· Common clinical use has been 15 to 20 minutes, 3 to 7 times per
week.
· Generally accepted frequency is 25 to 50 Hz.
Therapeutic Uitrasound
● Ultrasound is produced by applying an electric current to a crystal
(Fig. 28-5). The current causes the crystal to vibrate at a resonant
frequency, emitting pressure waves that are absorbed by the tissue.
● Therapeutic ultrasound generates ultrasonic energy in continuous or
pulsed form to produce thermal, mechanical, and chemical effects in
tissues.
● Ultrasound is capable of separating collagen fibers and changing the
CHAPTER 28 + Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat 551
● Exercise caution when using ultrasound over plastic or metal plate
implants because the reflection may cause more intense heating,
leading to burns or discomfort.
● Choose a sound head that provides absolute continuous contact with
theskin.
Therapeutic ultrasound can be used to do the following:
● Increase collagen extensibility (stretch)
● Increase blood flow and increase range of motion
● Decrease pain and muscle spasm
●Accelerate wound healing
The treatment protocol is as follows:
1. Determine the depth of tissue to be treated.
· If tissue to be treated is from skin to 3 cm deep, select 3.3-MHz
frequency.
●If tissue to be treated is 2 to 5 cm deep, select 1.0-MHz frequency.
2. Determine the amount of soft tissue in the area to select the rate at
which the energy is delivered into the area.
· Choose 1 to 2 W/cm² for areas with large amount of soft tissue such
as the caudal thigh muscle.
· Choose 1 to 1.5 W/cm? for areas with less soft tissue, and 0.5 to
1.0 W/cm? for areas with little soft tissue, such as the carpus.
· Choose the mode pulsed or continuous depending on type of
thermal effects desired. Both modes give thermal and nonthermal
effects, but the pulsed ultrasound has a lower average energy so
that the thermal effects are minimal. Pulsed ultrasound is available
in 20% pulse and 50% pulse. Pulsed ultrasound is selected when
 healing effects are desired with as little heating as possible.
· Treatment time can be calculated by determining the number of
transducer heads that fit into the treatment area and multiplying
that number by 2.5.
· The transducer head is moved at a rate of 4 cm/s in overlapping
circles in the treatment area.
· Keep the beam at less than 15 degrees to the surface of the skin.
· Select a treatment area that requires no more than 20 minutes of
treatment time
·Ifa large treatment area is desired, selecta larger transducer head or
divide the area into different treatment session areas.
· Sessions are usually repeated 2 to 3 times per week.
Massage
· Therapeutic massage is the manipulation of soft tissue that includes
holding, causing movement, and applying pressure to the body.
552 PART FOuR ·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
● Massage therapy may improve functioning of the circulatory,
lymphatic, muscular, skeletal, and nervous system and may improve
the rate at which the body recovers from injury or illness.
· Massage can be used to relax and reduce anxiety of the cat in the
postoperative stage of recovery.
Two basic massage techniques are as follows:
● Effleurage massage is a gliding stroke using the whole hand. The stroke
is applied along the lines ofthe muscle and affects the superficial tissues.
Effleurage is mostly used to assist with circulation, so the strokes are
always performed toward the heart.
● Petrissage uses a kneading compression stroke with skin rolling.
Petrissage is used for muscle tension, knots, and spasms.
Passive Rangeof Motion
● Passive range of motion is the manipulation of a joint through its
complete possible flexion and extension.
· Passive range of motion provides controlled movement along the
normal lines of stress, which can result in stronger scar and connective
tissue.
 The motion of the joint affects muscles, joint surfaces, capsules,
ligaments, fasciae, vessels, and nerves. Reduction in the normal range
immobilization, or inactivity.
 Range of motion therapy is beneficial in the following:
● Healing and in recovery from soft tissue and joint lesions
● Maintaining existing joint and soft tissue mobility
● Minimizing the effects of contracture formation
● Assisting neuromuscular reeducation and enhancing synovial
movement
 Passive range of motion will not do the following:
● Prevent muscle atrophy
● Improve strength and endurance
 Passive range of motion may be the most important exercise for a
cat recovering from a fracture because of the restrictive nature of the
movement allowed by splinting or casting-
General Instruction.  Allow the cat to be in a comfortable position.
This may be siting, standing, or lying. Isolate the range of motion of the
joint as much as possible so thiat pain or stiffness does not influence thie
range of the focus joint.
Carpus. Support the leg with one hand. With the leg in a neutral
position begin the extension. Continue to extend the carpus to the end
feel. Then, to get maximum extension, extend the digits to end feel. Press
CHAPTER 28 +Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat 553
on the pads of the foot. This simulates the normal position of the leg
during stance phase of movement, giving the cat proprioceptive feedback
and making it more aware ofthe leg. Hold for 10 seconds, and then begin
flexion of the carpal joint. Continue flexing the joint until the end feel,
and then for maximum flexion, flex or fold the digits to the back of the
leg. Hold for 10 seconds. Repeat 5 to 10 times.
Elbow. The carpal joint must be flexed and extended to flex and
the other hand behind the elbow. Gently push the elbow into extension
end fel. The carpal joint will extend at the same time. Push gently on
the carpal joint to get maximum extension of the carpal joint and elbow.
Hold for 10 seconds. Begin the flexion by flexing the carpal joint, and
then, supporting the elbow joint to keep in same location, flex to end
feel. Hold for 10 seconds. Repeat 5 to 10 times (Fig. 28-6).
Sholder. Begin with one hand supporting the leg in a neutral
position. Hold one hand on the top of the shoulder. Begin extending the
elbow, which will also extend the carpus. Bring the elbow to end range
and continue to push gently on the elbow until the end feel of shoulder
is reached. Usually the leg will reach just above the eye if the head is in
normal position. Hold for 10 seconds. Begin the flexion. Fold the elbow
and gently push up against the supporting hand to end feel. Hold for ten
seconds. Repeat 5 to 10 times.
Stifle. Combine passive range of motion for these two joints to get
maximum extension and flexion. Supporting the tarsus in a neutral
position, begin to push gently on the stifle until end feelis reached. Gently
push on the tarsus to reach maximum extension. Digits can be extended
and the pads of the foot pressed as if the cat were standing. Hold for
10 seconds; begin flexion by folding the tarsus to maximum flexion and
then folding the knee to maximum flexion. Hold for 10 seconds; repeat
5 to 10 times.
Hip. Support the limb and begin to push the stifle gently into
extension. Keeping the knee in extension and one hand on the ischial
tuberosity to prevent movement, gently bring the leg back until end feel
of the hip is reached. Hold for 10 seconds. Begin flexion by folding the
stifle and tarsus and bringing the knee up to hip joint end feel. Hold for
10 seconds. Repeat 5 to 10 times.
Phototherapy (Cold Laser)
● Phototherapy is application of low-power light to areas of the body in
order to stimulate healing.
   a       s
30% to 40%.
554
A
B
FIG. 28-6. A, Passive range of motion of elbow joint-extension. B,Passive
range of motion of elbow joint—flexion.
● Cell proliferation and wound healing can be enhanced by 150% to
200%.
Phototherapy works as follows:
● Photons, electromagnetic energy, are emitted from the low-power
laser and enter the tissue.
● The energy is absorbed by the mitochondria of the cell
● The energy is converted to chemical energy within the cell.
 The permeability of the cell membrane changes, which affects a variety
of cell types including macrophages, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and
mast cells.
555
 Phototherapy can be used for the following:
●Soft tissue injuries such as sprains, strains, and tendinitis
● Osteoarthritis
·Chronic pain
● Wound management of ulcers, pressure sores, and burns
● Skin infections
Healing of incision sites
Cover wound or phototherapy device with clear protective barrier if
the skin is broken. Apply the laser with gentle contact for duration of
treatment (Fig. 28-7).
ACTIVEREHABILITATION
Aquatic Therapy
Aquatic therapy is the use of the therapeutic properties of water to
injury:
●Strength
● Range of motion
·Endurance
Aquatic therapy allows for active muscle contraction while limiting
peak vertical force.
Aquatic therapy is beneficial for the following:
●Soft tissue injuries
 Osteoarthritis
● Postoperative fracture care
Muscle weakness
FlG. 28-7. Application of phototherapy to incision site of amputation.
556
PART FOuR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
● Neurologic impairment
· Geriatric care
● Postoperative amputee care
 Contraindications
· Cardiac dysfunction
· Respiratory dysfunction
· Surface infection
· Danger of bleeding or hemorrhage
· Severe peripheral vascular disease
.Diarrhea
The therapeutic properties of water include the following:
· Thermal—Transfer of heat to the submerged tissue
· BuoyancyThe upward thrust of water on immersed body
· Hydrostatic pressure—Pressure exerted by water on immersed
body
· Cohesion—The tendency for water molecules to adhere to each
other
·Turbulence—The whirlpools in water caused by movement
 The therapeutic thermal effects of water are the same as for superficial
heat, only more systemic.
· Passive range of motion can be performed in warm water to
increase stretch and range of motion because of the increase in
tissue extensibility.
· The soothing effects of warm water reduce pain and may increase
the cat's ability to exert more effort.
· Increasing the water temperature can stimulate metabolism,
relax tight muscles, help reduce pain, and increase soft tissue
extensibility.
The buoyancy property of water is used to increase or decrease the
amount of weight bearing on joints and bones.
· The actual effect of buoyancy can be dramatic.
·Reducing the body weight of the cat can reduce the amount of stress
on a weak joint to allow the cat to exercise in more natural gait
 pattern and move more comfortably.
The effect of hydrostatic pressure increases with water depth.
· This effect encourages upward flow of edema.
· Exercising the cat in deeper water enhances the effect of hydrostatic
pressure.
Cohesion and turbulence contribute to the resistance the cat has while
moving through the water.
· The cohesion property of water is used to increase the specific
flexion of the joint at water level.
CHAPTER 28 +Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat 557
The unique effects of the underwater treadmill include the following:
· Ability to vary the water depth to increase or decrease the amount
of weight bearing the cat has while exercising
· Vary the speed of exercise
· Control the water temperature closely because of the small body of
water
Introduction
· Special attention is required for safe and productive introduction of
the cat to aquatic therapy.
·The therapist must be relaxed and confident in the process to ensure
the cooperation of the cat.
· Instructions of how to hand over and then to retrieve the cat after
the exercise should be carefully explained to the owner or handler.
Recommendations
· Prepare a towel and place to put the cat at the immediate end of
the exercise session. This can be in the towel-wrapped arms of the
 owner or another technician.
·Water temperature should be 90° to 92° F.
·While standing in the exercise chamber of the underwater treadmill,
the therapist should raise the water level to the desired level.
· Turn the treadmill on the desired speed.
· Normal walking speed for the cat in treadmill is 0.8 to 1.3 mph.
· Have the owner hand the cat to the therapist in the chamber with
a smooth confident motion with the cat facing the direction it will
walk (Fig. 28-8).
· Place the cat in the water, and guide the cat with hands supporting
trunk of the cat if needed (Fig. 28-9).
When the session is complete, do the following:
· Do not turn off the treadmill.
● Lift and remove the cat from the water, and place it on the prepared
towel and wrap the cat (Fig. 28-10).
· Hand the cat to the owner or assistant, and then turn off and drain
the treadmill (Fig. 28-11).
· Gently towel dry the cat (Fig. 28-12).
Feline Exercise Therapy
cat's natural ability to complete activities.
  i n n n  si  go  s 
function sooner and to lessen the risk of future injuries. The level
of each exercise varies with the condition or postoperative stage of
the cat.
558
FERNO
FERNO
FIG. 28-8. A, The client passesthe cat tothe therapist. B, The therapist confidently
takes the cat and in one smooth movement moves the cat toward the water. C, The
CHAPTER 28 · Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat
559
一
FlG. 28-9. A, The therapist supports the cat for the first several strides. B, The
therapist remains near to guide the cat but allows the cat as much independence
as possible in the treadmill.
● An exercise therapy program begins with short-duration, low-impact
activities and progresses to longer periods with more strenuous
activities. Modification of the program to accommodate the cat's
comfort level is important.
● The exercise therapy program is divided into three stages: warm-up,
the exercise activities themselves, and the postexercise therapy.
The warm-up portion of the program is as follows:
● Assess the cat's physical and mental condition, and prepare the cat
for the exercise session. Assessment of the cat is important in order
to evaluate the impact of previous sessions and to make changes
necessary to keep progressing toward therapy goals.
560
FERNO
FlG. 28-1o. The therapist lifts the cat from the water without turning off the
treadmill.
with a towel.
● The cat is prepared for the exercise session by warming the affected
area with a warm pack, passive range of motion, massage, or stretch.
A combination of superficial heat and stretch is an excellent way to
 prepare the cat to get the most from the exercise session.
GaitTraining
● Chronic pain or traumatic injury can cause a cat to alter its movement.
● This alteration in gait may cause pain or injury to even unaffected areas.
CHAPTER 28·RehabilitationMethodsandModalitiesfortheCat
561
FlG. 28-12. The client begins gently to towel dry the cat.
● Gait-training techniques and exercise focus on returning the cat to as
near normal movement as possible.
Early Proprioception Exercises
 Physioroll
· Choose the appropriate size of ball for the cat and for the type of
exercise.
· The ball should be at the wither height of the cat when it is
standing.
· Air can be added or removed to help make the ball the right size.
Although many cats may resist being placed on the ball initially, most
cats relax after rhythmic movement or bouncing begins. The relaxation
o sss ss    d d ns
surgery or trauma (Fig. 28-13).
· Place the cat on the ball so that the trunk is supported.
· Gently roll the ball until the front legs come in contact with the
ground.
· Hold and bounce gently for 10 to 20 seconds.
· Then gently roll the ball so the front fet come off the ground and
the back feet touch the ground.
· Gently bounce for 10 to 20 seconds.
● The weight is gradually shifted from front to hind limbs and then
back again.
· The amount of weight can be increased or decreased depending on
the amount of roll and pressure on the ball.
· The cat will use trunk muscles to stabilize itself
562
FIG. 28-14. Standing resistance exercise: The cat resists and pushes against
the gentle resistance.
Standing Resistance
· Once the cat can stand, gently press on the shoulder, slowly
increasing pressure (Fig. 28-14).
· The cat will push back to remain standing.
· If the push is too hard, the cat will be knocked off balance.
· Release the pressure slowly or the cat may fall.
· Try to keep the cat in the same spot.
· Shoulder, hip, and trunk on both sides ofthe cat are good locations
for resistance exercises.
CHAPTER28•RehabilitationMethodsandModalitiesfortheCat563
Balance Board
· The balance board is usually 20 inches with a 14-degree angle.
· Homemade versions may vary from these specifications and are still
suitable.
· Balance board exercise can assist in the restoration of stability and
 proprioception of cats following back, rear limb, or front limb
surgery.
· Balance board exercise can also be used as an early weight-bearing
exercise following knee or hip surgery, elbow or shoulder surgery,
or fracture repair (Fig. 28-15).
Benefits of balance board exercise include the following:
· Improved balance and coordination
· Better proprioceptive awareness for injury prevention
· Greater trunk and pelvic girdle stability
· Increased leg and ankle range of motion
Perform the balance board exercise as follows:
· Position the cat centrally over the board with feet shoulder width
apart.
● Support the cat as needed. Be sure to keep the rocking motion under
control.
· Then lift the cat and rotate the board 90 degrees and rock side to
side for 20 repetitions.
· The cat will contract its muscles and shift its weight to stay on the
balance board.
FlG. 28-15. The therapist supports the cat while slowly rocking the board.
564
PART FOuR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Early Weight-Bearing Exercises
These exercises encourage static weight bearing.
One Leg Standing (Fig. 28-16)
· Lift the contralateral leg. Hold for 10 to 15 seconds.
· Repeat 2 to 3 times.
· Increase time and repetitions as cat's strength increases.
Cross Leg Standing (Fig. 28-17)
. Lift the contralateral leg.
· Once the cat is balanced, lift the diagonal rear leg.
·Hold for 10 to 15 seconds. Repeat 2 to 3 times.
· Increase time and repetitions as cat's strength increases.
Dancing
aui aeoua on l pue sa uo napun io a poddn ·
weight bearing on rear legs.
· Hold for 10 to 15 seconds.
· Repeat 2 to 3 times. Increase time and repetitions as cat's strength
increases.
● When the cat's strength increases to the point that it is no longer
difficult to support its weight in the stationary position, begin with 2
to 3 steps and increase until the cat is able to move forward 10 steps.
Carts and Slings (Fig. 28-18)
· Carts and slings can be used to support the animal during the early
stages of recovery from most neurologic conditions.
● Carts and slings provide the needed support for the dog to assist the
therapist during range of motion and floor exercises.
Examples of Rear Limb Exercises
Sit to Stand (Fig. 28-19)
· Place the cat in a sit position.
· Allow or encourage the cat to stand.
· Repeat several times.
Down to Stand (Fig. 28-20)
· Place the cat in a sphinx down position.
·Allow or encourage the cat to rise.
Incline
· Walk the cat up incline.
· Gradually increase the grade.
Gait-Training Exercises
Cavaletti Exercises. Cavaletti poles can be used for the following
(Fig. 28-21):
CHAPTER 28 • Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat
565
FlG. 28-16. One leg standing encourages low-impact early weight bearing.
While supporting the cat, lift the noninjured limb and hold for 10 to 15 seconds.
FlG. 28-17. Cross leg stand encourages increased weight bearing during the
al paunui ue uo lubiem sh to os ym pueis ot ieo aut moe oi bel e peuoei
in a standing or still position.
· Increase range of motion
· Increase stride length
Perform Cavaletti exercises as follows:
ofthe cat's elbow.
· Encourage cat to go through the poles.
566
PART FOuR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
FlG. 28-18. Supported walking with a cat in sling.
● This can be done by luring the cat with food, calling, or allowing the
cat to go over poles into a closet or carrier.
· Raise, lower, or spread apart the poles to reach desired gait.
Examples of FrontLimbExercises
Wheelbarrow (Fig. 28-22)
· Lift both rear legs.
· Hold for 10 to 15 seconds.
· Repeat 2 to 3 times.
· Increase time and repetitions as cat's strength increases.
When the cat's strength is increased to the point that it no longer
has difficulty supporting its weight in the stationary position, begin
to walk the cat slowly forward while holding both rear legs. Begin
with 2 to 3 steps and increase until cat is able to move forward 10
steps.
 Down to Sit
● Start with the cat in the down position.
· Lure the cat to the sitting position by raising your hand above its
head with food in your hand.
Physioroll or Physioball (Fig. 28-23)
· Fold and hold the contralateral limb to the injured limb, and roll
the cat forward.
· The cat will reach for the ground with the injured limb.
· Gently bounce the cat with the limb on the ground.
CHAPTER28·RehabilitationMethodsandModalitiesfortheCat
567
FlG. 28-19. A, Place the cat in a sitting position. B, Point to something on the floor
in front of the cat while releasing the cat. C, Allow the cat to rise into the stand.
568
B
FIG. 28-20.A,Place and support the cat in a down position. B, Point to
something in front of the cat while releasing the cat.
Trail of Treats (Fig. 28-24)
·Place treats on the floor about 1 foot apart.
· Allow the cat to walk slowly, sniffing the ground.
· This keeps the cat's weight over its feet and encourages weight
bearing on both front feet.
Decline (Fig. 28-25)
·Walk the cat down hills or ramps to encourage front limb weight
bearing.
Tunnel (Fig. 28-26)
· Walking through a tunnel causes the cat to crouch and increases
weight bearing on front limbs.
CHAPTER 28 • Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat
569
FIG. 28-20—Cont'd.C, Allow the cat to rise without taking a step. D, Allow
RearLimb RehabilitationProgram
Hip
· Problem: Loss of extension (range of motion)
· Exercises
· Passive range of motion
· Active range of motion
· Cavaletti exercises
·Walking in 6 inches of high grass
·Walking in 6 inches of water
570
FlG. 28-21. Cat walking over Cavaletti rails.
FlG. 28-22. Wheelbarrow: Gently lift and support both rear legs to encourage
early weight bearing on front limbs.
· Problem: Loss of pelvic muscle mass
·Exercises
· Stationary weight-bearing exercises
· One leg standing
· Cross leg standing
● Sit to stand
· Down to stand
· Moving weight-bearing exercises
·Slow walking
· Incline
CHAPTER 28 • Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat
571
FIG. 28-23. A, Place cat on ball. B, Gently roll the cat forward to encourage
active range of motion and weight bearing on a front limb.
·Underwater treadmill
·Serpentine walking
·Problem: Muscle guarding
·Exercises
· Physioball
·Active stretching
· Balance board
●Modalities
·Massage therapy
· Therapeutic ultrasound
· Electrical stimulation for pain control
572
PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
B
FIG. 28-24.A, Place small pieces of food about 6 inches apart on floor.
B,Point at food and allow cat to sniff and eat trail of treats to encourage weight
bearing on front limbs.
Knee
· Problem: Loss of range of motion
·Exercises
·Passive range of motion
· Active range of motion
· Cavaletti exercises
·Walking in 6 inches of high grass
· Walking in 6 inches of water
CHAPTER 28 • Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat
573
FIG. 28-25. Decline: Allow the cat to walk down the incline slowly. Food may
be used to encourage the descent.
FlG. 28-26. Cat walking through tunnel to encourage flexion of front limbs.
· Problem: Loss of forelimb muscle
· Exercises
· Stationary weight-bearing exercises
· One leg standing
·Cross leg standing
· Down to sit
·Moving weight-bearing exercises
·Slow walking
. Decline
574
PART FOuR ·Acute and Chronic Pain Management
·Underwater treadmill
· Trail of treats
·Serpentine walking
· Problem: Muscle guarding
· Exercises
· Physioball
·Active stretching
· Balance board
·Modalities
· Massage therapy
· Therapeutic ultrasound
· Electrical stimulation for pain control
Hock
· Problem: Loss of extension (range of motion)
· Exercises
· Passive range of motion
· Active range of motion
· Cavaletti exercises
·Walking in 6 inches of high grass
● Walking in 6 inches of water
· Exercise in underwater treadmill
·Problem: Muscle guarding
·Exercises
· Physioball
·Active stretching
· Balance board
· Modalities
·Massage therapy
· Therapeutic ultrasound
· Electrical stimulation for pain control
FrontLimbRehabilitationProgram
Shoulder
● Problem: Loss of extension (range of motion)
· Exercises
·Passive range of motion
· Active range of motion
· Cavaletti exercises
●Walking in 6 inches of high grass
· Walking in 6 inches of water
CHAPTER 28 • Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat
575
· Problem: Loss of shoulder cuff muscle
·Exercises
· Stationary weight-bearing exercises
· One leg standing
· Cross leg standing
· Down to sit
● Moving weight-bearing exercises
·Slow walking
· Decline
· Underwater treadmill
· Tunnel
· Trail of treats
· Problem: Muscle guarding
· Exercises
·Physioball
·Active stretching
· Balance board
· Modalities
·Massage therapy
· Therapeutic ultrasound
·Electrical stimulation for pain control
Elbow
· Problem: Loss of range of motion
· Exercises
· Passive range of motion
·Active range of motion
· Cavaletti exercises
· Walking in 6 inches of high grass
● Walking in 6 inches of water
● Problem: Loss of arm muscle
· Exercises
· Stationary weight-bearing exercises
· One leg standing
· Cross leg standing
· Down to sit
·Wheelbarrow
· Physioball
● Moving weight-bearing exercises
·Slow walking
· Decline
·Underwater treadmill
·Wheelbarrow
576
PART FOUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
· Problem: Muscle guarding
· Exercises
· Physioball
·Active stretching
· Balance board
·Modalities
· Massage therapy
· Therapeutic ultrasound
·Electrical stimulation for pain control
Carpal
· Problem: Loss of range of motion
·Exercises
· Passive range of motion
· Active range of motion
· Cavaletti exercises
●Walking in 6 inches of high grass
· Walking in 6 inches of water
·Exercise in underwater treadmill
·Problem:Hyperextension
·Exercises
· Underwater treadmill
Back
· Problem: Rear limb atrophy
· Exercises
· Underwater treadmill
●Serpentine walking
· Problem: Muscle spasm
·Exercises
· Physioball
· Active stretching
· Balance board
·Modalities
·Massage therapy
·Electrical stimulation for pain control
Obesity
· Problem: Exercise intolerant
· Exercises
· Underwater treadmill
·Slow walking
· Problem: Joint pain
·Exercises
· Physioball
CHAPTER 28 • Rehabilitation Methods and Modalities for the Cat
577
·Active stretching
· Balance board
· Underwater treadmill
· Modalities
●Massage therapy
·Electrical stimulation for pain control
·Therapeutic ultrasound
29
QUALITY OF LIFEISSUES
M.LESLEYWISEMAN-ORRIACQUELINEREID
ANDREAM.NOLAN,ANDE.MARIANSCOTT
MEASURING THE IMPACT OF CHRONIC PAIN
UPON HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE
Acute pain is associated with tissue damage or the threat of it and serves
the vital purpose of rapidly altering behavior in order to avoid damage
or minimize further damage and to optimize the conditions in which
healing can take place, stopping when healing is complete. In contrast,
chronic pain persists beyond the expected course of an acute disease
 d   n     n  
the sufferer. Human chronic pain is often associated with fear, anger,
anxiety, or depression, all of which may be caused by a patient's pain
and in their turn may exacerbate it. Chronic pain therefore can have a
widespread impact on patients' social, psychological, and physical well-
being, thereby affecting their quality of life (QOL).
QOL is a general term used in a variety of disciplines in which it is
accepted that QOL is, like pain, a multidimensional construct that is
subjectively experienced by and is uniquely personal to the individual.
Health-related quality of life (HRQL) is concerned with those aspects
of QOL that change as a result of ill health and medical interventions.
 o      d  s 
accepted definition for QOL in animals exists. We propose the following
simple definition, intended to be relevant in any circumstances (including
those of ill health): QOL is the subjective and dynamic evaluation by
the individual of its circumstances and the extent to which these meet
its expectations, which results in an affective (emotional) response to
those circumstances. Consequently, HRQL is the subjective evaluation
of circumstances that include an altered health state and related
interventions.
578
CHAPTER 29 +Quality of Life IsSues
579
Recognition of the effects of chronic pain on HRQL in humans has led
to the development of instruments to measure chronic pain through such
impacts, and many of the instruments now used in people are concerned
primarily with the way in which the chronic condition disrupts activities
of daily living and alters HRQL. Indeed, HRQL measures may be more
responsive to clinical changes in patients with a chronic condition than
are pain measures themselves.
The application of the term quality of life to animals is less common,
at least in formal veterinary or scientific contexts in which the focus
has been on “welfare" and welfare measurement. Some use these terms
interchangeably, but the authors believe that there is a distinction
between the two as follows. Welfare (and similarly well-being) is a
, an  a s a  s  no so a
freedoms"ofthe Farm Animal Welfare Council. Although the importance
to its welfare of how the animal feels is now widely recognized, practical
welfare measurement is still most usually concerned with ensuring that
minimum standards of care are provided. Consequently, the focus is on
ensuring that animals do not feel too bad, rather than on helping to make
them feel good or very good. If we adopt for animals a conceptualization
and definition ofQOL that is similar to that for people, then consideration
of QOL in veterinary and animal science offers the opportunity to make
explicit the importance of the individual's perspective and to shift the
focus in animal welfare significantly from the avoidance of poor QOL to
the attainment of good and even excellent QOL (Box 29-1).
Although the subjective nature of the pain experience renders
impossible any scientific certainty about its perception (even about
how it is perceived by another person), most scientists now consider
that, unless proved otherwise, the morally correct stance is to assume
that many nonhuman animal species may suffer pain in a similar way
to humans. Accordingly, we should assume that chronic pain may
have a negative effect on an animal's HRQL as it does on our own, and
anecdotal evidence and recent studies have provided some evidence
forthis.
IMPORTANCE OF MEASURING CHRONIC PAIN
ANDHRQLIN ANIMALS
The incidence of chronic pain in companion animals is increasing. In
the past two decades small animal practitioners have seen a considerable
change in the demographics of the pet population with an increase in
the geriatric population of dogs and cats, resulting in more frequent
08G
PART FOuR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
B0X 29-1
QOL and HRQL of People and Animals in Pair
Quality of life (QoL), like pain, is a multidimensional construct that is subjectively
experienced by and is uniquely personal to the individual.
animals. However, whereas welfare measurement ensures that minimum standards of
care are provided so animals do not feel too bad, QoL measurement, by focusing on the
animal's perspective, attempts to ensure that the animal feels good or very good.
● When ill health or medical intervention leads to changes in QOL, the term heath-related
quality of life(HRQL) is used.
animals.
● In humans, chronic pain is measured by its impact on HRQL, and recent evidence
supports the use of similar methodology in animals.
 presentations of painful, chronic conditions such as osteoarthritis and
painful tumors.
The current trend in managing chronic osteoarthritis in dogs is toward
using combinations of therapeutic agents accompanied by lifestyle and
dietary management, and in oncology, clinicians must choose from a
range of therapeutic options. To assess clinical change, gauge treatment
efficacy, and guide treatment decisions, including decisions regarding the
appropriateness of euthanasia, many clinicians and their clients would
pain and HRQL as they attempt to identify the best course of action for
the treatment of a patient that cannot speak for itself. With greater choice
of treatment options and increased affordability has come increasingly
demanding ethical decision making in general veterinary practice and
in specialist veterinary practice. This is particularly true in the field of
oncology, in which increased survival is often achieved by the aggressive
use of potentially aversive treatment protocols that may adversely affect
HRQL during and after treatment. In palliative care, too, treatments can
have negative and positive impacts on QOL that must be weighed against
each other and against quantity of life valuations. An instrument that
could be used with confidence to measure QOL and to monitor clinical
change in an individual, as well as to provide data that would facilitate
the development and selection of treatments with known effectiveness
and impact, should reliably inform such decision making and so lessen
the moral distress often suffered by those involved in such decisions,
whether veterinary practitioner or client. Until now, there have been no
such instruments, and measurement of an animal's pain and QOL has
CHAPTER 29 + Quality of Life IsSues581
used indirect clinical measures and subjective judgment by veterinarian
and/or client: an assessment approach of questionable validity, reliability,
and sensitivity and one that is at risk of positive and negative bias.
The current emphasis on evidence-based veterinary medicine, in
which decisions on adopting, modifying, or abandoning treatment
methodologies are made according to peer-reviewed evidence, requires
that robust measures of clinical impact be developed. Furthermore, a
recent international workshop of experts in animal and human pain
concluded that the creation of valid and acceptable instruments to
immediate action. The unpleasant feelings associated with pain—the
emotional component ofpaincause an animal to suffer. Measuring that
emotional component of an animal's pain or HRQL represents a huge
challenge. In the past two decades the medical profession has recognized
the importance, however difficult, of the valid and reliable measurement
of how people are feeling, and we have much to learn from the methods
established by our medical colleagues in pursuit of that aim.
QUICKASSESSMENTQUALITYOFLIFEQUESTIONNAIRE
The Quick Assessment Quality of Life Questionnaire is for use by pet
owners and is designed to assess the QOL of pets (species unspecified),
regardless of disease condition; that is, it is a generic instrument
(Box 29-2). However, it is not clear on what basis the items in the
questionnaire were generated, leading to the assumption that it was ad
hoc and that the questionnaire was not validated before publication.
Furthermore, no guidance is given as to how the questionnaire should
be used by the pet owner; it appears that the answers to questions 1 to 5
inform a global impression ofthe pet's QOL, recorded by the owner on a
1-to-10 numeric rating scale.
QUESTIONNAIREFOREVALUATINGHEALTH-RELATED
QUALITY OFLIFEINDOGSWITHSIGNSOFPAIN
SECONDARYTOCANCER
The 12 items in the Questionnaire for Evaluating Health-Related
Quality of Life in Dogs with Signs of Pain Secondary to Cancer were
based on those used in a questionnaire to assess HRQL in people with
cancer and cover three domains, namely, physical, psychological, and
social functioning (Box 29-3). Responses are scored from 0 to 3 and are
summed to give an overall score (0 to 36), with lower scores indicating
lower HRQL.
582
PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
B0X 29-2
Quick Assessment Quality of Life Questionnaire
1. How many pleasures does your pet currently have in his life?
How many
pleasures did your pet have in his life when he was feeling his best, physically and
emotionally?
2. How many things does your pet currently have or do in his life that could be called fun?
_How many things did your pet have or do in his life that could be called fun
when he was feeling his best, physically and emotionally?
3. On a scale of 1 to 10, 1 being unaffected and 10 being severely distressed (suffering),
how much discomfort is your pet currently experiencing from unpleasant feelings (such
S nausea,ill feelings, difficulty breathing, pain, itchiness, constipation, loneliness,
fear, anxiety, depressionj?
4. All things considered, what do you consider to be your pet's current enjoyment of life
overall, on a scale of 1 to 10 (1 means no enjoyment, and 10 is the highest possible
level of enjoyment)?
D! moy u Aan Dujag OL pue Duimun Aaa Duag L l olLlo ales e u “9
would you be to take on the life your pet is now living?
6. Based on the answers given to the above five questions, rate your pet's current quality
of life using a scale of 1 to 10, 1 being the lowest and 10 being the highest possible
quality of life an animal could have.
From McMillan FD: I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 39:227-235, 2003.
The questionnaire was shown to be acceptable to respondents, easy
to use, and quick to complete. Scores demonstrated a difference between
healthy dogs, those with skin disease (pruritus, not pain), and dogs
with cancer, but whether the instrument is sensitive enough to detect
requires further investigation.
KARNOFSKY'S SCORE MODIFIED FOR CATS
Karnofsky's score was developed to determine the ability of a human
patient to carry on normal activities in life by using a scale of 0% to
100%. This scale was modified for use in cats, based on eating, playing,
sleeping, and social behaviors, as well as general health.
The Karnofsky's score for cats is calculated by adding the score
from an owner questionnaire (Box 29-4) to a general condition score
generated by the attending clinician (Box 29-5). The owner compares
the actual behavior of the cat to its behavior when well and has to
judge the difference, choosing between five scores (0 = behavior not
present any more; 1=behavior shown only rarely; 2=behavior is
shown half as often as before; 3 = behavior is shown almost as often as
before; 4 = behavior is shown as often as before). Thereafter each item
CHAPTER 29+Quality of Life Issues
583
B0X 29-3
Questionnaire for Evaluating Health-Related Quality of
Life in Dogs with Signs of Pain Secondary to Cancer
How much do you think that the disease is disturbing your dog's quality of life?
Very much (0)
Much (1)
Alittle (2)
Not at all (3)
Does your dog still do what it likes (e.g., play or go for a walk)?
No (0)
Rarely (1)
Frequently (2)
In a normal way (3)
How is your dog's mood?
Totally altered (0)
Some episodes of alteration (1)
Changed a little bit (2)
Normal (3)
Does your dog keep its hygienic habits (i.e., does your dog clean itself)?
No (0)
Rarely (l)
Less than before (2)
Yes (3)
How often do you think that your dog feels pain?
All the time (0)
Frequently ()
Rarely 12)
Never (3)
Does your dog have an appetite?
No (0)
Only eats when forced; will eat more of what it likes (1)
Little (2)
Normal (3)
Does your dog get tired easily?
Yes, always (0)
Frequently (1)
Rarely (2)
No (3)
How is your dog sleeping?
Very badly; not sleeping at all (0)
Badly (1)
Almost normally (2)
Normally (3)
How often does your dog vomit?
Always (0)
Frequently (1)
Rarely (2)
Never (3)
Continued
584
PART FOuR + Acute and Chronic Pain Management
B0X 29-3
Questionnaire for Evaluating Health-Related Quality of Life
in Dogs with Signs of Pain Secondary to Cancer-Cont'd
How are the intestines of your dog functioning?
very badly (0)
Badly (1)
Almost normally (2)
Normally (3)
Is your dog able to position itself to defecate and urinate?
Never positions itself to urinate or defecate (0)
Rarely positions itself to urinate or defecate (1)
Sometimes positions itself to urinate or defecate (2)
Urinates and defecates normally (3)
How much attention is your dog giving to the family?
Indifferent (0)
Little attention (1)
Increased attention; the dog is needy (2)
Has not changed (3)
Scores (values in parentheses) for all 12 questions are summed to determine the
health-related quality of life score. Possible scores range from O to 36.
From Yazbeck KVB, Fantoni DT: JAm Vet Med Assoc 226:1354-1358, 2005.
score (0 to 4) is multiplied by a weighting factor attributed to that
 ss i s  a g  s  s
the questionnaire score out of 50. The clinician determines the general
normal general condition; 4=minor changes; 3=medium changes;
2 =major changes in general condition; 1 = severely diseased; 0 = dead)
The score chosen is multiplied by 10 to give a maximum of 50.
Thus the score is calculated as follows:
General condition score (0 to 50) + Questionnaire
score (0 to 50) = Karnofsky's score (0 to 100)
The usefulness of the Karnofsky's score was demonstrated in a study
of naturally feline immunodeficiency virus-infected cats undergoing
treatment in which treated cats showed improved HRQL compared with
untreated controls, but to the authors² knowledge, further validation has
not been carried out. Additionally, no information as to how the weights
for the items in the owner's questionnaire were derived is available,
leading to the assumption that it was ad hoc.
CHAPTER 29+Quality of Life Issues
585
B0X 29-4
Karnofsky's Score Modified for Cats (Owner Questionnaire)
Questionnaire is to be answered by the cat owners.The owner has to compare the actual
behavior of the cat to the behavior before he noticed any signs of disease and has to
judge the difference. He can choose between five scores (O = behavior is not present any
more;1=behavior is only shownrarely;2=behavioris shownabout half as often as in
earlier times;3=behavioris shown almost asoften as inearlier times;4=behavioris
shown as often as in earlier times). The points are multiplied with the factor individually
for every question. The maximum (max.) points are listed at the right side.
Questions About the Cat's Behavior (Factor/Max. points)
Eating Behavior (Max. points = 10)
Your cat is eating the whole amount of what you feed:
1.5/6
Your cat is eating with appetite every time you feed:
0.25/1
Your cat is eating immediately after receiving its food:
0.25/1
Your cat is eating everything that is offered:
0.25/1
Your cat is eating something it did not like in earlier times:
0.125/0.5
Your cat is catching mice:
0.125/0.5
Excretion Behavior (Max. points =5)
Your cat is always house-trained:
1/4
Your cat is burying its excretions in a proper way:
0.25/1
Sleeping Behavior (Max. points = 10)
The duration of its nonsleeping periods is normal:
1.5/6
Your cat is very energetic:
1/4
Comfort Behavior (Max.points =10)
Your cat is cleaning and grooming itself often and carefully:
1/4
Your cat is very self-content:
0.5/2
Your cat sunbathes regularly:
0.5/2
Your cat visits its favorite places regularly:
0.5/2
Playing Behavior (Max. points = 8)
Your cat plays frequently:
0.25/1
Your cat is interested in new toys:
0.25/1
Your cat is coming regularly to you for the routine contact:
1/4
0.5/2
Social Behavior (Max. points =7)
Your cat is often leaving the house for a walk:
0.5/2
The durationof time spent outside is normal:
0.5/2
Your cat behaves interestedly in other animals:
0.5/2
Your cat is fighting or having sexual activities as often as usual:
0.25/1
From Hartmann K, Kuffer M: Eur I Med Res 3:95-98, 1998.
In conclusion, there are remarkably few measurement instruments
available to the veterinary surgeon who wishes to measure companion
animal QOL or HRQL. Increasingly, such measurement is becoming
more and more necessary in clinical practice as medical advances
facilitate the keeping of animals with painful chronic disease for a longer
time, and evidence-based medicine requires that robust measures of
clinical impact be developed. The development of valid, reliable, and
989
PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
B0X 29-5
Karnofsky's Score Modified for Cats
(Clinician Questionnaire)
100%—Normal behavior, no complaints, no evidence of disease
90%—Minor signs of disease, still normal eating, resting, and social behavior
80%—Some signs of disease, eating behavior not influenced, social behavior slightly
reduced, normal activities like playing and grooming only with effort, increased
sleeping time
70%—Playing, comfort, and social behavior reduced, more lethargy than normal, less
appetite
60%—Requiring assistance sometimes in cleaning and special feeding care
 50%—-Requiring assistance all the time in cleaning and feeding, and sometimes medical
care
40 %—Requiring assistance for everything and depending on medical care; wild, roaming
cats without human help in acute danger to life
30%—Severely disabled, taking no food, appropriate medical care difficult at home,
hospitalization indicated
20%—Very sick,life not possible without hospitalization, active supportive treatment
necessary for staying alive
10%—Danger to life, fatal process progressing rapidly
0%—Dead
sensitive measurement instruments for QOL and HRQL in animals
is time-consuming, challenging, and costly, but in the authors' view,
the resourcing and carrying out of such research are mandatory if we
are to maintain rigorous scientific standards in modern veterinary
medicine.
SUGGESTEDREADINGS
Association of Veterinary Teachers and Research Workers: Guidelines for the
recognition and assessment of pain in animals, Vet Rec 118:334-338, 1986.
Brearly JC, Brearly MJ: Chronic pain in animals. In Flecknell PA, Waterman-
Pearson A,editors: Pain management in animals、London,20oo,WB
Saunders.
Cambridge AJ, Tobias KM, Newberry RC, Sarkar DK: Subjective and objective
measurements of postoperative pain in cats, / Am Vet Med Assoc 217(5):685-
690,2000.
Conzemius MG, Hill CM, Sammarco JL, Perkowski SZ: Correlation between
subjective and objective measures used to determine severity of postoperative
pain in dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 201(11):1619-1622,1997.
Holton L, Scott EM, Nolan AM, et al: The development of a composite measure
scale to assess pain in dogs, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 20(suppl 1): 167-168, 1997.
McMillan FD: Maximising quality of life in ill animals, J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc
39:227-235,2003
CHAPTER 29 + Quality of Life IsSueS587
Paul-Murphy J, Ludders JW, Robertson SA, et al: The need for a cross-species
approach to the study of pain in animals, JAMA 224(5):692-697,2004.
Wiseman-Orr ML, Nolan AM, Reid J, Scott EM: Development of a questionnaire
to measure the effects of chronic pain on health-related quality oflife in dogs.
Am fVet Res 65:1077-1084,2004.
Wiseman-Orr ML, Scott EM, Reid J, Nolan AM: Validation of a structured
questionnaire as an instrument to measure chronic pain in dogs on the basis
of effects on health-related quality of life, Arr J Vet Res 67: 1826-1836, 2006.
Wojciechowska JI, Hewson CJ: Quality-of-life assessment in pet dogs, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 226(5):722-728,2005.
30
HOSPICE AND
PALLIATIVE CARE
TAMISHEARER
ot surprisingly, as the human population ages and has more
aware that there are benefitstohaving those servicesavailable for
pets too. Consequently, a growing number of pet owners are requesting
palliative and hospice care services for their pets. Ultimately, the goal of
while enhancing the quality of life for the pet and family.
Often the trend in veterinary medicine is to shadow advances in
human care. However, when it comes to palliative and hospice care,
the profession is adopting a philosophy rather than a diagnostic test.
Little information is available to guide the veterinary practitioner
through this philosophy and process of palliative and hospice care,
untilnow.
The availability of euthanasia for pets has created a delay in
embracing palliative care and hospice care in the veterinary profession.
Beca use of advances in veterinary medicine, the profession is now able
are less dependent on the option of euthanasia to alleviate suffering.
The result is an overall qualitative improvement and extension of life
for pets.
The American Veterinary Medical Association recognizes hospice
 e  s   d e o d   s a
the practice of good veterinary medicine. A copy of the guidelines can be
obtained from the association.
The term hospice comes from the Latin word hospitium, which means
to host. Hospice is defined as a facility or program designed to provide
the terminally ill. The term palliate comes from the Latin word palliare,
588
CHAPTER 30 +Hospice and Palliative Care589
which means to cloak or conceal. Palliative care is focused on the relief
of suffering to achieve the best quality of life regardless of the disease
outcome. Palliative care is not hospice care, but the services may overlap
during the approach of death.
A human study of 122 caretakers showed that a lack of preparedness
more than 9 months, with major depression. Because of the strong bond
between some people and their pets, it is reasonable to assume that
similar data may apply to the loss of a pet, thus highlighting the need for
palliative and hospice care for pet owners.
The following information should help any veterinarian use the
 r s   n n   
provide aid in many situations (Box 30-1).
B0X 30-1
Qualifications/Circumstances That Warrant Palliative
or Hospice Care
1. A decision not to pursue curative treatments
2. Diagnosis of a terminal illness
3. Diagnosis of a chronic illness
4. Symptoms of a chronic illness that are interfering with the routine of the pet
 5. Disease process in which curative treatment was possible but failed
6. Problems that require long-term intensive care
7. llnesses that are progressive
8. Diseases or traumas that have health complications associated with them
Veterinarians should keep in mind that palliative or hospice care
should always be relationship centered. Palliative and hospice care
should be family oriented with the focus on the pet's quality of life. Any
veterinarian interested in providing palliative care and hospice services
should be a good listener, patient, and empathic and should have good
time management skills.
If possible, a palliative or hospice care program should begin as soon
as a qualifying diagnosis is made, even before the onset of symptoms.
All curative treatments need to be discussed with pet owners before
entering into palliative or hospice care. With every new case, careful
 d         n
mistake of developing a hospice plan for a pet with a treatable illness.
Accurate diagnostic and prognostic information should helpto transition
hospice care.
590 PART FOUR · Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Patient evaluation should consist of the following:
·Physical examination findings
· List of all problems
●Assessment of quality of life
The location where hospice care is carried out is less important than
the philosophy behind the care. Having a quiet designated area in a
is preferable, but not necessary. The care can be carried out in standard
examination rooms or at the pet owner's house. To offer the service is
better than not to offer it because of lack of a specialized area. The pet
should be comfortable in the chosen surrounding.
PALLIATIVE AND HOSPICE CARE PROTOCOL
It makes sense to follow an established protocol to ensure that all details
different; the protocol serves as the template for the veterinarian and the
Care developed by the nonprofit Pet Hospice and Education Center
provides such a protocol (Box 30-2).
B0X 30-2
Five-Step Strategy for Comprehensive Care
1. Evaluation of the pet owner's needs, beliefs,and goals for the pet
2. Education about the disease process
3. Development of a personalized plan for the pet and pet owner
4. Application of hospice or palliative care techniques
5. Emotional support during the care process and affter the death of the pet
EVALUATIONOFTHEPET OWNER'SNEEDS,BELIEFS
AND GOALSFORTHEPET
For the program to be successful, the care delivered by the veterinary
professional must be consistent with the beliefs of the pet owner.
Investigation of these psychosocial concerns allows for proper development
of a personalized program. Communication is a major part of the foundation
upon which palliative and hospice care is built. For example, if a family does
not believe in euthanasia, then the course of action and recommendations
hospital, then this should be understood, and alternatives to hospitalization
should be discussed. Keep in mind that it is not unusual for pet owners to
CHAPTER 30+Hospice andPalliative Care591
abandon their original palliative or hospice care plan and pursue additional
treatment in the hope of a cure.
To ask the proper questions so as to prepare for the medical plan
adequately is important, especially as the end of life nears. Whether the
pet owner has had any past experiences (good or bad) with health care is
helpful to know beca use this can playa role in understandingthe decision-
strive for a cure despite the prognosis or instead may choose just to keep
the pet comfortable. The owner's attitude regarding nutritional support
to esophagostomy and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tubes. The
veterinarian should explain the risks and benefits of the various support
options. Forced feeding by placing food in the mouth of a dying pet that
is not hungry should be discouraged.
When designing a plan for anillpet, itis important to consider whether
the pet owner has desires for diagnostic testing to track the disease
home care for their pet.
Financial concerns on the pet owner's part should be taken into
consideration but should not alter the sharing of information about
all treatment options. There may be benefit in using alternative/
of complementary therapy is the use of milk thistle (silymarin) to aid in
the treatment of liver disease.
Early on, the veterinarian should discuss final event details with the pet
owner. Specifically, the veterinarian should determine where a pet owner
wants the pet to die and whether the owner wants to be with the pet at that
time. The veterinarian shou ld inform the owner regarding the pet's body
if the pet dies at home. Several choices may be available for handling the
pet's remains, and there is benefit in asking about this ahead of time.
Veterinarians should be prepared to go where the clients need them to
go to improve a pet's quality of life (Box 30-3).
EDUCATIONABOUT THEDISEASEPROCESS
The veterinarian should become familiar with the disease process
to be able to share factual information with the pet owner about life
expectancy, symptoms of the disease, and common side effects. This
shared knowledge allows the pet owner to be able to make better choices
on the pet's behalf. An accurate diagnosis is important before initiating
592
PART FOuR·Acute and ChronicPainManagement
BOX 30-3
Psychosocial Concerns Assessment
Medical experiences
Belief regarding death and euthanasia
Preferences for testing to track illness trajectory
Preferences regarding hospitalization versus outpatient versus home care
Role of financial concerns on health care choices
Preferences regarding alternative/complementary care
Preferences on where a pet dies and whether owner wants to be present
Discussion of what to do with the body if the pet dies at home
Choice of how to handle the remains
Diagnosis
Chronic disease
Terminal
Owner declines therapy
Nonresponsiveto
Severetrauma
curative therapy
Injury with health complications
Palliative care
Hospice care
Evaluation of the pet owner's needs, beliefs, and goals forthe pet
Educationabout thediseaseprocess
Development of a personalized plan for the pet and pet owner
个
Application of hospice or palliative care techniques
Euthanasia
Natural death
Emotional support during end of life and after
FlG. 3o-1. Hospice and Palliative Care Cascade.
CHAPTER 30 + Hospice and Palliative Care  593
a hospice plan.Careful review of diagnostic tests and response to
treatment may prevent the embarrassment of developing a hospice plan
for a pet with a treatable illness.
Taking into account all the side effects associated with the disease
and letting the pet owner know that these complications may respond
to symptomatic treatment is important. For example, constipation is
a common side effect of many illnesses and can often be prevented
by educating the pet owner to look for the symptoms of small, hard
stools, and/or decreased frequency of bowel movements and then
providing early therapy for the condition before obstipation develops.
Pet owners need to know that a decrease in appetite should be treated
early with antacids, antiemetics, and appetite stimulants to maintain
a better nutritional state longer. This may be of importance to delay
cancer cachiexia.
DEVELOPMENTOFAPERSONALIZEDPLANFORTHEPET
ANDPETOWNER
Development of a personalized plan for the pet and pet owner should
take into consideration the previous discussion about the family's
beliefs and desires for the pet. In addition to managing the symptoms
of disease, the plan should take into account the willingness of the pet
In designing a palliative and hospice care plan, the program should be
 sd  e s  a sso a  
For example, the coordinator may work with the family and internal
medicine specialist to make sure that all the communication is being well
directed and that all of the physical, emotional, and psychosocial needs
are being met.
As a pet's condition begins to deteriorate, it is important to tra nsition
into hospice care. For this to happen, the family must acknowledge that
the pet is actually dying and is showing no improvement or worsening
with medical help. Even after an end of life plan has been developed,
  p  a       s 
attempts.If this happens, the veterinarian should review the disease
process, indications, and contraindications of such options with the pet
owner to promote the making of informed decisions.
While designing the end of life plan, veterinarians may come across
dilemmas regarding treatment choices because of side effects of some
medications. Veterinarians should take into account the principle of
double effect in which interventions may have a posit ive and a negative
594
PART FOuR·Acute and ChronicPain Management
consequence. The concept is used in human medicine to help ethically
justify the treatment choices. For example, a medication used to alleviate
pain may also risk death because of respiratory depression, but the
importance of controlling pain may be overriding.
For pets that are difficult to medicate, oral medicines can be
compounded into a more palatable medication. Also, many medicines
can be given as a subcutaneous injection that the pet owner can be taught
to administer. Not all dermal preparations are efficacious.
Part of the plan should address the nutrition of the pet. Pets that
have a good appetite may be fed a prescription diet formulated for the
specific disease process, but if a pet is not interested in food, a variety
of creative options can be considered. Supplementing or relying on
feeding tubes, such as esophagostomy and percutaneous endoscopic
These options should be reviewed with the pet owner before plan
orhospicecareplan
Treatment of all
1 processes that interfere with quality of life is
important. Appropriate drug therapy must take into consideration side
effects and drug interactions. For example, veterinarians should treat a
painful otitis even in a dying pet to prevent additional discomfort from
theinfection orinflammation.
People that are in respiratory distress report that opioids alleviate the
feeling of distress better than oxygen therapy does. Placement of a fan
directed at a dyspneic patient may also decrease anxiety from not being
able to breathe easily.2 Pets may be prescribed these therapies for breathing
comfort if oxygen therapy is not a treatment option. An antianxiety drug
When treating wounds, distinction should be made between the
actual pain of the wound itself versus the pain associated with tending to
the wound. It may be helpful to give pain medication 1 to 2 hours before
wound treatment.
Because pets that are in palliative or hospice care programs may
 ss n        
side effects of polypharmacy therapy. The veterinarian must obtain
a complete list of medications that a pet has been prescribed to avoid
drug interactions such as serotonin syndrome or reactions between
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs and corticosteroids. Serotonin
syndrome presents as mental status changes, autonomic hyperactivity,
and neuromuscular abnormalities. Serotonin syndrome can be avoided
by not combining an opioid with a serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
If serotonin syndrome does occur, it can be controlled by removal of the
CHAPTER 30 + Hospice and Palliative Care  595
offending drug combination and supportive therapy. Potential problems
can also occur in chronic renal failure; be watchful of reactions with
gabapentin and tricyclic antidepressants. Metoclopramide should not be
prescribed for nausea and vomiting if there is a possibility of a digestive
tract obstruction. In humans, opioid-induced urinary retention is treated
with an opioid antagonist.
Distinguishing between dysphoria and pain is a necessary challenge.
Some drugs may elicit whining and restlessness in pets. Choices to alleviate
these symptoms include providing good pain relief, discontinuing the
offending drug, providing an opioid blocker, and offering sedation. Even
though care is taken when prescribing drugs, the pet owner should be
advised to make the following observations (Box 30-4).
BOX30-4
Medication Side Effect List for Clients
medication
3. Lack of appetite or vomiting after giving medication
4. Change in bowel movement consistency,frequency, or color
5. Development of skin irritation or itching
6. Development of depression or disorientation after administration of a medication
APPLICATION OFPALLIATIVE ORHOSPICE CARE
TECHNIQUES
The pet owner should be taught how to carry out the techniques to
provide comfort. The pet owner should be shown and then made to
demonstrate understanding of the technique. For example, a client
should demonstrate administration of subcutaneous fluids on the
pet. A technical support team member for the pet owner should
be available to contact when problems develop in carrying out the
technique (Box 30-5).
B0X 30-5
Hospice Technique Tips
1. Provide technique demonstration
2. Provide written information describing the technique
3. Have the client repeat the technique in front of staff
4. If needed, provide compounded medications for ease of administration
5. Provide a list of medication side effects
596PART FOUR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
EMOTIONAL SUPPORT DURING THE CARE
PROCESS AND AFTER DEATH
End of life is defined as the period when death is imminent. Before and
during this time, the pet owner needs a means of interpreting quality of
life. Veterinarians should have a system to evaluate quality of life that
takes into account not only the physical comfort of the pet but also the
emotional well-being to aid the pet owner in the decision process. Dr. Alice
of life called “HHHHMM." The scale takes into account how the pet is
coping with hurt, hunger, hygiene, happiness, mobility, and more. The
scale is an excellent resource for veterinarians to share with pet owners.
A description of the dying process, whether by natural causes or by
euthanasia, should be shared with the pet owner based on the specific
disease trajectory before the death of the pet.
 If time permits, an emotional support system for the owner should
be implemented before the end of life of the pet. This emotional support
system might call on the services of other professionals including human
hospice medical advisors, ethicists, clergy, psychologists, social workers,
and volunteers who have advanced training in human palliative and
S  e       
component of care for the pet and the family is covered.
Bereavement counselingshouldlast aslongas necessary. The veterinarian
The veterinary staff should be able to recommend more services to help pet
owners grieve the loss of a pet, especially if the pet owner is depressed or has
special needs. Many larger communities have pet loss support groups.
ROLE OFPHYSICALREHABILITATION TECHNIQUES
IN PALLIATIVE AND HOSPICE CARE*
The role of physical rehabilitation techniques inthe management of caring
for an ill pet can be valuable because it can add great benefit without the
side effects associated with drug therapy. As with all treatment choices, it
is best to have an understanding of the indications and contraindications
for each modality.
Veterinarians should integrate rehabilitation techniques in the
palliative and hospice care plans when possible (Table 30-1). Massage
*Details about physical rehabilitation can be found in Chapters 27 and 28.
CHAPTER 30 + Hospice and Palliative Care
597
may help decrease pain and improve circulation. Simple techniques such
as assisted standing by the use of slings or a towel help to slow muscle
atrophy. Weight shifting may help a pet stay mobile with less loss of
balance. Use of exercise balls make supporting a pet's weight easier and
may promote range of motion or stretching at the same time. Range
of motion exercises may decrease pain while improving mobility and
strength (Boxes 30-6 and 30-7).
Adjusting the position of the pet may prevent decubitus ulcers and
 pressure sores, as well as atelectasis and lung congestion. Respiratory
secretions may be managed with manual therapy ofpercussion, vibration,
postural drainage, and initiating a cough by palpating the trachea. This
should not be attempted if there has been thoracic trauma, a low platelet
count, subcutaneous emphysema, or a heart condition.
TABLE 30-1
Rehabilitation Techniques in Palliative
and Hospice Care
Therapies
Indications
Contraindications
Massage
 Decrease pain
Shock
Improve circulation
Fever
Increase lymphatic flow
 Over areas of acute inflammation
and dermatitis
Release endorphins
Assisted standing
Maintain strength 
Induces pain
Slow muscle atrophy
Weight shifting
 Maintain mobility
 Induces pain
Improve balance
 Build strength
Range of motion/
Improve mobility
Induces pain
stretching
Improve strength
Decrease pain
Positioning
 Prevent pressure sores
Induces pain or difficult breathing
 Prevent atelectasis
Prevent lung congestion
Cryotherapy
Decrease inflammation
Decreased sensation
 Decrease pain
 Unable to give feedback
Decrease swelling
Hypertension
Peripheral vascular disease
Continued
598
PART FOuR·Acute and ChronicPainManagement
TABLE 30-1
Rehabilitation Techniques in Palliative
and Hospice Care-Cont'd
Therapies
Indications
Contraindications
Heat
 Decrease pain
Decreased sensation
 Decrease muscle spasm
Unable to give feedback
Improve circulation
Obesity
Increase flexibility/tissue
 Peripheral vascular disease 
extensibility
Over malignant neoplasia, derma-
titis, infection, pregnancy
Eectrical stimulation
Regain strength
Seizure disorders
Reeducate muscles
Peripheral vascular disease
Decrease pain
Over heart, dermal neoplasia,
thrombophlebitis, pacemakers,
uterus during pregnancy
Reduce edema
Aquatic therapy
 Decrease pain
Heart conditions
Build strength
Respiratory disorders
Improve balance
Vascular disease
Improve range of motion
 Dermal infections 
Diarrhea
Therapeutic
 Improve wound healing
Over spinal cord after lami-
ultrasound 
nectomy, dermatitis, dermal
neoplasia, thromboembolism,
pacemakers, heart, growth
plates, implants, carotid sinus
Improve muscle
circulation
 Decrease muscle spasm
 Decrease pain
Increase extensibility of
collagen
Low-level laser
 Decrease muscle spasm
Induces pain
 Decrease pain
 Over uterus during pregnancy
Increase muscle
circulation
 Improve wound healing
CHAPTER 30·Hospice and Palliative Care
599
B0X 30-6
Tips to Improve Comfort
Provide comfort with good pain management.
Tend to all secondary disease symptoms, such as nausea and vomiting.
Provide clean, soft bedding located in a thermally comfortable area with access to social
interaction with family.
Provide nonslip flooring.
Provide thermal comfort by providing warmth or keeping the pet cool.
Prevent dry, sore mouth by use of a mouth moisturizer.
Prevent dry, sore eyes by the use of an eye lubricant or artificial tears.
Allow good access to palatable foods and fresh water.
Provide opportunities to urinate and defecate frequently, using assisted standing devices if
needed.
Provide attention to satisfy the pet's emotional needs.
Avoid environmental dangers such as fly strike, heatstroke, and freezing.
Never restrict water availability, and keep food and water within reach.
When restraint is necessary, use conservative restraint to minimize breathing problems and
pain from arthritis.
Keep pet clean around the genitals, rectum, feet, eyes, and mouth by using baby wipes or mild
soap with lukewarm water
Provide hygiene aids including disposable pads, diapers, and hygiene panties.
Block off stairs to prevent fall, and move furniture so that the pet does not get wedged
between pieces.
Provide mobility aids, such as specially designed slings and carts.
BOX 30-7
Most Common Side Effects of the Disease Processes
Pain
Dyspnea
Nausea/vomiting
 Constipation
Reflux
Anorexia
 Pruritus
Bone marrow failure
 Urine retention
Fatigue
Neurologic symptoms
From Engelberg R, Downey L, Curtis R: I Palliat Care 5:1086-1098.
009
PART FOuR ● Acute and Chronic Pain Management
CONCLUSION
Any veterinarian should be able to use the philosophy of palliative and
hospice care. Veterinarians should keep in mind that this type of care
should always be relationship centered. Ultimately, the goal of palliative
and hospice care in veterinary medicine is to relieve suffering while
enhancing the quality of life for the pet and family.
SUGGEsTED READINGS
Millis DL, Levin D, Taylor R: Canine rehabilitation and physical therapy.
Philadelphia, 2004, Elsevier.
Shearer TS: The essential book for dogs over five, Columbus, Ohio, 2002, Ohio
Distinctive Publishing.
Villalobos A: Canine and feline geriatric oncology: honoring the human-animal
bond, Ames, Iowa, 2006,Blackwell Publishing.
APPENDIX
DRUGS UsED FOR
THE TREATMENT OF PAIN,
PAIN-RELATED ANXIETY,
AND ANESTHESIA
RELATED SIDE EFFECTS
AS DESCRIBED IN
THIS HANDBOOK
602
Appendix
 Swine: 0.1-0.2 (adult) 
 Not recommended for 
Av: 1.0-5.0 P0 q1 2h
 Swine: 10 P0 q6-8h
Av: 0.02-0.04 SC,IM
Toxic dose unknown
 <1.5 SC epidurally
 2.7 intraarticularly
recommend <2 
Other Species
(6y/bw) sas00
IM q1 2h 
3S
birds
Ra: <1.55
F
0.03-0.1 IM,
0.01 -0.02 IV
Cattle Dose
0.05-0.2 P0,
100 P0 q1 2h
(ruminants)
0.1-0.2 IV, IM 
[6y/bw)
Al 6y/6n 00 L-09 
25-50 P0 q1 2h
Equine Dose
0.02-0.05 IV
(6y/6w)
0.02-0.04 V, SC, IM prn 
Cat Dose (mg/kg)
Not recommended
2 SC, interpleural 
WI 6y/6n 00 L-05
0.05-0.1 max.
5-10 P0 q24h 
10-25 P0 q48h
0.1-2.25 P0
3-5 PO q24h 
1.5 epidural
2-3 PO q24h
PO
53
2
1-1.
0.02-0.04 v, SC, IM prn 
(6x/6w) aso0 600
0.025-0.1 max. 3 mg
0.25-1.0 P0 q12-24h
1-2 SC, interpleural 
10-15 P0 q8-12h
Use with caution 
 PO q12-24h
10-25 P0 q8-12h
50-100 μg/kg IM 
 PO q24h
1-1.5 epidural 
V, SC, IM 
0.5-2 P0
10-20 P0
 Trade Name 
Fosamax
Tenormin
Antisedan
Marcaine
Tylenol
Acepromazine
Acetaminophen
Aendronate
Amantadine
Amitriptyline
Bupivacaine
Atropine  
Aspirin
Atenolol
Drug
Appendix
603
Continued
0.1-0.2 mg/kg per hour
0.1-0.3 mg/kg per hour
Re: 2-4 followed by 1-2
 oral doses may need
Re: 0.4-1.0 IM, SC, V
F: 0.01-0.03 q6-1 0h 
Ra: 0.01-0.05 q6-10h
Ra: 0.5 q2-4h IVv, SC
q24-72h IM, Iv, SC
Av: 1.0-2.0 q12-24h;
F: 0.1-0.4 q2-4h IV,
 Camelids: 0.05-0.2
 Swine: 0.5 IM once
Parrot: 1-3 IM 
to be higher
M, SC 
IM, SC
.
IV CRI
Re: 1 IM 
IV CRI
F,IM
1.1 IM once
0.55IV once,
0.05-0.2 V, IM
(ruminants)
 2.2 IM once 
0.22 IV once,
0.01 -0.04 IV
0.02-0.1 IV
0.04-0.2 IM
q3-4h
0.5-1.1 IV
0.1-0.4 SC,IM q2-6h 
0.005-0.02 SC, IM,
1-4 SC single dose
Not recommended 
0.01 -0.02 buccal
0.5-2 P0 q6-8h
 0.5 IM, IV q6-8h 
0.1 IV g1-2h
 for oral use 
IV q4-8h 
 2-4 PO q24h 
q6-12h
0.005-0.02 SC, IM, IV
2 SC, IM q2-6h 
0.1-0.8 IV q0.5-2h
0.05-0.50 SC, IM, IV
 SC single dose
0.5-2 P0 q6-8h
0.8-4.4 P0 q24h
22 P0 q1 2h 
4.4 P0 q24h
q6-24h 
q4-8h 
0.2-1.2 9
 Carpuject
Buprenex,
Torbugesic
Zenecarp
Thorazine
Rimadyl,
 Chlorpromazine
 Buprenorphine 
 Butorphanol
Carprofen
604
Appendix
Av: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg IM, IV
Other Species
(6y/6w) saso0
0.01-0.15 IV, IM
Catte Dose
0.002-0.1 IV
0.005-0.04 IM
0.02-0.08 IV
(6y/6w)
0.5-1.0 IV
0.01 -0.04 V, IM 
0.01 -0.15 V, IM 
Equine Dose
(6x/bw)
0.5-1.0 IV
0.05-0.1
0.125 IV
5-22 IV
0.10-0.15 SC, P0, IV
5 IM, I, PO q12-24h 
Cat Dose (mg/kg)
1-5 PO q1 2-24h
0.5-2.0 P0 q6-8h
125-0.0.35 IV
0.05-0.4 IV, IM 
1.75-2.5 PO
0.5 P0 q6h 
0.5-2.2 P0
0.01 IV
1-5 IV
0.0005 mg/kg per hour Iv
hour IV (extended seda-
3-4 P0 q24h 7-day limit 
0.0005-0.001 mg/kg per
25-100 IM, N, SC, PO q8h 
(short-term sedation/
tion/analgesia—CRI)
transdermal patch
0.10-0.15 SC, P0, IV
0.5-2 PO, SC, IV q6-8h
Dog Dose (mg/kg)
0.005-0.01 IV bolus
1-3 P0 q12-24h 
(preanesthetic)
0.5-1 P0 q4-6h
0.125-0.035 IV
0.1/15-20 kg
 PO q24h
 analgesia)
0.1-0.5 N, IM 
0.5-2.2 P0
0.5-1.5 P0
0.01 IV
1-5 IV
12
Trade Name
 Clomicalm 
Dormosedan
Dexdomitor
 Precedex
Metamizole
Catapres
Deramaxx
Cardizem,
Dilacor
Benylin
Dopram
Valium
Dexamethasone
Dexmedetomi-
Comipramine
Dextrometho-
Clonidine
Deracoxib
Detomidine
rphan 
Diazepam
Diltiazem
Doxapram
Codeine 
dine
Dipyrone
Drug
Appendix
605
Continued
 anesthesia to reduce
 anesthesia to reduce
hour IV CRI during 
 hour IV CRI during
 CRI for analgesia
F. 20-30 μg/kg per
volatile inhalant
 concentrations
volatile inhalant
 concentrations
patch
0.005-0.01 IV
ruminants)
(small
 100-g/h trans-
 dermal patch
per 450 kg
0.01 -0.02 IV
 2-20 μg/kg per hour Iv
 CRI: 1-4 μg/kg per hour
 (pain management)
10-30 μg/kg per hour
(surgical analgesia)
0.005-0.04 SC, IM
Loading: 1-3 μg/kg
 25 μg/kg per hour
0.002-0.005 IV
(surgical analgesia and
5 kg: 12 μg/kg per hour
>25 kg: 75 μg/kg per hour
 2-20 μg/kg per hour V
minimal alveolar con-
centration reduction)
10-25 kg: 50 μg/kg per
10-45 μg/kg per hour
10-15 P0 q24h
0.01-0.04 SC, IM
0.002-0.005 IV
hour
Sublimaze
EtoGesic
 Duragesic
 transdermal
 Etodolac
Fentanyl
Fentanyl:
patch
606
Appendix
0.005-0.015 mg/kg per
Ra: 0.05-0.2 IV, IM, SC
0.1-0.5 q24-48h IM 
 F: 0.1-0.2 IV, IM, SC 
Other Species
(6y/6w) saso0
 Swine: 3.3 μg/kg
 Swine: 0.02 IV
hour IV CRI
48-9b
q6-8h
Sheep: 0.02 IV
1.1-2.2 IV q24h
 5-10 μg/kg IM,
2.5-5 μg/kg IV
Catte Dose
(6x/6w)
0.02 IV
 3S
3.3-6.6 μg/kg Iv
Equine Dose
0.2-1 .1 v, IM 
(6x/6w)
0.02 IV
q24h
1-4 IV
 5-10 μg/kg IV, IM, SC 
0.05-0.1 SC, IM q2-6h
Cat Dose (mg/kg)
520 mg/kg P0 q12h
Jad 6y/6w s0'0-L00
0.2 mg/cat IV prn 
PO single dose
I IV, IM, SC once 
0.03-0.05 IV q1h
25-5.0 P0 q12h
25-5 P0 q12h 
0.5-2.2 IV
(6x/6w) aso0 600
5-40 mg/kg P0 q12h 
5-10 μg/kg IV, IM, SC 
0.2 mg/dog IV prn 
1.0 PO single dose
I IV, IM, SC once 
0.05-0.2 SC, IM
0.05-0.1 IV q2-6h
25-5 P0 q12h
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
0.5-1.0 PO q8h
5 P0 q24h
0.5-2.2 IV
 per hour 
Trade Name
Previcox
Romazicon
Banamine
Neurontin
Robinul-V
 Dilaudid
Hyd rostat
Cortef
 Tofranil
Glycopyrrolate
Hydrocortisone
Hydromorphone 
meglumine
Fumazenil
Gabapentin
Firocoxib
Imipramine
Flunixin
Drug
Appendix
607
Continued
 <2 SC 4.4 epidurally
Ra: <2 SC Av: 1 -3; toxic
 Re: 10-100 IM,IV, SC 
IV CRI for 24 hours
Re: 2 q24-48h IM, SC
Av: 1 -5 IM, IV q24h 
 unknown; recom-
 postoperatively
Ra: 0.5 IV before
Re: toxic dose
 s> puaw 
Surgery
at 4
F
2.0 N, IM q24h 
0.16-0.45 sub-
1.1-3.3 N, IM 
arachnoid/
epidural 
924h
0.25-1.0 IV bolus, then
followed by 2 μg/kg
0.75-1 mEq Mg2+/kg IVv
 0.5 Iv, followed by 10
μg/kg per minute 
 0.5-2 IV, IM, SC initial 
0.5-1 P0 q24h up to
during surgery,
 10-40 μg/kg IV
4.4 of 2% epidural
0.25 IM q1 2h 
24 hours
5 days
infusion
asop
5-15 IV
 pamolgy Kuabuns buunp
10 μg/kg per minute 
1-2 IV, IM, SC initial dose
1 P0 q24h up to 5 days
0.3-0.6 PO, IV, IM q8-12h
0.75-1 mEq Mg2+/kg Iv
0.5 IV, followed by.
for next 24 hours 
5-15 IV
Ketalar, Veta-
 Ketofen, Anafen 
Numerous:
KetaFlo
Toradol
D-aspartate
receptor an-
tagonist, not
Ketamine (as
N-methyl-
 anesthetic)
Ketoprofen
Magnesium
Ketorolac
Lidocaine
 salts
809
Appendix
Camelids: 10-20 μg/kg
150-300 μg/kg (aquatic)
150 μg/kg (snakes and 
F: 0.1-0.2 SC, PO q24h
*Parakeets: 0.5-1.0 P0
Re: 0.1-0.2 IM,Iv, PO
Re: 50-100 μg/kg
Ra: 0.1-0.5 SC, PO
Other Species
(6y/bw) saso0
(tortoises)
q24-48h
q12-24h 
lizards)
Re: 1-4 IC
q12h
Catte Dose
(6y/6w)
Equine Dose
0.01-0.02 IV
(6y/6w)
0.2-1.0 IV
 (sedation/analgesia)
 0.1 mg/kg loading dose,
 sedation/analgesia)
 then 0.05 mg/kg PO
Cat Dose (mg/kg)
(preanesthetic)
(preanesthetic)
0.015-0.03 IM
0.01-0.015 IV
0.005-0.01 IV
(short-term
1-5 IV, IM prn 
22-4.4 IM 
3S 1
q24h
 sedation/analgesia CRI)
25-6.5 IM (preanesthetic)
0.005-0.01 IV (sedation/
0.001-0.003 mg/kg per
hour IV (supplemental
(short-term sedation/
Jad 6y/6w 200'0- 1000
2 inital loading dose, 
3-10 N,IM q2-3h or prn 
 CRI during inhalant 
(6x/6w) aso0 600
0.001 -0.003 Iv bolus
hour IV (extended
then 0.1 PO q24h 
(preanesthetic)
0.01 -0.02 IM
0.003-0.005 IV
anesthesia)
analgesia)
 analgesia)
0.005-0.01 1
0.2 IV, SC
2
Trade Name
Domitor
 Metacam
 Demerol
Medetomidine
 Meloxicam 
 Meperidine
Drug
Appendix
609
Ra: 0.5-5 IM single dose
Continued
 dose preoperatively
 Swine: up to 0.5 IM
 Swine: 0.1 -0.2 IV
Av: 0.5-1.0 IV,IM
F: 0.2-2 IM single 
1.5-6.5 (turtles)
preoperatively
(crocodiles)
0.1 epidurally
Re: 0.05-4.0
 epidurally
01-0.5 IV
0.05-0.25 sub-
 200 mg single
 total dose IM
arachnoid/
 epidural
0.05-0.1 IV
0.1-0.5 IV
0.03-0.1 IV
 asop 
0.1-0.5 N, IM, SC q2-4h
0.5 ml of 2% solution,
 q30sec, epidurally,
0.22-0.44 P0 q12-24h
 IV followed by 5.4
mg/kg per hour for 
0.05-0.1 IM, SC q4-6h
until reflexes are 
0.002-0.005 P0 q8h
24 to 48 hours
0.5-1 P0 q1 2h 
20-40 mg IA
0.05-0.5 IV, IM
 absent
8
q30sec, epidurally, until
0 N, IM, SC q2-4h 
mg/kg per hour for 24
0.05-0.1 mg/kg per hour
0.5 ml of 2% solution, 
reflexes are absent 
0.22-0.44 P0 q12-24h
0.25-1.0 SQ, IM q4-6h
0.1 epidurally q1 2-24h 
IV followed by 5.4
0.002-0.005 P0 q8h
0.05-0.1 IV q1 -2h
0.5-1 P0 q12h 
t 48 hours 
0.1 -0.25 IV, IM 
0.1 -0.5 1
4-10 P0
Carbocaine-V
Depo-Me-
drol, Solu-
Dolophine 
Medrol
Medrol, 
Mexitil
Versed
Cytotec
 Mepivacaine 
Methadone
Methylpred-
 nisolone
Mexiletine
Midazolam
Misoprostol
Morphine 
610
Appendix
F: 0.05-0.2 V, IM, SC
Ra: 0.05-0.2 IV, IM, SC
 Other Species
(6y/6w) saso0
q6-8h
q6-8h
0.001 -0.005 IV
Cattle Dose
0.01 -0.02 IV
(6y/6w)
Equine Dose
0.001-0.005 IV
0.02-0.08 IV
0.01 -0.02 IV
0.05-0.1 SC
0.001-002 IV
 200-400 mg/
0.04 V, SC 
horseIV
[6x/6w)
 as needed to reverse
0.002-0.04 IV, SC,IM
 22-3.3 IM, N, SC q4h 
Cat Dose (mg/kg)
Not recommended
Not recommended 
0.02-0.2 IV,IM, SC
1-1.5 mg/kg diluted
 0.2-0.4 V, SC, IM
0.05-0.1 SC
q1-44h
 opiate
as needed to reverse
 (behavioral
0.002-0.04 IV, SC, IM 
1-2 mg/kg diluted over
1.65-3.3 IM, IV, SC q4h
Dog Dose (mg/kg)
0.5-1 SC, IM q1 -4h
0.025-0.2 N, IM, SC
 2-4 hours IV, SC
1.0 PO q4-6h
0.05-0.1 SC
22 PO q1 2h 
problems)
0.03-0.5 IV
2-5 q1 2h 
opiate
1-4 SC
 Trade Name 
 MS Contin 
 Numorphan 
Talwvin-W
Nubain
Revex
Narcan
Trexan
Aredia
Morphine sul-
 fate tablets
Oxymorphone
sustained
release
Nalbuphine
 Pamidronate
and oral
Naltrexone
Pentazocine
Morphine
 sulfate: 
liquid
Nalmefene
Naloxone
Drug
Appendix
611
Continued
 Swine: 4 IV q24h 
17-25 loading
dose, then 
2.5-5 q24h
q48h PO, IV
or 10-14 
4.4-8.8 PO q24h
6-8 hours if 
 2-4 IV q24h 
mg/horse
necessary
q12-24h
total IM
Up to 0.1 IV 
0.5-1 P0
100-200
slowly
Repeat in
1-2 PO, IV, IM q12-24h 
 initially, then taper 
1-2 P0, IV, IM q12-24h 
 initially, then taper 
0.4-1.2 (2.5-5 mg/cat)
Not recommended 
68 IV, PO q12h 
0.7 PO q24h
One time
to q48h
toq48h
 PO q&h
P
2-3 P0
0.4-1.2
0.2-1 P0 q8h (titrate dose
0.5-1 PO, IV, IM q12-24h
 initially, then taper to
0.5-1 PO, IV,IM q12-24h
 initially, then taper to 
0.02-0.06 IV over 5-10
10-22 P0, IV q8-12h 
(max. 800 mg/dog)
 2-4 (max. 10) Iv in 
0.3-4 P0 q8-12h
0.1-0.3 PO q8-1 2h 
 increments
minutes
to effect) 
20-35 P0
q48h 
q48h 
(with acet-
aminophen)
Delta-Cortef
 (sustained 
 Phenylbutazone  Butazolidin 
Meticorten
Cortisat-20
OxyContin 
release)
Prilosec
Percocet
 Dilantin
Lyrica
Inderal
 Prednisolone
Prednisone
Omeprazole
Oxycodone
 Phenytoin
Pregabalin
 Propanolol
612
Appendix
Av: 0.1-0.5 P0 q1 2h 
Other Species
(6y/bw) saso0
Cattle Dose
(6y/6w)
Equine Dose
0.01-0.02 IV
(6y/6w)
0.008-0.12
V,IM
1 mg/cat P0 q24h max.
CRI: 4-10 μg/kg per hour
1-2 ml of 0.2%/kg intra-
 Total dose 1 SC for declaw
 mg/cat) P0 q8-12h
Loading:4-10 μg/kg 
 (pain management)
20-60 μg/kg per hour
(surgical analgesia)
 (sedation/analgesia)
0.01-0.02 IV (preanes-
Cat Dose (mg/kg)
1 ml of 0.2% or 0.5%
 per site intracostal
1 mg/15 kg (0.5-2
 nerve block 
0.3 PO q48h 
0.015-0.03 IV
0.05-0.2 IM,
0.02-0.03 IM
SC q3-4h
0.5 epidural
1000-100
7days
1810-600
0.03-0.06 1
0.02 IM
thetic}
CRI: 4-10 μg/kg per hour
1 ml of 0.2% or 0.5% per
0.3 PO q24h for 3 days,
 then every other day
 site intracostal nerve 
1-2 ml of 0.2%/kg intra-
0.05-0.2 IM, SC q2-4h 
I mg/15 kg (0.5-2 mg/
0.01 -0.02 IV (sedation/
 pleural regional block
(6y/6w) aso0 600
(pain management)
Loading: 4-10 μg/kg 
Jnou jad 6yy6n 09-0z
(surgical analgesia)
dog) P0 q8-12h 
0.02-0.04 IM, IV
(preanesthetic)
0.03-0.05 IV
analgesia)
0.005-0.01 IV
0.5 epidural
block
M
Trade Name 
Numorphan 
(sustained
release)
Minipress
Opana
Feldene
 Sedivet
Naropin
Ultiva
Oxymorphone
Remifentanil
 Romifidine 
 Ropivacaine
Piroxicam
Drug
Prazosin
Appendix
613
Ra: 5-10 PO q12-24h 
Sheep: 0.05-0.1 IV
Goats: 0.01 -0.5 IV
Swine: 0.5-3 IM
F: 5 P0 q12h
0.1-0.3 IM 
0.05-0.5 IM
Re: 1-1.25 IM 
0.125-0.2 IV
0.03-0.1 IV
 0.1 -0.2 IM 
0.075 IV
2.0 IV
0.5-5 slow IV
q12-24h
0.5-1 P0
0.5-1.0 IV
0.1-0.3 IV
0.3-0.5 IM
1-2 IM 
0.075 IV
0.5-1 P0 q12-24h,then 
 5-10 IV (experimental
taper dose to 0.5-1
0.11-0.22 P0, IM, SC
 0.2-0.4 SC,IM q1 -2h 
U.d,
 0.25-0.5 SC, IM 
0.5-5 slow IV
dosage)
IM, SC
0.05-0.1 IV
0.1-0.3 IV
q48h
0.5-1 P0 q12-24h, then
5-10 IV (experimental
taper dose to 0.5-1
0.11-0.22 P0, IM, SC 
0.1 g/kg per minute
Loading: 5 g/kg
0.2 SC, IM q1 -2h 
0.05-0.1 IV prn
0.25-0.5 SC,IM 
0.5-5 slow IV
1.1-2.2 IM, SC
dosage)
0.1-0.3 IV
q48h
 Tranquived 
Triamtabs
Aristocort
Rompun, 
 Sufenta 
Ultram
Vetalog
 Yobine
Triamcinolone
Sufentanil
Tolazoline
Tramadol
Yohimbine
 Xylazine
DFX
A
2-agonist(Continued)
α2-adrenoceptors
respiratory system, effect on,
analgesic action, mechanism of, 213
154,225b,225-226
distribution and expression of, 212t
side effects and toxicity of, 391
expression on,212
side effects of, 223
functional significance of
types of, 153b, 396, 396t
subtypes, 212
α2-Autoreceptors, 214-215
signal transduction
α2-Heteroceptors, 214
mechanism of, 213
Aβ nerve fiber
structure of, 211
pain sensation detection, 16
subtypes of, 211
sensory information transduction, 15
α2-agonist,153b
Aβ nociceptor, 16-17
02-adrenoceptors, molecular
A△ nerve terminal, 16-17
pharmacology of, 211
Abdomen, flank approach to, 451b
for analgesic therapy, 344
Abnormal movement, 63-65b
background of, 210
Absorption
for cancer pain, 407-408
decreasing, of drug, 393
cardiovascular system, effect on,
of drug, 118
154-155, 224b, 224-225
of local anesthesia, 235
central nervous system, effect
Acetaminophen
on, 153-154, 224b
doses in dogs and cats, 191t 
clinical issues with, 156
metabolism in feline, 418
clinical use of, 217b
use of, 405-407
continuous infusion during
Action potential, 13-15, 232
inhalant anesthesia, 220
Activation, 29t
endocrine system, effect on, 156,
Activator, 319, 319f
226b
Active range of motion, 517, 545
epidural/intrathecal administration
Active rehabilitation, 546, 555-556
of, 221-222
Active transport, 120
gastrointestinal system, effect
Activity, 62
on,155,226,226b
Acupuncture
genitourinary system, effect on, 156
abbreviations and locations for, 311b
imidazoline receptors, 212
adding electrical stimulation
intraarticular administration of, 223
to, 302-304
as pain treatment, 141, 152-153
adverse effects of, 308
 patient selection, considerations
archives, tips and chat room for, 333
for, 217
benefits of, 304-305
perineural administration of, 223
at calming point of scalp, 303f
pharmacokinetic properties of, 216b
as CAM modality, 302-304
pharmacologic considerations for, 153
for cancer pain, 411
pharmacology of, 215
contraindications for, 308
in postoperative or intensive
 courses and supply companies, 315
care patients, 220-221
defnition of, 57-59
receptor blockade and, 393-394
for effective analgesia, 450
as regional analgesic, 454
for feline pain, 431
renal system, effect on, 226b,
 gold bead implants, 308-310
226-227
indications for, 307
Page numbers followed by ab, indicate boxes; f, hgures; t, tables.
614
Index
615
Acupuncture (Continued)
Acute pain management (Continued)
mechanism of action, 304-307
tail amputation, feline, 374-375
overview of, 302b
thoracotomy/intercostal, canine, 370
for pain, areas of, 312-315
thoracotomy/sternotomy, feline, 369
for pain, studies of, 312t
trauma, feline, 377
percutaneous acupuncture
Acute-phase reactant, 52-55
electrostimulation, 303f
Acute-phase response, 55
 percutaneous electrical nerve
Addiction, cocaine, 241
stimulation (PENS), 304f
Addison’s disease, 255
points for head pain, 314t
Additivity, 136-137
points for pain, 307
Adjunctive medication, 141
points to induce analgesia,
Adjuvant analgesic drug
in cow, 310f
for cancer pain, 409t 
points to induce analgesia,
for dogs and cats, 161t
in dogs, 308f
types of, 159-162, 160t
points to induce analgesia,
Adrenal cortex, 50t
in horse, 309f
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
 spinal pain, approaches to, 310-312
function of, 49
suppliers for, 330
Afferent, 13
supplies for, 306f
Afferent sensory nerve fiber, 33-34
veterinary courses for, 332
Aggression
Acute pain
as 02-agonist side effect, 153-154
anorexia and, 72-74
jn avian, 467-468
definition of, 57-59
in canine and feline, 29-30
lameness in dog, 71f
expression of, 70f
in rabbits and ferrets, 496-497
opioid effect on, 143-145
reluctance to movement, 68
severe pain and, 65-66
stress and, 42-43
Agitation,399
stress response to, 44f, 45-46
Agonist, 131
treatment of, 78
See also Opioid agonist
Acute pain management
Agonist-antagonist
anastomosis, canine, 370-371
opioid agonist, combining with,
bilateral femoral fracture
450
repair, canine, 376
receptor blockade and, 393-394
castration, canine, 356-357
See aiso Opioid agonist-antagonist
castration, feline, 358
Alendronate, 271
cystotomy, canine, 372
Alfentanil, 170, 424
declaw of front feet, feline, 359
Allergic reaction, 241
elbow surgery, canine, 366
Allodynia
exercise-induced trauma, canine, 378
amantadine for, 267b
forelimb amputation, canine, 368
central sensitization and, 188-189f
incisor extraction, canine, 361
definition of, 57-59
intestinal resection, canine, 370-371
stimulus intensity and, 34f
laparotomy, canine, 370-371
windup contributing to,439
laparotomy, case study, 372
Amantadine, 266, 429f
lumbosacral disk surgery, canine, 374
American Animal Hospital Association,
mandibulectomy, canine, 362
standards of accreditation, 83-84
maxillectomy, canine, 362
Amide, properties of, 234t
nasal biopsy, canine, 364
Amino acid, 20
ovariohysterectomy, canine, 353, 355
Amino-amide local anesthetics
ovariohysterectomy, feline, 357
bupivacaine hydrochloride as, 246
pancreatitis, canine, 373
eutectic mixture of lidocaine and
radius/ulnar fracture repair,
prilocaine (EMLA), 245
canine, 367
lidocaine hydrochloride as, 244-245
rear limb amputation, canine, 375
 mepivacaine hydrochloride as,
shoulder surgery, canine, 365
246
616
Index
Amino-amide local anesthetics
Analgesic therapy (Continued)
(Continued)
components of, 343b
prilocaine hydrochloride as, 245
drug administration, routes
ropivacaine hydrochloride as,
of, 345, 346b, 346f
246-247
drug issues with, 344b
Amino-ester local anesthetics
drug rotation schedules for, 351
benzocaine as, 243
drug selection for, 344-345
procaine hydrochloride as, 242-243
environment as factor for, 341
proparacaine hydrochloride
factors to consider, 338b
as, 243-244
failure of, 351, 352b
tetracaine hydrochloride as, 243
medical history as factory for, 340
Amitriptyline, 429f
multiple drug administration for, 351
AMPA receptor, 23
multiple low dosing for, 350
Amputation
multiple routes for, 351
forelimb of canine, case
 nonsteroidal antinflammatory
study,368,383
drug as, 345
rear limb of canine, analgesia
opioids as, 344
for, 432b
owner expectations as factor for, 341
rear limb of canine, case study, 375
pain cause as factor for, 341-342
tail of feline, case study, 374-375
pain duration as factor for, 342-343
Amygdala, 27f
 pain history as factor for, 340
Analeptic, 398
pain severity as factor for, 342
Analgesia
pharmacologic history as
α2-agonist for,217-218,218t
factor for, 340
benefits of, 482
physical status as factor for, 339
defnition of, 57-59
in reptiles, 485
mediation at brainstem, 214-215
sex as factor for, 339
mediation at dorsal horn, 214
treatment plan development
production of, 132t
for, 343-344
side effects and toxicity of, 391
weight as factor for, 338-339
synergistic effect from combining,
Analgesic trial, 418
470-471
Anastomosis, case study, 370-371
Analgesia ladder, 403f, 403-404
Anesthesia
Analgesic adjuvant, 217
defnition of, 57-59
Analgesic drug
disregard of, 6
administration, techniques for, 349
by infiltration, 278-279, 280f
benefits versus side effects, 78-79
 stress response, causing, 49
in bovine, 445b, 448t
See aiso General anesthesia
dasses of, 486
Animal
combinations in equine, 449t
anthropomorphism and, 13 
dosages for rabbit and ferret, 499t
cancer pain management, 402
dosages for reptile, 488-489t
a5 companion, 8
epidural, in bovine, 453t
distress in, 9
jn equine, 445b, 446-447t
ethical treatment of, 2-5
limited knowledge of, 6
fight or flight response from,
lipophilicity of, 118-119
42-43
postsurgical and posttraumatic, 7
five freedoms of, 42, 43b
regional, in equine, 452t
mental state of, 8
side effects, therapy for, 397t
quality of life of, 578-579
types of, 142t
social ethics and role of, 7-8
Analgesic therapy
well-being of, 42-43
2-agonist as, 344
Animal analgesia, 6
age as factor for, 338
Animal suffering
anamnesis of animal, 338
ethical concern for, 2-3
breed as factor for, 339
 pain management for, 4-5
dhoices of, 337-338
for research, 4
Index
617
Animal welfare, 11b
Autonomic nervous system
Animal Welfare Act, 4
activation of,48
Anion, 123-124
brain region associated with, 27f
Anorexia, 72-74
stress change in, 44f
Antagonist, 131-133
Avian
Anterolateral system, 26-28
benzodiazepine for, 470-471
Anthropomorphism, 13
dosage recommendations, 472
Anticholinergic, 400
drug type and dosage for,
Anticruelty law, 2-3
602-613t
Antidepressant
local anesthesia effect on, 471-472
as pain treatment, 141
NSAID for pain treatment,
tricyclic, for cancer pain, 410
474-476, 475t
Antidiuretic hormone, 51
opioid effect on, 472-473
Antiinsulin effect, 51
pain behavior in, 467-468
Antinociception, 27f
physiology of pain in, 468-470
Anxiety
brain region associated with, 27f
B
 pain-associated characteristics
Back
of, 63-65b
acupuncture for, 310-311
tranquilizer for, 470-471
rehabilitation of, 576
Anxiolysis, 223-224
 sources of pain, 313-314t
Apoptosis, restoration of, 433
Balance board, 563f
Appearance
Balanced epidural anesthesia, 455
chronic pain and stress, 74
Baricity, varying of, 238
facial expressions and, 72
Behavior
Appetite
assessment of, 440-441
anorexia,72
in avian, 467-468
loss of, 44f
body posture and activity, 62
Apprehension
brain region associated with, 27f
as analgesic drug side effect, 399
cat escaping, 65-66, 70f
pain-associated characteristics
changes in as side effect, 397-398
of, 63-65b
opioid effect on, 143-145
Aquatic therapy
pain-associated characteristics of,
cohesion and turbulence in, 556
63-65b
contraindications for, 556-557
 pain causing change in, 42,
hydrostatic pressure in, 556
47-48, 416-418
introduction of feline to, 557
 pain indicators in equine/bovine,
recommendations for, 557
442t
uses for, 555-556
in reptile, 482-484, 483-484b
See aiso Underwater treadmill;
stress response to, 44f
Water
urinary/bowel habits, 75
Arachidonic acid, 148-149, 186-187f
Behavioral pain scale, 89-94
Arousal, 27f
 Behavioral response scale, 94
Arterial blood pressure, low,
Behavior modifer, 141
400-401
Benzocaine, 243
Aspirin
Benzodiazepine, 5-6, 470-471
doses in dogs and cats, 191t
Benzodiazepine antagonist, 396-397
as off-label NSAID, 193-194
Bicarbonate, 238
Atrioventricular block, 146
Bilateral elbow dysplasia, 386
02-agonist as cause of, 154-155,
Bilateral elbow osteoarthritis, 387
224-225
 Bilateral femoral fracture repair, 376
as analgesic drug side effect,
Bilateral hip osteoarthritis, 384
400
Bilateral stifle osteoarthritis, 385
 opioid as cause of, 176
Biliary excretion, 124
Atrophy, 540, 550
 Biliary smooth muscle, 179
Auditory stimuli, 42
Bioavailability, 128, 487-490
618
Index
Bioequivalence, 128
Bupivacaine
Biologic membrane, 118-119
dilution and administration
Biomedicine, 4
for epidural, 300
Biotransformation, 236-237
dosage for avian, 472
Biphasic stimulation, 303f
for feline pain, 429
Bird. See Avian
side effects of, 240b
Bisphosphonates, 410-411
Bupivacaine hydrochloride, 246
Bladder, distention and irritation, 75
Buprenorphine
Blood coagulation, 49f
analgesic effects of, 405-407
Blood flow
classification of, 500-501
cyclooxygenase enzymes as
for feline pain, 421
regulator of, 199f
overview of, 172
drug delivery and rate of, 120
for rabbit and ferret pain, 498
Blood-flow rate-limited diffusion,121
Butorphanol
Blood glucose, 51
for avian pain, 473
Blood pressure
dosage effects of, 393-394
α2-agonist effect on, 154-155
for feline pain, 421-422
low, consequences of, 400-401
as intravenous constant rate
Blood vessel, vasoconstriction of, 199f
infusion (CRI), 500
Body composition, 545
overview of, 170-171
Body posture, as pain indicator, 62
for rabbit and ferret pain, 498
Bombesin, 18-19
for reptile pain, 486-487
Bone healing, NSAID effect on, 200
Bovine
C
acupuncture for, 310f
Calcitonin gene-related peptide
 analgesic drugs for, 445b, 448t
(CGRP), 18-19
drug type and dosage for, 602-613t
Camelid, drugs for, 602-613t
epidural analgesic drugs for, 453t
Cancer
face branding of, 3
NSAID for tumor growth
multimodal analgesic therapy in,
inhibition, 433
448
pain management of patients, 5-6
painful behavior assessment,
Questionnaire for Evaluating
440-441
Health-Related Quality of
pain indicators in, 442t, 444f
Life in Dogs with Signs of
pain tolerance of, 441
 Pain Secondary to Cancer,
systemic drug therapy in, 437
581-582, 583-584b
Bowel habit, 75
Cancer pain
Brachial plexus, 290f
02-agonist for, 407-408
Brachial plexus block, 289, 291f
acupuncture for, 411
Bradyarrhythmia, 146, 154-155,
adjuvant drugs for, 409t
224-225
approaches to,411-412
Bradycardia
bisphosphonates for, 410-411
α2-agonist as cause of, 154-155
components of, 82-83
opioid as cause of, 146, 176
control, ABCs of, 411b
Brain
defnition of, 57-59
opiate receptor in, 175
 drug and techniques for, 403-404
regions of, 27f
 in feline, 433
 somatosensory modalities route to,
glucocorticoid for,253
26
local anesthesia for, 410
Brainstem, 214-215
local/whole body radiation
Breakthrough pain, 57-59
for, 410
British Brambell Commission (1965),
management of, 402
4-5
methylprednisone for, 253
Bruticaine,7
morphine for, 405-407
Buccal administration, of drug, 348
 NMDA receptor antagonist, 408
Buffered vitamin C, 273, 274t
nonopioids for, 404-405
Index
619
Cancer pain (Continued)
Canine(Continued)
opioid for, 405-407
NSAID doses for, 191t
stronium-89 for, 411
NSAID toxicity treatment in, 198t 
surgical, management of, 412t
opioid effect on, 145
tranquilizer for, 408-409
osteosarcoma, case study, 389-390
tricyclic antidepressants for, 410
ovariohysterectomy, case
Canine
study, 353, 355
2-agonist effect on, 153-154
pain indicators in, 63b
active range of motion, 517
pancreatitis, case study, 373
acupuncture abbreviations
 passive range of motion, 514
and locations, 311b
percutaneous acupuncture
 adjuvant analgesic drugs for, 161t
electrostimulation, 303f
altered facial expressions/
physical modalities for pain in, 507
appearance,72
physical rehabilitation for, 513-514
anastomosis, case study, 370-371
physiologic/behavioral characteristics
appearance of, 74
of pain, 63-65b
behavior as pain indicator, 47-48
radiation-induced, case study, 382
bilateral elbow osteoarthritis,
radius/ulnar fracture repair,
case study, 387
case study, 367
bilateral femoral fracture
rear limb amputation, case study, 375
repair, case study, 376
shoulder surgery, case study, 365
body posture and activity of, 62
stretching in, 516
castration, case study, 356-357
therapeutic exercise for, 513-514,
contrast thermotherapy in, 513
517-518
cryotherapy in, 507-508
thermotherapy in, 511
cystotomy, case study, 372
thoracotomy/intercostal,
drug type and dosage for, 602-613
case study, 370
elbow dysplasia, bilateral,
transcutaneous electrical nerve
case study, 386
stimulation, 525-526
elbow surgery, case study, 366
trigger point therapy for, 532
exercise-induced trauma,
Capillary membrane, 118-119
case study, 378
Caprine, drugs for, 602-613t
fght or flight response from, 42-43
Carbohydrate metabolism, 51
forelimb amputation, case
Carbonation, 238
study, 368, 383-384
Cardiac output, 120
hip dysplasia, case study, 379-380
Cardiovascular system
hip osteoarthritis, case study, 381
α2-agonist effect on, 154-155,
hip pain, case study, 388
224b,224-225
incisor extraction, case study, 361
local anesthesia effect on,
intestinal resection, case
158, 240-241
study, 370-371
 nonsteroidal antinflammatory
laparotomy, case study, 370-372
drug effect on, 151
lidocaine patch on, 279f
NSAID effect on, 200-201
low-level laser therapy (LLLT) for, 528
opioid effect on, 146
lumbar pain, case study, 388
pain symptoms of, 32t
lumbosacral area of, 298f
Carfentanil, 170
lumbosacral disk surgery,
Carpal, rehabilitation of, 576
case study, 374
Carprofen
mandibulectomy, case study,
as approved NSAID, 190
362-363
for chronic disorders, 477
massage for, 530
 doses in dogs and cats, 191t
maxillectomy, case study, 362
for feline pain, 426
muscle strengthening activity for, 523
Carpus, ROM for, 552-553
nasal biopsy, case study, 364
Carrier-mediated transport, 119-120
neck and back pain, sources
Cart, 564
of, 313-314t
Cartilage, NSAID effect on, 197-200
620
Index
Case study
Caudal epidural anesthesia
anastomosis, canine, 370-371
advantages and disadvantages
bilateral elbow osteoarthritis,
of, 458-459
canine, 387
catheter, placement of, 459f
 bilateral femoral fracture
continuous, 459f
repair, canine, 376
neuroanatomy and needle
castration, canine, 356-357
placement for, 457f
castration, feline, 358
overview of, 457-459
cystotomy, canine, 372
Caudal regional anesthesia, 463
declaw of front feet, feline, 359
Cavaletti rail, 517, 522, 564-566, 570f
elbow dysplasia, bilateral, canine, 386
Center of chirality, 134
elbow surgery, canine, 366
Central nervous system (CNS)
exercise-induced trauma, canine, 378
α2-agonist effect on, 153-154, 224b
forelimb amputation, canine,
Aβ nerve fiber and, 15
368, 383-384
central sensitization within, 36
hip dysplasia, canine, 379-380
gate control theory, 24-25,25f
hip osteoarthritis, canine, 381
glucocorticoid effect on, 257
hip osteoarthritis, feline, 384
local anesthesia effect on, 157-158
hip pain, canine,388
local anesthesia toxicity, 239-240
incisor extraction, canine, 361
nonsteroidal antinflammatory
intestinal resection, canine, 370-371
drug effect on, 150-151
laparotomy, canine, 370-372
opioid effect on, 143
lumbar pain, canine, 388
pain symptoms within,32t
lumbosacral disk surgery, canine, 374
peripheral nerves as extension, 14
mandibulectomy, canine, 362-363
sedation/depression of, 175
maxillectomy, canine, 362
Central nervous system (CNS)
nasal biopsy, canine, 364
depression, 175, 398
ostcosarcoma, canine, 389-390
Central sensitization, 37f, 188-189f, 440f
ovariohysterectomy, canine, 353, 355
in avian, 469
ovariohysterectomy, feline, 357
NMDA receptor and, 408
pancreatitis, canine, 373
opioid use for, 419
radiation-induced pain, canine, 382
overview of, 34-36
radius/ulnar fracture repair,
windup contributing to, 439
canine, 367
Cerebellum, 27f
rear limb amputation, canine, 375
C-fiber nociceptor, 17
shoulder surgery, canine, 365
Chemical restraint
stifle osteoarthritis, feline, 385
 medetomidine as, 428
tail amputation, case study, 374-375
See also Anesthesia
thoracotomy/intercostal, canine, 370
Chemical stimuli
thoracotomy/sternotomy, feline, 369
receptor sensitivity to,14-15
trauma, feline, 377
transduction of, 14f
Castration
Chest wall rigidity, 146
of canine, case study, 356-357
Chirality
of feline, case study, 358
center of, 134
using bruticaine, 7
local anesthesia and, 235
using curariform, 6
Chiropractic manipulation, 450
Cat. See Animal; Feline
Cholecystokinin, 18-19
Catabolism
Chondroitin supplement, 273
pain increasing, 440
Chondroprotective agent, 431-433
of protein, 52
Chondrosarcoma, 413-414
as stress response, 44f
Chronic osteoarthritis, 580-581
Cataracts, 256
Chronic pain
Catecholamine, 50, 400-401
anorexia and, 72-74
Cation, 123-124
appearance, effect on, 74
Cattle. See Bovine
in avian, 468t
Caudal anesthesia, 296-297, 452
definition of, 57-59
Index
621
Chronic pain (Continued)
Complementary and alternative
exercise and, 518
medicine (Continued)
in felines, 417-418
herbs as, 315-318
health-related quality of life
homeopathy as, 322-323
(HRQL) and, 579
magnet therapy as, 320
measuring HRQL, 579-581
 pulsed electromagnetic feld
NSAID for pain treatment, 477
(PEMF) therapy, 321
quality of life and, 578-579
veterinary manual therapy as, 318
in rabbits and ferrets, 496-497
Comprehensive care strategy,
reluctance to movement, 68
for disease, 590b
stress and, 42-43
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention
treatment of, 78
and Control Act, 179
weight shifting in dog, 71f
Compression wrap, 509
Chronic pain management
Computed tomographic image,
bilateral elbow osteoarthritis,
303f
canine, 387
Concentration gradient, 118-119
elbow dysplasia, bilateral, canine,
Constant rate infusion (CRI), 350f
386
of butorphanol, 500
forelimb amputation, canine, 383-384
drug type and dosage for, 602-613t
hip dysplasia, canine, 379-380
in feline, 424
hip osteoarthritis, canine, 381
of fentanyl, 502-503
hip osteoarthritis, feline, 384
steady state value, 129f
hip pain, canine, 388
uses for, 349-350
lumbar pain, canine, 388
Constipation, 178-179
osteosarcoma, canine, 389-390
Continuous caudal epidural
radiation-induced pain, canine, 382
anesthesia, 459-460
stifle osteoarthritis, feline, 385
Continuous caudal subarachnoid
Cingulate gyrus, 27f
anesthesia, 460-461
Clearance (CL), 126-127
Contrast bath
Clinical effcacy, 138-139
application of, 513
Clinical pain, 438
Contrast thermotherapy
Clinical pharmacology, 113
 indications and contraindications
Clonidine, 215, 264
for, 513
C nerve fiber, 16
uses and effcacy of, 513
Cocaine, addiction to, 241
Controlled ball playing, 524-525
Codeine, 405-407
Cornea, morphine application, 173
Cold, pain and, 508b
Cortex, 27f
Cold immersion bath, 510
Cortical norepinephrine, 48-49
Cold therapy
Corticotropin-releasing factor, 48-49
application of, 547
Corticotropin-releasing factor
cold pack application, 547f
(CRF), 18-19, 46-47
contraindications for, 547-548
Cortisol, 50, 52
phototherapy as, 553-554
Cough suppression, opioids and, 145
Colic, equine behavior from, 443f 
Cow. See Animal; Bovine
Colonoscopy,5-6
Craniad distribution, 296-297
Colorado State University
Cranial nerve ganglia, 18-19
Veterinary Medical Center
Cruelty, 2-3
acute pain scale, 98-99,
Cryotherapy
102-103f, 104-105f
application of, 509
vertical pain scale, 100-101f
duration and frequency of, 510-511
Companion animal, 8
effects of, 508b
Complementary and alternative
indications for, 508
medicine
precautions and contraindications
acupuncture as, 302-304
for, 508b
considerations for, 301
uses for, 507-508
for feline pain, 430-431
Curariform drug, 6
622
Index
Cushing's syndrome, 255
Disease
Cyclooxygenase synthase (COX)
comprehensive care strategy, 590b
NSAID inhibition of,
educating about process of, 591-593
183-185, 199f, 474
side effects of process of, 599b
pain and inflammation
Disinhibition, 36
production,186-187f
Disposition
types of, 148-149
of local anesthesia, 235
Cystotomy, case study, 372
 one-compartment model of
Cytochrome P450 enzyme, 122
intravenous drug, 116f 
Cytokine
plasma concentration (Cp)
release of, 49f
time curve, 115f
role of, 52-55
two-compartment model of
 systemic inflammatory response
intravenous drug, 117f
syndrome (SIRS), 52-55
Distress, 9
cause of, 42-43
D
definition of, 45
Dairy cow. See Animal; Bovine
Distribution
Dancing
factors of, 120
as exercise, 521-522
of local anesthesia, 235-236
as weight-bearing exercise, 564
volume of, 125-126
Death
Dog. See Animal; Canine
blood glucose and, 51
Dorsal column, 21
emotional support after, 596
Dorsal horn
from pain, 9-10
analgesia mediation at level of, 214
serum cortisol concentration, 50
gray matter of, 20-21
Declaw, front feet
sensory information processing, 22-23
analgesia for, 432b
Dorsal root ganglia, 18-19
of feline, case study, 359
Dorsal root nerve, 19-20
pain from,432b
Dosage regimen
Decline walking, 568, 573f
calculation of, 128
Decomposition, 122-123
loading dose administration, 130
Defecation, 178
Dose-effect relationship, 134
Demerol, 422-423
Dose-response curve, 132f
Depression
Dosing interval, 130
as analgesic drug side effect, 398
Down-to-stand exercise, 564
pain and, 65-66
Drug
Deracoxib
absorption and distribution of, 114
as approved NSAID, 190
absorption of, 118, 235
doses in dogs and cats, 191t
absorption of, decreasing, 393
Dermatome, 17
abuse classifcation of, 179
Detomidine
administration, route of, 124, 485-486
epidural administration of, 454
administration, techniques for, 349b
pharmacology of, 216
administration at home, 433-434
sedation from, 454
agonist versus antagonist, 131
Dexmedetomidine
for analgesic therapy, 344
continuous infusion of, 220-221
antagonism of, 392b
doses for, 218t, 221t
bioavailability of, 128
pharmacology of, 215
bioequivalence of, 128
Differential ionization, 121
 biotransformation and
Differential nerve block, 232-233
excretion of, 236-237
Diffusion
clinical effcacy of, 138-139
blood-flow rate limited, 121
concentration versus time, 113-114
of drug, 118
constant rate infusion (CRI), 129f
membrane-limited, 121
craniad distribution of, 296-297
rate determinants of, 118-119
detection in plasma, 114 
Digital nerve block, 428, 429f
diffusion of, 118
Index
623
Drug (Continued)
Elbow,293
discontinuation of, 392
bilateral dysplasia in canine,
disposition of, 235
case study, 386
distribution of, 235-236
bilateral osteoarthritis in
dosing interval, 130
canine, case study, 387
elimination of, 113-114, 127b
injection into, 294f
elimination of, increasing, 393
passive range of motion for, 553, 554f
excretion of, 123
rehabilitation of, 575-576
extravascular administration of, 124
surgery in canine, case study, 366
half-life of, 127
Electrical impulse, 439
injectable, types of, 260
Electrical signal, 14
intravenous bolus dose of, 124
Electrical stimulation
intravenous infusion of, 124
for attenuation of muscle atrophy, 550
intrinsic activity of, 133
contraindications for, 549
lpophilicity of, 118-119, 119t
for pain management, 549
membrane transportation of, 118
uses for, 549
metabolism in feline, 418
Electroacupuncture, 302-304
metabolism in liver, 122-123
Electrolyte, 256
oral, types of, 264
 Electromagnetic therapy, 450
oral administration of, 345-347
Elimination
physical dependence on, 139
of drug, increasing, 393
potency of, 132f, 133-134
half-life of drug, 127b, 127
prolonged-release dosage forms, 125
lidocaine and, 136
protein binding, 121
volume of distribution during, 125
renal failure and elimination of, 113
Emotion, 27f
 routes of administration, 
Enantiomorph, 134
345,346b,346f
End feel, joint, 542t
side effects and toxicity of, 391
Endocrine pain, 32t
tolerance to, 139
Endocrine system, 156, 226b, 227
types and dosage of, 602-613t
Endogenous opioid, 24-25
ultrafltration of, 119
Endorphin (END), 18-19
See also Intravenous drug;
Endurance exercise, 540-541
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory
Enkephalin (ENK), 18-19
drug (NSAID); Opioid
Enteric nervous system, 37f
Drug abuse, 179
Enterohepatic cycling, 124
Drug antagonism, 136
Environmental stimuli, 14, 440-441
Drug antagonist, 393-394, 451t
Enzyme, 18-19
Drug dose
Epidural, definition of, 57-59
calculation of, 128-130
Epidural administration
principles of, 113
of α2-agonist, 221-222
Drug interaction, 136
for analgesic therapy, 347
Drug metabolite, 123-124
dilution/administration of
Drug synergism, 448-449
morphine/bupivacaine, 300
Dynorphin (DYN), 18-19
of glucocorticoid, 253
Dysphoria, 176, 408-409, 594-595
of medetomidine, 428
Dysplasia
of morphine, 173
bilateral elbow in canine,
of opioid in feline, 424
case study, 386
Epidural anesthesia/analgesia
of hip in canine, case study, 379-380
balanced, 455
for cancer pain, 410
E
purpose of, 450-451
Efferent, 13
site of injection, 296-297
Effcacy, opioid, 142
Epidural injection, 297b
Effleurage massage technique, 532, 552
alternative hanging drop
Eicosanoid synthesis, 183-185
technique, 299
Elastic bands, 524f, 524
catheter, placement of, 299
624
Index
Epidural injection (Continued)
Excitement, 176
in ferret, 502f
Excretion
single injection technique, 297-299
 of drug and drug metabolites, 123
Epidural opioid, 454-455
of local anesthesia, 236-237
Epidural space, 296-297, 459-460
Exercise
Epinephrine
dhronic pain and, 518
effects of, 50
controlled ball playing, 524-525
increase in, 52
dancing as, 521-522
local anesthesia and, 238b, 278b
elastic bands, 524f, 524
Equilibrium, steady-state, 125-126
as feline therapy, 557-560
Equine
for obesity, 576-577
abnormal posture in, 443f
physical rehabilitation and, 513-514
acupuncture for, 309f
sit-to-stand, 520, 521f
analgesic drug combinations in,
strengthening, 517-518, 523
449t
stretching and, 516
analgesic drugs for, 445b, 446-447t,
weight-bearing, 564
452t
Exercised-induced trauma,
castration of, 6
case study, 378
drug type and dosage for, 602-613t
Extracorporeal shock wave
extracorporeal shock wave
treatment (ESwT), 534-535
treatment (ESwT) in, 535
application of, 535-536,537f
multimodal analgesic therapy in,
effects of, 535b
448
indications for, 535
 painful behavior assessment, 440-441
orthopedic application of, 534-535
pain indicators in, 442t
precautions and contraindications
 percutaneous electrical nerve
for, 536b
stimulation (PENS), 304f
Extravascular drug administration, 124
pointing in, 444f
regional analgesic drugs for, 452t
F
Regional anesthesia
Face branding,3
equipment for, 456t
Facial expression, 44f
Regional anesthesia
appearance and, 72
techniques in, 458t
of cat in pain, 73f, 74f
rolling in, 443f 
of dog in pain, 73f, 76f
systemic drug therapy in, 437
Facilitated transport, 120
Escape behavior, 29-30
Farm animal, pain control, 8-9
Escaping, 70f
Fat metabolism, 52
pain and, 65-66
Fear
Ester, properties of, 234t
brain region associated with, 27f
Ethics
as stress response, 44f
of animal cruelty, 3
Feline
of animal treatment, 2-5
α2-agonist effect on, 153-154
wncontrolled pain and suffering, 8
acetaminophen metabolism in,418
Etodolac
acupuncture needle on scalp of, 303f
as approved NSAID, 190-192
acute pain in, 416-417
doses in dogs and cats, 191t
adjuvant analgesic drugs for, 161t
Etomidate, 50
altered facial expressions/
 Eutectic mixture of lidocaine and
appearance,72
prilocaine (EMLA), 245
appearance of, 74
Euthanasia, 10, 588
behavior as pain indicator, 47-48
Everlase medical laser, 305f
body posture and activity of, 62
Evidence-based veterinary medicine,
cancer pain in, 433
581
castration, case study, 358
Exaggerated pain, 32b
dhronic pain in, 417-418
Excitatory synaptic transmission,
declaw of front feet, case study, 359
24t,24-25
drug administration at home, 433-434
Index
625
Feline (Continued)
Ferret
drug metabolism in, 418
analgesic drug dosages for, 499t
drug type and dosage for, 602-613t
drug type and dosage for, 602-613t
escaping and, 65-66
epidural injection in, 502f
exercise therapy for, 557-560
ketamine use in, 505
fght or flight response from, 42-43
local anesthesia use in, 504
flexion of hock, measurement of, 544f 
meloxicam use in, 503-504
general trauma, case study, 377
opioid use in, 498-503
grooming, failure to,74
pain recognition in,
hair loss in, 75f
494-495, 495b, 496f
hepatic glucuronidation in, 418
tramadol use in, 505
hip osteoarthritis, case study, 384
Fever, stress and, 53-55
hyperthermia from opioid use, 180
Fibrosis, of epidural space, 459
Karnofsky's score, 585b, 586b
Fight or flight, 42-43, 44f, 50
Karnofsky's score for, 582-586
Firocoxib
local anesthetics for, 428-429
as approved NSAID, 192
morphine metabolism in, 418
doses in dogs and cats, 191t
neck and back pain, sources
First-pass metabolism, 122-123
of, 313-314t
Flank surgery, anesthesia for, 461-462
NSAID doses for, 191t
Fluid balance, 256
NSAID toxicity treatment in, 198t
Food supply, animal agriculture, 5
NSAID use in, 424-426
Foramina, 286f
opioid effect on, 143-145
Forefoot block, 287, 288f
opioid use in, 419, 425t
Forelimb amputation
osteoarthritis in, 417, 431
of canine, case study, 368, 383
ovariohysterectomy, case study, 357
pain control, approaches to, 412-413
owner-provided history of, 542-543
Forward dancing, 522
pain indicators in, 63b
Fracture, NSAID effect on, 200
 pain management in, 415
Freedom, five, 42,43b
 pain management techniques for, 540
Free drug, 121
pain recognition in, 416
Free nerve ending, 16
pain treatment, challenges to,415b
Freezing, 44f
passive range of motion for, 552
Front limb exercise
 physiologic/behavioral characteristics
decline walking as, 568
of pain, 63-65b
down-to-sit as, 566
rehabilitation consideration for, 540
physioroll as, 566, 571f
rehabilitation of, 538
trail of treats, 568, 572f
rehabilitation session, productive
tunnel walking as, 568, 573f
and safe, 539b
wheelbarrowing as, 566, 570f
stifle osteoarthritis, case study, 385
Front limb rehabilitation
strengthening exercises for, 540
of back, 576
tail amputation, case study,
of carpal, 576
374-375
of elbow, 574-575
thoracotomy/sternotomy,
of knee, 572-574
case study, 369
for obesity, 576-577
Femoral nerve block, 291
of shoulder, 574
Fentanyl
Full agonist, 131, 132f, 393-394
for avian pain, 473-474
Fungal infection, 257
for cancer pain, 405-407
25 constant rate infusion
G
(CRI), 502-503
Gabapentin, 267, 429f
constant rate infusion (CRI) of, 424
GABA receptor, 23
for feline pain, 422
Gait
as opioid agonist, 169
analysis of, 545-546
for rabbit and ferret pain, 498
cavaletti exercises for, 564-566, 570f
transdermal administration of, 174
as indicator of pain, 63-65b
626
Index
Gait (Continued)
Glucocorticoid(Continued)
stilted, 68
for intervertebral disk
training technique for, 560-561
disease pain, 252
Galanin (GAL), 18-19
intraarticular administration of, 253
Gastric ulceration, 256
mechanisms of action, 250-251
Gastrointestinal motility, 158
neuropathy/myopathy as
Gastrointestinal pain, symptoms of, 32t
side effect of, 255
Gastrointestinal stasis, 155
for otitis externa inflammation
Gastrointestinal system
and pain, 252
2-agonist effect on,155, 226, 226b
perineural administration of, 253
local anesthesia effect on,158
pharmacology of, 254t
 nonsteroidal antinflammatory
polyphagia as side effect of, 256
drug effect on, 151, 152b
prototypes of, 249-250
NSAID effect on, 195-196, 196b
side effects and toxicity of, 254-255
opioid effect on, 147
 for systemic inflammatory
Gate control theory, 24-25, 25f
disease pain, 252
General anesthesia
toxicity of, 257
medetomidine as adjunct to, 219
veterinary medicine, used in, 254t
preanesthetic sedative-analgesic
wound healing, delay in, 256
agent,219-220
Glucocorticoid receptor, 250
Genitourinary system
Glucosamine/chondroitin
α2-agonist effect on, 156
supplement, 273, 274t
nonsteroidal antinflammatory
Glucosamine hydrochloride, 273, 274t
drug effect on, 151
Glucosamine sulfate,273,274t
opioid effect on, 147
Glucuronidation pathway,
Gesellschaft, 8
deficiency of, 418
Glasgow Composite Measure
Glutamate
Pain Scale Short Form
postsynaptic receptor activation, 20
(GCMPS-SF), 94, 97-98b
release of, 33f
Glasgow Composite Pain
Glycine receptor, 23
Tool, 94, 95-97b
Goal
Glaucoma, 256
achievement of, 544
Glomerular filtration, 123-124
of rehabilitation, 543
Glucagon, 50-52
Gold bead implants, 308-310
Glucocorticoid
Goniometer, 544f
Addison's disease as side effect of, 255
Gray matter
adverse effects of, 255b
anatomy of, 22f
central nervous system, effect on, 257
overview of, 20-21
Cushing's syndrome, 255
regions of, 19-20
effects of, 250
Grooming, avian failure to, 467-468
effcacy and use of, 251, 251b
Grooming, failure to, 74
electrolyte/fluid balance, effect on, 256
Growth hormone, 51
epidural administration of, 253
Guarding, 68
gastric ulceration,
Gut stasis, 158
development of, 256
glaucoma/cataracts,
H
development of, 256
Hair loss, 74, 75f
hypoadrenocorticism as
Half-life
side effect of, 255
drug elimination and, 127
jatrogenic bacterial and fungal
drug metabolism in feline, 418
infection, 257
steady-state equilibrium and,
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
128-130
as side effect of, 255
Hanging drop technique, 299, 457-458
immunosuppression as side
Head pain, acupuncture points for, 314t
effect of, 256-257
Health, pain-associated
insulin resistence as side effect of, 257
characteristics, 63-65b
Index
627
Health-related quality of life (HRQL)
Horse. See Animal; Equine
dhronic pain and, 578
Hospice care
measurement of, 579-581
benefits and goals of, 588
Questionnaire for Evaluating
comfort,tips to improving, 599b
Health-Related Quality of Life
comprehensive care strategy, 591-593
 in Dogs with Signs of Pain
disease process, educating about,
Secondary to Cancer, 581-582
592b
Heat pack, 511
emotional support during, 596
Heat therapy
euthanasia and, 588
application of, 511, 548f, 548
guidelines for use of, 588
contraindications for, 548
medication side effect list, 595b
duration and frequency of, 512
 owner needs, beliefs and
indications for, 511
goals for, 590-591
precautions and contraindications
 personalized plan, development of,
for, 512b
593-595
uses for, 511
protocol for, 590
Hematology,55
 psychosocial concerns
Hematopoietic system, 159
assessment, 592b
Hemodynamics, 49f
qualifications/circumstances for,
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 121
589b
Hepatic glucuronidation, 418
rehabilitation techniques in,
Hepatopathy, 257
596-597, 597-598t
Hepatotoxicity, 196b
techniques for, 595, 595b
NSAID effect on, 196-197
House training, loss of, 75
Herb
Howling,7
effects of, 315-318
Human
for pain, 316-317t, 318b
anthropomorphism and, 13
yucca root as,315f
medicine as science-based, 5
High-sensitivity nerve ending, 15
Husbandry agriculture, 4-5
Hill equation, 134
Hyaluronidase, 237
Hip,294
Hydrogen ion, 234
dysplasia in canine, case
Hydromorphone
study, 379-380
in feline, 420
osteoarthritis in canine,
for feline pain, 423
case study, 381
overview of, 168
osteoarthritis in feline, case study,
as preemptive analgesia, 501-502
384
for rabbit and ferret pain, 498
pain in canine, case study, 388
Hydrophilic drug, 118
passive range of motion for, 553
Hydrophobic membrane, 118
rehabilitation of, 569-571
Hydrostatic pressure, 556
Hippocampus
Hydrotherapy, 450
location in brain, 27f
Hyperalgesia, 33-34, 34f
long-term potentiation and, 439
defnition of, 57-59
Histamine release, 146, 178
development of, 188-189f
Hock, 574
windup contributing to, 439
Homeopathy
Hyperesthesia, 57-59
adverse effects of, 323
Hyperglycemia, 51
homeopathic pellets, 323f
Hyperpathia, 57-59
indications for, 323
Hypersensitivity, 33-34
mechanism of action, 322-323
Hyperthermia, 180, 420-421
Homeostasis
Hypoadrenocorticism, 255
pain interrupting, 29-30
Hypoalgesia, 57-59
restoration of, 45, 51
Hypoesthesia, 57-59
stress and, 42
Hypotension, 400-401
Hormonal status, changing, 48, 50t
Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical
Hormone, homeostasis restoration, 51
(HPA) system axis, 48
628
Index
Hypothalamus
International Pain Society, 6
activation of, 49f
Interneuron, 19-21
location in brain, 27f
Interpleural block, 281, 282f
Interventional pain management,
57-59
Jatrogenic bacterial infection, 257
Intervertebral disk disease, 252
Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism, 255
Intestinal resection, 370-371
Ice massage, 508b, 510
Intraarticular administration
Ice pack therapy, 508b, 509, 510f
of α2-agonist, 222-223
Idiopathic pain, 438
into elbow joint, 293, 294f
Iguana.See Reptile
of glucocorticoid, 253
Ileus, 498
into hip joint, 294
Imidazoline receptor, 212
of morphine, 173
Immobilization, 44f
into stifle joint, 292, 293f
Immune system
Intramuscular administration, 347
activation of, 52
Intranasal administration, of drug,
depression of, 49f
348
incompetence of, 45-46
Intraocular pressure, decrease in, 227
stress and trauma, response to, 54f
Intrathecal administration, 221-222
Immunologic pain, 32t
Intravenous bolus dose, 124
Immunosuppression
Intravenous drug
endogenous opioids and, 52
for analgesic therapy, 347
as glucocorticoid side effect, 256-257
disposition of, 116-117f
as stress response, 44f
for reptile pain,486b
Incisional block before closing
Intravenous infusion, 124
incision, 280, 281f
Intravenous local/regional anesthesia
Incisional line block, 279
forelimb Bier block, 296f
Incisor extraction, 361
forelimb block, 295
Incline walking, 564
rear limb block, 296
Inducible COX, 148-149
Intrinsic activity, 133
Industrialized agriculture, 4-5
Jonization, 121
Infection
Isobologram, 136, 137f
blood glucose and, 51
Isoflurane, 473
pain associated with, 440
Isomer, 134
Infiltration anesthesia, 278-279, 280f
Inflammatory pain, 17, 438, 440
J
Infraorbital nerve block,284,285f
Jogging, 519-520
Infrared laser, 529
Joint end feel, 542t
Inhalant anesthesia, 220
Joint injection, 292b
Inhalational administration, of drug,
Joint mobility, 514
348
Inhibitory interneuron, 24-25
K
Inhibitory synaptic transmission,
KAI receptor, 23
24t, 24-25
Karnofsky's score
 Injectable drugs, types of, 260
clinician questionnaire, 586b
Innocuous stimuli, 34f
modification for feline, 582-586
Insulin
owner questionnaire, 585b
decrease in secretion, 50-51
Ketamine, 6, 260
glucocorticoid effect on
for cancer pain, 408
resistence to, 257
as rabbit and ferret
Integration, 27f
premedication,505
Intensity, stimulus,32-33
side effects of, 490-491
Intercostal block, 283f, 283
Ketoprofen,191t
Interleukin (IL-1, IL-6)
as approved NSAID, 192
as immune system messenger, 52
for feline pain, 426
production of, 52-55
for reptile pain, 485-486
Index
629
Ketorolac, 262
Local anesthesia (Continued)
Kinesthesia, 541
 cardiovascular system, effect
Knee rehabilitation, 572-574
on, 158, 240
caution with,278b
L
central nervous system,
Laboratory animal
effect on, 157-158
analgesia, 6
central nervous system,
 pain management of, 4
toxicity of, 239-240
Lameness, 47-48, 71f, 82-83
dhemical structure of, 233
evaluation of, 546
chirality, 235
Laminae, 21-22
clinical application of, 241-242
Laparotomy, 370-371
clinical attributes of, 242t
of canine, case study, 372
clinical issues with, 159
Laryngeal reflex, 177-178
defnition of, 57-59
Laser
disposition of, 235
penetration of, 529
distribution of, 235-236
variables for LLLT, 529
effectiveness of mixing of, 239
wavelengths of, 529
epinephrine and, 238b
Lateral column, 21
eutectic mixture of lidocaine and
Law, animal laboratory, 8-9
prilocaine (EMLA), 245
Leash walking, 518
factors influencing activity of, 237
Leukotrienes, 148-149
 gastrointestinal system, effect on, 158
Levomedetomidine, 134
hematopoietic system, effect on, 159
Lidocaine, 136, 429, 472
hydrogen jon concentration and, 234
Lidocaine hydrochloride,
lidocaine hydrochloride as, 244-245
244-245
lipophilic-hydrophilic balance, 234
Lidocaine patch, 279f
mepivacaine hydrochloride as, 246
Lidoderm patch, 244-245
methemoglobinemia,
Life, quality of, 578-579
development of, 241
Limbic system, 26-28
as pain treatment, 141, 156-157
Limb proprioception, 26-28
pharmacologic considerations for, 157
Limping,68
physiochemical properties of, 234t
Line block, incisional, 279
pregnancy, effect on,239
Lipid, solubility of, 118-119
prilocaine hydrochloride as, 245
Lipolysis, 51
procaine hydrochloride as, 242-243
Lipophilicity
proparacaine hydrochloride
defnition of, 118-119
as, 243-244
of drugs, 119t
protein binding and, 234
Lipoxygenase, 186-187f
for rabbit and ferret pain, 504
Lissauer's tract, 19-20
as regional analgesic, 453
Liver, drug metabolism, 122-123
for reptile pain, 487
Lizard. See Reptile
respiratory system, effect on, 158
Loading dose (LD) calculation, 130
ropivacaine hydrochloride as, 246-247
Local anesthesia
site of action,232
absorption of, 235
tetracaine hydrochloride as, 243
allergic reaction to, 241
toxicity in avian, 471-472
baricity, varying of, 238
toxicity of, 239
benzocaine as, 243
types of, 157t
biotransformation and
vasoconstrictor, use of, 238
excretion of, 236-237
Local anesthetic nerve block, 349
blockade, priority of, 233b
Locomotor activity, 68
bupivacaine,injection caution, 240b
Locns cernlens (LC), 214-215
bupivacaine hydrochloride as, 246
Long-term potentiation, 439
for cancer pain, 410
Low-level laser therapy (LLLT)
carbonation and pH adjustment,
administration of, 530, 531f
238
application of, 529-530
089
Index
Low-level laser therapy
Mechanical stimuli
(LLLT)(Continued)
receptor sensitivity to,14-15
for chronic pain management, 528
transduction of, 14f
effcacy of, 528
Mechanoreceptor, 16-17
laser variables for, 529
Mechanothermal receptor, 16-17,469
overview of, 528b
Medetomidine
precautions and contraindications
as adjunct to general anesthesia, 219
for, 529b
for cancer pain, 407-408
Low-threshold nerve ending, 15
as chemical restraint, 428
Lumbar pain, case study, 388
continuous infusion of, 220-221
Lumbosacral area, of dog, 298f
doses for, 218t, 221t
Lumbosacral disk surgery,
for feline pain, 428
case study, 374
historical background of, 210
Lumbosacral epidural puncture, 501
intraocular pressure, decrease in, 227
Lumbosacral invertebral junction
opioid, combining with, 219-220
for continuous caudal epidural
pharmacology of, 215-216
anesthesia, 459f, 459-460
racemix mixture of, 134
for continuous caudal subarachnoid
side effects of, 490-491
anesthesia, 460f, 460-461
Median effective dose (ED50), 135, 135f
 segmental thoracolumbar
Median lethal dose (LD50), 135, 135f
subarachnoid anesthesia,
Meloxicam
461f, 461-462
as approved NSAID, 192-193
Lying down
bioavailability of, 487-490
praying position, 68f
for chronic disorders, 477
reluctance to, 65, 72
doses in dogs and cats, 191t
for feline pain, 426-427
M
for rabbit and ferret pain, 503-504
Magnesium, 261
for reptile pain, 485-486
Magnet therapy
Membrane
mechanism of action, 320-321
characteristics and permeability
 pulsed electromagnetic field
of, 118-119
(PEMF),321
drug transportation by,118
types of, 321b
Membrane-limited diffusion, 121
Maintenance dose (MD), 128-130
Membrane phospholipid, 186-187f
Mandibular nerve block, 286, 287f
Memory
Mandibulectomy, case study, 362-363
behavioral changes, causing,42
Manipulation
brain region associated with, 27f
aggressiveness from, 76f
factors shaping,28
response to, 74
of pain, 38-39
Massage, 450
Mental nerve block, 285, 285f
application of,532
Mental state, painful animals, 8
definition of, 551-552
Meperidine,168-169,422-423
effleurage technique of, 532, 552
Mepivacaine hydrochloride, 246
indications for, 531
Metabolic pathways, 122-123
pain relief and, 530, 531b
Metabolism, 49f
petrissage technique of, 532, 533f, 552
of carbohydrates, 51
precautions and contraindications
defnition of, 51
for, 531b
of drugs in feline, 418
stroking technique of, 532
of drugs in liver, 122-123
techniques for, 532, 552
of fat, 52
Maxillary nerve, 286f
lidocaine and, 136
Maxillary nerve block, 284, 286f
of morphine in feline, 418
Maxillectomy, 362
Metabotropic receptor, 23
McMillan, Frank, 5
Methadone
Mean resonance time (MRT), 125-126
for feline pain, 423
Mechanical nociceptor, 469
overview of, 168
Index
631
Methemoglobinemia, 241
Myelographic radiograph, 303f
Methylsulfonylmethane, 273, 274t
Myofascial pain, 57-59
Mexiletine, 270
Myofascial pain syndrome, 311
Microlactin, 273, 274t
Myopathy, 255
Minimum anesthetic concen tration
(MAC), 473
N
Modulation
Nalbuphine, 171, 422
brain region associated with, 27f
Nalmefene, 181
pain sensation and, 14, 14f
Naloxone, 136, 180-181, 394
 peripheral sensory nerve
Naltrexone, 181, 394
impulses, 18-19
Naproxen, 191t
of sensory input, 25
Narcotic, 142
 stress response during, 44f
Nasal biopsy, case study, 364
of synaptic transmissions, 24t
National Institutes of Health
Morbidity
Guidelines for Laboratory
Is 'pue asoonjg poolq
Animal Care and Use, 4
pain increasing, 440
National Institutes of Health
Morphine
Reauthorization Act, 4
benefits of, 501
Nausea
description of, 164-165
 as analgesic drug side effect, 399
dilution and administration 
 opioid side effect, 145, 420
for epidural, 300
Neck pain, sources of, 313-314t
duration and cost of, 165
Nephrotoxicity, 196b
efficacy of, 165
Nerve block, local and regional,
epidural administration of, 173
349, 455-456
for feline pain, 423
Nerve branch, 18-19
intraarticular administration of, 173
Nerve cell, 20b
metabolism in feline, 418
Nerve conduction, 232
for rabbit and ferret pain, 498
Nerve endings
for reptile pain, 486-487
low-threshold (high-sensitivity),
side effects of, 165
15
topical application on cornea, 173
See aiso Receptor
Mortality See Death
Nerve fiber, 18t
Motion, 545-546
Nerve locator, 290f
Motor neuron, 19-21
Nervousness, 399
Motor-secretory reflex, 36
Nervous system, 13
Motor-vascular reflex, 36
Neural circuit, 44f
Movement, 15
Neural toxicity, local anesthesia
reluctance to, 65, 66f, 72
and, 240-241
restlessness, 65-66
Neurochemical
Multimodal analgesic therapy
nerve cell viability, 20b
defnition of, 57-59
signal transmission, 20b
 in equine and bovine, 448
types of, 18
Multimodal surgical analgesia, 470b
Neuroendocrine activation, 44f
Multiple low dosing, of
Neuroendocrine axis, 48
 analgesic drug, 350
Neuroendocrine effector molecule,
Multiple organ dysfunction
53b
syndrome (MODS), 54f
Neurohormone, 53b
Muscle atrophy, 540, 550
Neurokinin receptor, 23
Muscle mass, measurement of, 545
Neuromodulator, 24-25
Muscle relaxant, 399
 Neuropathic pain
Muscle relaxation, 223-224
characteristics of, 439
Muscle twitching, 399
defnition of, 57-59
Mydriasis
Neuropathy, 255
as opioid side effect, 419
Neuropeptide, 53b
as xylazine side effect, 227
Neuroplasticity, 13, 28
632
Index
Neurotransmitter
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory
dorsal root ganglion producing, 18-19
drug (NSAID) (Continued)
peripheral information
for reptile pain, 487-490
transmission, 22-23
respiratory system,effect on,151
stress effect on, 53b
selectivity of, 194b
Newborn, pain management of, 5
side effects in feline, 426
Nifedipine, 272
site of action, 185-187
Nimodipine, 272
toxicity of, 196b
NMDA receptor, 23
toxicity treatment, 198t
 NMDA receptor antagonist, 408
tumor growth inhibition, 433
Nociception
types of, 426-427
definition of, 57-59
Norepinephrine, 52
processes of, 437, 438f
Noxious stimuli
in reptile, 481,482b
electrical impulses and, 437
Nociceptor
pain sensation and, 14f
activation and sensitization of, 29t
Nucleus proprius, 21-22
nonnociceptor versus, 16-17
Numerical rating scale (NRS), 88-89
Nociceptor-mediated pain, 32-33
Nutraceutical agent, 273, 431-433
Nonnociceptive pain, 29-30
Nonnociceptor, 16-17
0
Nonopioid, 404-405
Obesity, 576-577
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory
Observation, 84-85
drug (NSAID)
Ohio State University Veterinary
adverse reactions, reducing, 195b
Teaching Hospital Pain Scale
analgesic effects of, 503-504
and Management Form, 106f
for analgesic therapy, 345
Oliometer, 545, 545f
approved compounds of, 189-190
Onychectomy, 428, 429f
for avian pain, 474-476, 475t
Opiate receptor
bone healing, effect on, 200-201
classifcation and effects of, 164t
cardiovascular system, effect
location of, 174
on, 151, 200-201
opioid agonist occupying, 174
carprofen as, 190
overview of, 163-164
central nervous system,
Opioid
effect on, 150-151
advantages preanesthesia, 419
dhoosing and monitoring
agonist-antagonist, 170-173
use of, 187-189
agonists, types of, 164
for chronic disorders, 477
analgesia, production of, 138-139
clinical application of, 187
analgesic efficacy of, 163
clinical choices for feline, 427
for analgesic therapy, 344
clinical issues with, 152
for avian pain, 472-474
compounds used off-label, 193
biliary smooth muscle, effect on, 179
contraindications for, 189
bradycardia as side effect of, 176
deracoxib as, 190
for cancer pain, 405-407
doses in dogs and cats, 191t
cardiovascular system, effect on, 146
etodolac as, 190-192
central nervous system, effect on, 143
for feline pain, 424-426
classification of, 500
gastrointestinal system, effect on,
clinical issues with, 147-148
151, 152b, 195-196, 196b, 197b
clinical use in feline, 421-423
genitourinary system, effect on, 151
constipation as side effect of, 178-179
indications for, 474-476
cough suppression/
overview of, 183
depression, 177-178
as pain treatment, 141, 142t, 148-149
defnition of, 57-59, 163
pharmacologic considerations for, 150
epidural administration in feline, 424
 prostaglandin inhibition 
excitement/dysphoria from, 176
from, 183-185
for feline pain, 419, 425t
renal system, effect on, 197
gastrointestinal system, effect on, 147
Index
633
Opioid (Continued)
Opioid agonist-antagonist (Continued)
genitourinary system, effect on, 147
opioid agonist, combining with, 450
histamine release as side effect of, 178
partial or mixed, 395
hyperthermia as side effect of, 180 
pentazocine as, 172
mixing of, 423
Opioid analgesic, 166-167t
overview of, 404-405
Opioid antagonist
pain score, 419
definition of,164b
as pain treatment, 141, 142t
nalmefene as, 181
peripheral receptors of, 175
naloxone as, 180-181, 394
pharmacologic considerations for, 143
naltrexone as, 181, 394
pharmacology of, 174
types of, 395t
for rabbit and ferret pain,
uses for, 180
498b, 498-503
Oral drugs
receptor blockade and, 393-394
for analgesic therapy, 345-347
receptor specificity, potency,
for feline pain, 433
efficacy of, 142
for reptile pain, 485-486
receptor subtypes, 143b, 144t
types of, 265
as regional analgesic, 454-455
Osteoarthritis (OA)
regional/local administration of, 173
bilateral elbow in canine,
for reptile pain, 486-487
case study, 387
respiratory depression as
bilateral hip in feline,
side effect of, 177
case study, 384
respiratory system, effect on, 145-146
bilateral stifle in feline,
sedation/depression of CNS, 175
case study, 385
side effects and toxicity of, 391
in canine, 580-581
side effects of, 405-407, 419-420, 498
exercise for, 513
timing of administration, 419
in feline, 417, 431
tolerance and physical
hip in canine, case study, 381
dependence on, 180
Osteosarcoma
types of, 142
in canine, case study, 389-390
urinary retention as side effect of, 179
pain control, approaches to, 413-414
yomiting and defecation as
Otitis externa,252
side effect of, 178
Outcome measurements
Opioid agonist
active range of motion, 545
agonist-antagonist, combining
goal achievement, 544
with, 450
 passive range of motion, 544
alfentanil as, 170
Ovariohysterectomy
carfentanil as, 170
analgesia for, 432b
definition of, 164b
of canine, case study, 353, 355
fentanyl as, 169
of feline, case study, 358
hydromorphone as, 168
pain from, 432b
meperidine as, 168-169
Oxycodone, 405-407
methadone as, 168
Oxymorphone
morphine as, 164-165
for cancer pain, 405-407
occupying opiate receptor, 174
for feline pain, 423
oxymorphone as, 165-168
overview of, 165-168
potency, dosage, and dosing
as preemptive analgesia, 501-502
frequency of, 166-167t
for rabbit and ferret pain, 498
remifentanil as, 170
sufentanil as, 169
P
transdermal administration of, 174
Pain
Opioid agonist-antagonist
acupuncture points for head, 314t
buprenorphine as, 172-173
adjunctive therapy for, 159-162
butorphanol as, 170-171, 393-394
animal versus human, 8
definition of, 164b
anorexia and, 72-74
nalbuphine as, 171-172
in avian, 467-468
634
Index
Pain (Continued)
Pain (Continued)
behavioral indicators of,
 treatment for avian, 470-471
46-48, 47b, 62
types of drugs for, 141
biologic response to, 45-46
veterinary medicine role
as biologic stressor, 9
in controlling, 5
cancer patients and, 5-6
of visceral organs, 36-38
categorization of, 29-30
See also Animal suffering; Behavior;
cause, severity and duration of, 341
Cancer pain; Perioperative pain
characterization of, 17
Pain assessment
chemical mediators of, 439
jn avian, 467-468
clinical signs of, 82-83
behavioral, 80
cold and, 508b
by behavior of equine/bovine, 440-441
complementary and alternative
“gold standard”" of, 79-80
medicine for, 301
method, intended purpose of, 81-83
consequences of, 31f, 32t
physiological, 80
definition of, 28, 45, 57-59
in reptile, 483-484b, 482-484
depression and, 65
staged process of, 441
drug and techniques for, 403-404
tools for, 441-443
dysphoria and, 594-595
Pain scale
effects of, 440
behavioral, 89
facilitation of, 188-189f
guidelines for use of, 81
in ferrets, 494-495, 495b, 496f
key points relating to, 83b
forelimb amputation of canine,
subjective and semiobjective, 85b
case study, 383
as therapy guide, 83-84
homeopathy as, 322b
Pain scoring system, 30-32
homeopathy for, 322
Pain threshold, 57-59
howling and whining, 7
Pain tolerance level, 57-59
indicators in dogs and cats, 63b
Palliative care
indicators in equine/bovine, 442t
benefts and goals of, 588
injectable drugs as treatment for, 260
comfort, tips to improving, 599b
management of, 4-5
comprehensive care strategy, 591-593
 management techniques
disease process, educating about, 590b
for feline, 540
emotional support during, 596
memory of, 28, 38-39
euthanasia and, 588
moral value in controlling, 6
guidelines for use of, 588
morphologic change
medication side effect list, 595b
associated with, 55
owner needs, beliefs and
in neck and back, sources of, 313-314t
goals for, 590-591
nociceptor-mediated, 32-33
personalized plan, development
oral drugs as treatment for, 265
of, 593-595
physical modalities for canines, 507
protocol for, 590
physiologic/behavioral characteristics
psychosocial concerns
in dogs and cats, 63-65b
assessment, 592b
prevention in rabbits and
qualifcations/circumstances for, 589b
ferrets, 497-498
rehabilitation techniques in,
production of, 32-33
596-597, 597-598t
 prolonged and exaggerated, 32b
techniques for, 595
in rabbits, 494-496
 Pancreas, 50t
radiation-induced, case study, 382
Pancreatitis, case study, 373
referred, 38
Panting, 44f, 145, 177
 score evaluation form, 90t
Parallel processing, 26-28
stress and, 42-43
Paralytic drug, 5-6
study of, 13
Parasympathetic nervous system, 44f
systemic inflammatory response
Paravertebral nerve block, 281
syndrome (SIRS), 52-53
Parkinson's disease, 266
threshold of, 15, 16f
Partial agonist, 132f, 133, 393-395
Index
635
 Passive range of motion
Pharmacodynamics, 131
for carpus, 552-553
 Pharmacokinetic antagonism, 392
for elbow, 553, 554f
Pharmacokinetic drug interaction, 136
for feline rehabilitation, 552
Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic
goniometry measurement of, 544
model, 135
hand placement for, 515f
Pharmacokinetics
for hip, 553
concepts of, 125
instructions for, 552
principles of, 113-114
process of, 514-515
Pharmacology, 113
for shoulder, 553
of opioid, 174
for stifle joint, 553
receptor, 131
Passive reabsorption, 123-124
Phenolic drug, 418
Passive rehabilitation modality, 546
 Phenotypic switch, 36
 Pathologic pain, 29-30
Phototherapy
cause of, 32-33
defnition of, 553-554
definition of, 57-59
method of, 554
 Pawspice, 11
uses for, 555
Pentazocine, 172
 Physical dependence, 139
Peptide, 20
Physical rehabilitation
Perception, 26-28
application of,514
brain region associated with, 27f
exercise for, 513-514
pain sensation and, 14f, 14
Physical therapy, 538
 stress response during, 44f
Physiologic antagonism, 397-398
Percutaneous acupuncture
Physiologic pain, 29-30, 33f, 57-59, 437
electrostimulation, 303f
Physioroll, 561, 562f, 566, 571f
Percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
Pigeon shooting, 3
(PENS), 302-304, 304f
 Pinpoint pupil, 145
Periaqueductal gray matter (PAG)
Piroxicam
function of, 26-28
for chronic disorders, 477
location in brain, 27f
doses in dogs and cats, 191t
Perineural administration
as off-label NSAID, 194-195
of α2-agonist, 223
 Pituitary gland, 49f 
of glucocorticoid, 253
Plasma, 114
Perioperative pain
Plasma clearance (CL), 126
anesthesia by infltration, 278-279
Plasma concentration(Cp)
intraarticular administration
time curve, 115f, 129f
of anesthetic, 292
Pole weaving, 523
topical anesthesia for, 277-278
Polyphagia, 256
Peripheral nerve, 14
Polypharmacy therapy, 594-595
anatomy of, 231
Position
categorization of, 17
praying,65,68f
Peripheral nerve block, 281
shifting of, 69f
Peripheral nociceptor, 469
 submissive, 69f
Peripheral receptor, 175
 Postsurgical analgesia, 7
Peripheral sensitization, 33f
Posttraumatic analgesia, 7
activation of, 32-33, 35f
Posture, 62, 63-65b
in avian, 469
Potency, 132f, 133-134, 142
Perna canalicutus, 273,274t
Potentiation, 136-138
Personalized plan, development
 Praying position, 65, 68f
of, 593-595
Preanesthetic sedative-analgesic
Pethidine, 422-423
agent, 219-220
Petrissage massage technique,
Preemptive analgesia, 38-39
532, 533f, 552
for analgesic therapy, 349
pH adjustment, 238
benefits of, 482
Pharmacodynamic drug interaction, 136
definition of, 57-59
Pharmacodynamic model, 134
opioid as, 419
989
Index
Preemptive analgesia (Continued)
Rabbit (Continued)
purpose of, 449
meloxicam use in, 503-504
for systemic drug therapy, 445
opioid use in, 498-503
 Preemptive scoring system, 85b, 85-86
pain recognition in, 494-495
Pregabalin,270
tramadol use in, 505
Preganglionic neuron, 20-21
Racemic mixture, 134
Pregnancy, anesthesia effects on, 239
Radiation, 410
Prilocaine hydrochloride, 245
Radiation-induced pain, case study, 382
Procaine hydrochloride, 242-243
 Radius/ulnar fracture repair, canine, 367
Projection, 25-26
Raison d'etre, 8
pain sensation and, 14f, 14
Ramp walking, 519
stress response during, 44f
Range of motion
Projection neuron, 20-21
 stretching and, 516
 Prolonged pain, 32b
therapy benefts, 541
Prolonged release dosage form, 125
See aiso Active range of motion;
Proparacaine hydrochloride, 243-244
Passive range of motion
Proprioception, 15, 541
Rear limb amputation, 564
Proprioception exercise, 561
analgesia for, 432b
Prostaglandin, 148-149
of canine, case study, 375
NSAID inhibition of, 183-185
pain control, approaches to,
release of, 188-189f
412-413
Protein
Rear limb exercise
binding of, 234
decline walking as, 568
drug binding to, 121
down-to-stand as, 564, 568f
metabolism of, 52
 incline walking as, 564
role of, 52-53
sit-to-stand as, 564, 567f
 synthesis and breakdown of, 51
Rear limb rehabilitation
Proximal paravertebral thoracolumbar
of hip, 569-571
anesthesia {cattle), 463
of hock, 574
Proxy rater
of knee, 572-574
Psychosocial concerns assessment, 592b
Receptive field, 17-18
 Pulmonary pain, symptoms of, 32t
Receptor
 Pulsed electromagnetic feld
in somatic sensation, 15t
(PEMF) therapy, 321
in spinal cord, 22-23
adverse effects of, 322
See also Nerve endings
generator for,321f
Receptor agonist, 132t
indications for, 322
Receptor antagonist, 131-133, 132t
Pupil, pinpoint, 145
Receptor blockade, 393-394
Receptor pharmacology, 131
Q
Receptor reserve, 134
Quality of life (QOL)
Receptor specificity, 142
dhronic pain and, 578-579
Rectal administration, of drug,
quick assessment questionnaire,
348-349
581, 582b
Referred pain, 38
welfare and, 580b
Regional anesthesia, 451b
Questionnaire for Evaluating Health-
α2-agonist for, 454
Related Quality of Life in Dogs
defnition of, 57-59
with Signs of Pain Secondary to
local anesthetics for, 453, 471
Cancer, 581-582, 583-584b
opioid for, 454-455
purpose of, 450
R
 Regional anesthesia technique
Rabbit
considerations for, 456-457
analgesic drug dosages for, 499t
in equine, 458t
drug type and dosage for, 602-613t
equipment for, 456t
ketamine use in, 505
types of, 455-456
local anesthesia use in, 504
Regional anesthetic nerve block, 349
Index
637
Rehabilitation
Respiratory system (Continued)
balance board, 563f
nonsteroidal antinflammatory
categories of, 546
drug effect on, 151
clinical findings with, 543
opioid effect on, 145-146
considerations for, 540
Restlessness, 65-66
of front limb, 566, 574-575
Retching,155
goals of, 543
Reticular activating system (RAS), 26-28
for obesity, 576-577
Reticular formation, 27f
objectives of, 540
Rexed's laminae, 20
outcome measurements of, 544
Romifidine
physioroll for, 561, 562f
as α2-agonist, 216
primary areas of, 539t
doses for, 218t
principles of, 538
Ropivacaine hydrochloride, 246-247
productive and safe sessions of, 539b
Rostral ventromedial medulla
program for feline,541
(RVM),26-28
of rear limb, 564, 569
standing resistance exercise, 562f, 562
S
strengthening exercises for, 540
Saphenous nerve block, 291
techniques in palliative and
Sciatic nerve block, 292
hospice care, 597-598t
Second pain, 17
techniques in palliative and
Sedation
hospice care, 596-597
α2-agonist for, 218t
weight-bearing exercise as, 564
as α2-agonist side effect,
Release of suppressed behavior, 143-145
217-218, 223-224
Remifentanil, 170, 424
 as analgesic drug side effect, 398
Renal system
 of central nervous system, 175
02-agonist effect on, 226b, 226-227
as opioid side effect, 498
cyclooxygenase enzymes as
See aiso Anesthesia
regulator of, 199f
from xylazine or detomidine, 454
drug elimination, 113
Segmental thoracolumbar
excretion, mechanisms of, 123-124
epidural anesthesia, 462
NSAID effect on, 197
Segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid
pain, symptoms of, 32t
anesthesia, 461f, 461-462
Reptile
Seizure, 399
 analgesic drugs dosages for, 488-489t
Self-mutilation, 45-46
analgesic therapy in, 485
Semiobjective scoring system
drug administration, route of, 
for acute surgical/traumatic pain, 85
485-486
simple descriptive scale (SDS), 87-88
drug type and dosage for, 602-613t
visual analogue scale (VAS) as, 86-87
intravenous drug administration
Sensation
in, 486b
neurophysiology of, 14
local anesthesia use in, 487
 producing pain, 14f
opioid use in, 486-487
somatic, receptors in, 15t
pain assessment in, 482-484, 483-484b
Sensitization
pain in, 481-482
of nociceptor, 29t 
Research
overview of, 34-36
animals for, 2
Sensitizing soup, 29t, 33-34, 35f
importance of, 5
Sensory event, memory of, 28
Respiratory depression
Sensory homeostasis, 23
as analgesic drug side effect, 400
Sensory input
opioid as cause of, 177, 498
spinal cord modulation of, 23
Respiratory stimulant, 400
stimulation of, 46-47
Respiratory system
supraspinal modulation of, 25
α2-agonist effect on, 154,
Sensory nerve fiber, 14
225b,225-226
Sensory overlap, 15
local anesthesia effect on, 158
Sensory pathway, 13, 14f
889
Index
Serotonin syndrome, 594-595
Standing surgery, 451b
Serum cortisol, 50
Staring, at injury or painful site, 77f
Shock wave, 534-535
Static magnet
Shock wave therapy, 450
effectiveness of, 320
Shoulder
indications for, 533
passive range of motion for, 553
precautions and contraindications
rehabilitation of, 574-575
for, 533b
surgery for canine, case study, 365
use of, 534
Sickness syndrome, 45-46
Static magnet feld therapy, 533b, 533
Signal transmission, 20b
Steady-state equilibrium
Silent nociceptor, 17, 33-34
calculation of, 125
Simple descriptive scale (SDS),
half-life and, 128-130
87b, 87-88
time for reaching, 127b
Sinoatrial block, 224-225
Sternotomy
Sinus bradycardia
of feline, case study, 369
α2-agonist as cause of,
pain control, approaches to, 412-413
154-155, 224-225
Stifle joint
as analgesic drug side effect, 400
intramuscular block for, 292, 293f
Sit-to-stand exercise,521f, 520,564
osteoarthritis in feline, case study,385
Skeletal muscle
passive range of motion for, 553
controlling activity of, 20-21
Stilted gait, 68
local anesthesia toxicity, 241
Stimulus
pain, symptoms of, 32t
auditory and visual, 42
Sleeping nociceptor, 17, 3334
intensity of, 32-33
Sling, 564, 566f
Strengthening exercise, 517-518
Slow walking, 518, 520f
elastic bands for, 524f, 524
Snake. See Reptile
for feline rehabilitation, 540
Social ethic. See Ethics
weights, pulling or carrying, 523
Somatic pain
Stress
characteristics of, 438
acute-phase response and, 55
defnition of, 57-59
appearance, effect on, 74
Somatic sensation, 15t
behavioral indicators of, 46-48, 47b
Somatic sensory fber, 18-19
cytokines produced during, 52-55
Somatostatin (SOM), 18-19
definition of, 45
Spare receptor, 134
duration of, 45
Sphincter of Oddi, 179
homeostasis and, 42
Spinal anesthesia, 300
 immune system response to, 54f
Spinal cord
memory of, 28
acupuncture approach to
morphologic change
pain,310-312
associated with, 55
modulation of sensory input, 23-25
from pain, 42-43
nerve branches of, 18-19
wncontrolled pain as, 9-10
neurotransmitters and
Stress-induced analgesia, 25, 42-43
receptors, 22-23
Stressor, 42
opiate receptor in, 175
Stress response
white versus gray mater,19-20
activation of, 46-47
Spinal cord laminae, 21-22
behavioral, 44f
Spinal injection, 297b
biologic, types of, 46b
Spinal nerve, 18-19
biologic components of, 45-46
Spinohypothalamic tract, 25-26
 immunologic and hematologic, 53b
Spinomesencephalic tract, 25-26
ineffective, 42
Spinoreticular tract, 25-26
neurohumoral, 50t
Spinothalamic tract, 25-26
systemic effects of, 47b
Squinting, 416,417f
Stretching, 516
Stair climbing, 519
Stroking massage technique, 532
Standing resistance exercise, 562f, 562
Stronium-89, 411
Index
69
Subarachnoid, 57-59
Tetracaine hydrochloride, 243
Subarachnoid administration,
Thalamus
of drug, 347
function of, 26-28
Subarachnoid analgesia, 452
location in brain, 27f
Subcutaneous administration,347
Therapeutic exercise, 513-514, 517-518
Subjective scoring system, 85
Therapeutic index (TI), 135f, 135-136
Sublingual administration, of drug, 348
Therapeutic massage
Substance P, 18-19
defnition of, 551-552
postsynaptic receptor
techniques for, 552
activation,20-21
Therapeutic ultrasound
release of-188-189f
application of, 550f
Substantia gelatinosa, 21-22
overview of, 550-551
Succinylcholine, 6
treatment protocol for, 551
Sufentanil, 169
uses for, 551
Suffering
Therapy, pain scale as guide, 83-84
definition of, 45
Thermal agent, 546-547
prevention of, 9
Thermal nociceptor, 469
veterinary medicine role
Thermal stimuli
in controlling, 5
receptor sensitivity to, 14-15
Suffering. See Animal suffering 2-3
transduction of, 14f
Summation, 137
Thermotherapy
Suppressed behavior, release of, 143-145
application of, 511
Supraadditivity, 136, 448-449
effects of, 511b
Supraspinal modulation, 25
uses for, 511
Suprathreshold,15
Thoracotomy/intercostal,
Surgery
case study, 370
observation after, 84-85
Thoracotomy/sternotomy
pain management during, 5-6
of feline, case study, 369
pain scale and, 83-84
pain control, approaches to,412-413
preemptive scoring system, 85b, 85
Threshold, 15, 16f
Swimming, 517, 524-525
Thrombosis,49f
Swine, drugs for, 602-613t
Thromboxane, 200-201
Sympathetic mediated pain, 57-59
Thyroid, stress on, 50t
Sympathetic nervous system
Thyroid hormone, 51
activation of, 48, 49f
Thyroxine, 51
stress change in, 44f
Tissue damage, 44f
Synapse, 19-20
pain associated with, 17
Synaptic transmission, 24t
systemic inflammatory response
Synergism, 137-138, 448-449, 470-471
syndrome (SIRS), 52-55
Systemic drug therapy, 437, 450
Tissue hypersensitivity, 32-33
Systemic inflammatory disease, 252
Tolerance, 57-59, 139
Systemic inflammatory response
Tolfenamic acid, 193
syndrome (SIRS), 52-55, 54f
Topical administration, of drug, 348
Topical anesthesia
T
for perioperative pain, 273
Tail amputation, case study, 374-375
technique for, 278
Tail docking,7
Toradol, 262
Tame pigeon shooting, 3
Touch, 15, 26-28
Taxonomy, 29t
Toxicity
Teeth
of drugs, 391
incisor extraction, canine, 361
of glucocorticoid, 254-255, 257
mandibulectomy, canine, 362-363
of local anesthesia, 239
maxillectomy, canine, 362
 of local anesthetics in reptile, 487
Tepoxalin
of NSAIDs, 196b, 198t
as approved NSAID, 193
of phenolic drug in feline, 418
doses in dogs and cats, 191t
Trail of treats, 568, 572f
640
Index
Tramadol
Utrasound, therapeutic (Continued)
for feline pain, 430
treatment protocol for, 551
overview of, 265
uses for, 551
for rabbit and ferret pain, 505
Underwater treadmill
Tranquilization, 57-59
active joint movement,
Tranquilizer
increase in, 525f
for anxiety, 470-471
effects of, 557
for cancer pain, 408-409
process of, 558f, 559f, 560f
types and effects of, 399
weight-bearing forces, increase
Transcutaneous electrical nerve
in, 524-525
stimulation (TENS), 302-304
University of Melbourne Pain Scale
amperage for, 527-528
(UMPS), 89-94, 92-93t
application of, 525, 527-528
Urinary habit, 75
determining quality of, 526
Urinary retention, as opioid
indications for, 526-527
side effect, 179
overview of, 526b
 precautions and contraindications
V
for, 527b
Vagal afferent fiber, 36
Transdermal administration,
Vasoactive intestinal peptide, 18-19
of drug, 348
Vasoconstrictor, 238
Transduction
Vasodilation, 420
pain sensation and, 14f, 14
Vasopressin, 48-49, 51
process of, 14-15
Ventral column, 21
stress response during, 44f
Ventral horn
Transitional cell carcinoma, 413-414
gray matter of, 20-21
Transmission
interneurons and motor
 pain sensation and, 14f, 14
neurons, 19-20
of sensory and electrical impulses, 17
Vessel-poor group tissue, 120
of signal, 20b
Vessel-rich group tissue, 120
stress response during, 44f
Veterinarian
Transmucosal administration,
analgesia use, 7
of drug, 348
obligations as, 10
Trauma
 pain management knowledge, 7
exercise-induced to canine,
preserving role of, 10
case study, 378
Veterinary manual therapy
to feline, case study, 377
adverse effects of, 320
immune system response to, 54f
contraindications for, 320
preemptive scoring system, 85b, 85-86
indications for, 319
Treadmill walking, 519, 524-525
mechanism of action, 319
Treatment modality, 11
types of, 318b, 318
Tricyclic antidepressant, 410
Veterinary medicine
Trigger point therapy, 532
evidence-based, 581
Triodothyronine, 51
glucocorticoid use in, 254t
Tubular secretion, 123-124
 pain and suffering control, 5-7
Tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-alpha)
as science-based, 5
effects of, 53-55
Vibration, 15, 26-28
 as immune system messenger, 52
Vigilance
production of, 52-55
brain region associated with, 27f
Tunnel walking, 568, 573f
increased, as stress response, 44f
pain and, 65-66
U
Visceral pain
U.S. Department of Agriculture, 3
cause of, 36-38
Ultrafltration, 119
characteristics of, 438
Ultrasound, therapeutic
definition of, 57-59
application of, 550f
Visual analogue scale (VAS), 86f, 86-87
overview of, 550-551
Visual stimuli, 42
Index
641
Vitamin C, buffered, 273, 274t
Weights, pulling or carrying, 523
Vocalization, 63-65b, 72
Weight shifting, 68, 71f
Volume of distribution (Vd)
Welfare, 580b
calculation of, 125-126
Wheebarrowing, 521, 566, 570f
at steady-state equilibrium, 125-126
Whining, 7,72
Vomiting
White matter, 19-21
as α2-agonist side effect, 154-155
Windup
as analgesic drug side effect, 399
central sensitization, hyperalgesia,
as opioid side effect, 145, 178, 420
allodynia, 439
central sensitization and, 34-36, 440f
W
 continuum of pain process, 36
Walking
definition of, 57-59
cavaletti rail, 517, 522
NMDA receptor and, 408
on decline, 568, 573f
Woody chest syndrome, 146
on incline, 564
World Health Organization, analgesia
ramp, 519
ladder, 403f, 403-404
slow leash, 518, 520f
Wound healing, delayed
through tunnel, 568, 573f
as glucocorticoid side effect, 256
on treadmill, 519
inflammation causing, 440
underwater treadmill, 524-525,525f
in water, 517, 524-525
X
Water
Xylazine
buoyancy property of, 556
for cancer pain, 407-408
hydrostatic pressure in, 556
epidural administration of, 454
therapeutic properties of, 556
historical background of, 210
therapeutic thermal effects of, 556 
 pharmacology of, 215
Water retention, 51
sedation from, 454
Weaving, pole, 523
side effects of, 227
Weight bearing,pain
preventing,416-417
Y
Weight-bearing exercise
Yucca root, 315f, 315-318
carts and slings for support
during, 564
Z
cross leg standing, 564, 565f
Ziconotide, 264
dancing, 564
one leg standing, 564, 565f