The Practical Veterinarian
VeterinaryParasitology
LORARICKARD BALLWEBER
Toxocara
Thichuris
Paraoonmus
B工
Copyright @ 2001 by Buerworth-Heineiann
A meriber of the Reed Elsevier group
All rights reserved.
No part of this publicalion miay be reproduced, stored in a retrieval systerml, or
Lransmited in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without the prior writlen pernission of the publisher
Every elfort has been miade to ensure hal the drug dosage schedules within this
lext are accurale and conforri to standards accepled at tirie of publicalion.
However, as treatmient recorimiendations vary in he light of continuing
schedules herein with informiation found on product informiation sheets. This is
especially true in cases of new or infrequently used drugs.
Recognizing the iriporlance of preserving what has been writlen,
/Butterworth-Heineiann prints its books on acid-free paper whenever
possible.
CIGRA
Bullerworth-Heineniann supports the efforts of Anierican Forests
 and the Clobal ReLeaf progrant in its camipaign for the beermient of
7li0i trees, forests, and our environmient.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ballweber, Lora Rickard, 1958
Veterinary parasitology / Lora Rickard Ballweber.
p. ; cm. (Pracical veterinarian)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7506-7261-7 (alk. paper)
1. Veterinary parasitology. I. Title. II. Series.
[DNLM: 1. Parasitic Diseases, Animial—Handbooks. SF 810.AS B19Sv 2001]
SF810.A3 B35 20011
636.089'696dc21
00-063083
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available frori the British Library.
The publisher offers special discounts on bulk orders of this book.
For inforriation, please contacl:
Manager of Special Sales
Bullerworth-Heinemiann
225 wildwood Avenue
Woburn, MA 01801-2041
Tel: 781-904-2500
Fax: 781-9042620
For informialion on all Bullerworth-Heinemiann publications available, contact
our World Wide Web horie page at http:/www.bh.coni
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 21
Pninted in he United Stales of Arierica
Series Preface
ThePracticalVeterinarian series was developedtohelp
veterinary students, veterinarians, and veterinary techni
ciansfind answers to common questions quickly.Unlike
larger textbooks,which are filled with detailed informa-
tion and meant. to serve as reference books, all the books
inThePracticalVeterinarianseriesaredesignedtocut.to
the heart. of the subject. matter. Not. meant to replace the
reference texts, the guides in our series complement the
larger books by serving as an introduction to each topic
for those learning the subject matter for the first. time or
as a quick reviewfor those who alreadyhave mastered
thebasicsofeachsubject.
The titles for the books in our series are selected to
provide information for the most. common subjects one
would encounter in veterinary school and veterinary
practice. The authors are experienced and established
clinicians who can present the subject. matter in an easy
to-understand format. This helps both the first-time stul-
dent of the subject and the seasoned practitioner to
assess information often difficult to comprehend
It is our hope that the books in The Practical Veteri
narian series will meet. the needs of readers and serve as
a constant source of practical and important informa
tion. We welcome comments and suggestions that will
vi
vili
Series Preface
help us improve future editions of the books in this
series.
Shawn P Messonnier D.VM
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://itahc.taobao.co m
Preface
Unknowingly, I was first exposed to the discipline of vet-
erinary parasitology as a youngster when my grandfa-
ther, Roy V. Stambaugh, gave me his copy of a 1923
USDA publication on the diseases of horses.In thumb-
ing through it, I came upon an illustration of bots that.
were living in the stomach of the horse. While repulsed,
I was at.the same time fascinated that. such alifestyle was
occurring with apparently little harm to thehorse!Per-
haps that is why, years later, I chose to accept an assist-
antship to study for a Master's in parasitology rather
than ruminant.nutrition,and Ihave thoroughly enjoyed
veterinary parasitology over essentially the past 20 years.
Asfirst.a student.and now a veterinarymedicaleducator,
I have seen numerous reference materials on this sub-
ject. Many texts have become standards in the required
book list,but. the most. common complaint. from veteri-
nary students is they are not user-friendly and are too
verbose. Therefore, I was delighted to have the oppor
tunity to write a text that I hope is user-friendly. The out-
line format. was chosenbecause it. is designed to present
information in a succinct, easy-to-read, and readily
accessible format,thus,making this a quick reference
guide to the nuts and bolts of the parasites of veterinary
importance designed for the veterinarymedicalstudent.
ix
X
Preface
When designing this book, I was confronted with
the same question we are all confronted with in our
courses: what material to include. The first decision was
whether tolimit. it. to the usual dogs, cats,horses,etc., or
to include birds,reptiles,rodents, and other small mam-
mals. Shear volume of materialmade the choice for
me-it would have to be limited to traditional domesti-
cated animals (including poultry) with a few rodents
and smallmammals included in the arthropod section.
Next was which actual parasites to include. Decisions
here were governed by whether the parasite is common,
has dire consequences if missed, or possesses some
unique attribute or ability.Someparasites are encoun-
tered so infrequently that inclusion in a quick reference
guide is not. feasible. Others, such as Spirocerca lupi, are
included because of a unique attribute;in this case,its
association with neoplasia.Still others, such as Acan-
thocheilonema (=Dipetalonema) reconditum, are included
because of the difficulty in differentiating diagnostic
stages from those of other, more pathogenic parasites;
in this case, distinguishing microfilariae from those pro
duced by the heartworm, Dirofilaria immitis. Although
someparasites near and dear to mewerenot.included,
Ibelieve that those essentialtoa veterinary medical
educationare.
Thebookbegins withanintroductionexplaining
some basic concepts of parasitology and taxonomic clas
sification.Chapter 2 isdevoted solely to ectoparasites.
Preface
xi
sites,describing the characteristics and generalizedlife
cycles of each group (protozoans, nematodes, cestodes,
digenetic trematodes,acanthocephalans).Host-parasite
lists are provided here as well. The subsequent chapters
describe the parasites according tobody organ system.
Chapters 4 to 6 describe the parasites of the gastroin-
testinal tract, Chapter 7 describes the cardiopulmonary
system, and Chapter 8 covers the remaining organ sys-
tems. Geographic distribution and relative significance
tobothveterinarymedicineandpublichealthare
included for each parasite as a guide to the student as to
the general importance of the parasite.
Information related to treatment of helminths has
been summarized in tables for approved compounds
available in the United States.Dosages and treatment
schedulesshould be verified onpackageinsertsprior to
use. In cases where approved drugs are not available,
information on types and dosages of drugs used suc-
cessfully is included within the text. However, the
reader is reminded that. this constitutes extra-label drug
use and it is the responsibility of the attending veteri-
narian to determine the dosage and best treatment for
example, many collies and dogs of related herding
breeds may suffer potentially fatal idiosyncratic reac-
tions to ivermectin at doses as low as 100 mg/kg.
I would like to acknowledge Dr. Robert. Bergstrom
who offeredme that assistantshipin veterinarypara
 a g  oe s  n o
xii
Preface
tion with this subject. I would also like to thank Dr. Eric
State University, including Drs. Carla Siefker, Alan
Rathwell, Harry Jacobson, George Hurst, Carolyn
Boyle, Sharon Black, Terry Engelken, and Linda Pote,
for theirhelp and stimulating discussions over the past
few years. Finally, I express sincere appreciation to my
husband for his patience and understanding when I
needed to be working rather than fishing, and to the
rest of my family who do not know exactly what it is I
do, but have always supported my decision to do it.
L.RB.
Introduction
Symbiosis referstoany association,either temporary or
permanent, that. exists between two organisms of differ-
ent species.There are several types of symbiotic relation-
ships, including predator-prey, phoresis, mutualism,
commensalism, and parasitism. In the predator-prey rela-
tionship, the association is one that is very short and
results in harm (i.e., death) to one member while bene-
fiting the other.Phoreszsrefersto arelationship inwhich
one member of the association is mechanically carried
about by the second member with no harm inflicted on
either. Mutualism refers to a relationship in which both
members of the association benefit as a result of the rela
tionship.Commensalismrefers to arelationship in which
one member of the association benefits while the second
2
Introduction
member receives neither benefit. nor harm.Finally, para
sitism refers to a relationship in which one member of
the association—the parasite—lives in or on the sec-
ond—the host. The parasite derives nutritional benefit
from the host and is usually considered harmful to the
host, although the degree of harm can vary greatly. It is
the parasites and parasitic diseases of domestic animals
that we refer to as the discipline of veterinary parasitol-
ogy, the subject. of this book.
To understand parasites and the diseases they cause,
one must first understand what a species is and the con-
cepts of classification. Although not perfect, the most
widely accepted definition ofa species is an interbreeding
populationthatisreproductivelyisolatedfromothersuch
populations. For example, horses are host to many
speciesof smallstrongyles.Asmanyas 15-20species of
these parasites may be found living in the colon of the
same horse at. the same time,yet. they cannot interbreed
and are, thus, separate species. We recognize the fact that
many of these species are related,some more closely than
others, by considering them to be in the same genus or in
closely related genera within the same family. These rela-
tionships, then, are the basis of the Linnaean system of
classification. There are millions of organisms on earth,
each of which may have a different common name in dif-
ferent regions of the world.Conversely, the same com-
mon name may be used in different regions of the world
to refer to different species.In order to bring about sta
bility and universality, a system of classification has been
Introduction
3
devised in which all organisms are given a Latin binomial.
This consists of a genus name (capitalized) followed by
the species name (lowercase). Both genus and species
names are italicized.Each species refers to a specific
organismandbothgenusandspeciesnamesaregiven
when referring to that. particular organism,for example
Dirofilaria immitis for the heartworm of dogs.Similar
species are grouped within the same genus, similar gen-
era within the same family, similar families within the
same order,similarorderswithinthe same class,similar
classes within the same phylum, and similar phyla
grouped together in the same kingdom.In order to
communicate with colleagues, it is important to at least
learn the species names of the parasites.
Identification is the process of determining to which
'  sn s  so x sa g
generally, based on morphologic characteristics that are
used to describe a certain species, genus, family, etc.
Diagnosis,on the otherhand,usually refers to the process
of determining the cause of a disease.In this book,the
term diagnosis is used to refer to the process of deter-
mining thepresence oforhow to identifyaparticular
parasite species and not the determination of the cause
of the clinical signs present. For example, diarrhea in a
young calf may have a bacterial or viral cause and have
little or nothing to do with the coccidial infection pres
ent.However, identification of oocysts in the feces may
lead the uninitiated to misdiagnose coccidiosis.Always
remember-infection does not equal disease.
2
Arthropods
Ectoparasites, most. of which are arthropods, are those
parasites that live on the body of the host. Some spend
their entire life on the host, others spend only parts of
their life on the host, while still others only occasionally
visit the host.The ectoparasites most veterinarians deal
with directly are those that live all or much of their life
on the host. Those that. are periodic visitors to the host
are not usually on the animals when presented to the
practitioner. Although called upon to treat the effects of
these periodic parasites, most veterinarians are not
directly involved in their control. Consequently, this
   as s s  sn n
of their life on the host. with onlybrief mention of the
periodicparasites.
5
6
Arthropods
dassification of the Arthropods
Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Arthropoda
Class:
Arachnida (scorpions, spiders, mites, and
ticks)
Order:
Acarina (mites and ticks)
Class:
Insecta (insects)
Order:
Mallophaga (chewing or biting lice)
Anoplura (sucking lice)
Siphonaptera (fleas)
Diptera (two-winged flies)
Importance
● Intermediate hosts for various parasites.
· Vectors for bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens.
· Direct. causal agents of disease.
·Produce venoms that may be toxic
Morphology
● Arachnids: body divided into two parts (cephalotho
rax [fusion of head and thorax] and abdomen) or
completely fused; adults with four pairs of legs;
antennae absent; wingless.
Arthropods
7
· Insects: body divided into three parts (head, thorax,
abdomen); adults with three pairs of legs; antennae
present; wings present. or absent.
Ticks (Arachnida)
Ticks are divided into two families: the Argasidae (soft
ticks) and the Ixodidae (hard ticks). Table 2-1 outlines
the important. characteristics of each family
Life Cycle
· Simple metamorphosis with larval and nymphal
stages resembling adults.
· Separate sexes with females laying eggs off the host.
● Larva (six legs, no reproductive organs) hatches,
feeds on host. and molts to nymph.
· Nymph (eight legs, no functional reproductive
organs) feeds on host and molts to another nymph
(soft ticks) or adult (hard ticks).
· Soft ticks have two or more nymphal stages; hard
ticks have only one.
· All adult hard ticks feed on blood whereas not all
adult soft ticks do.
●Soft ticks tend to live inside (burrows, dens, hutches,
etc.), feed rapidly, and spend relatively little time on
the host. Hard ticks tend to live outdoors, feed
slowly, and spend longer time on the host.
8
Arthropods
Larvae, nymphs, and adults feed 
D sep leaas sunbai 'auo
· females-covers part of dorsal
Visible when viewed from the
Egg, larva, nymph, adult
bodidae (Hard Ticks)
 dorsal surface
repletion
surface
 surface 
Table 2-1  Important Characteristics of Soft and Hard Ticks 
Present
Larvaefeedslowly,overseveral
days; nymphs and adults feed
 Egg, larva, two or more nymphs,
Hidden when viewed from the
quickly, several times
Argasidae (Soft Ticks)
dorsal surface
 adult
Absent
Mouthparts
Life stages
Character
Scutum
Feeding
Arthropods
9
·Most. ticks cannot tolerate direct sunlight, dryness,
or excessive rainfall; tick activity decreases during
the cold months and increases during spring, sum-
mer, and fall.
·Hard ticks can be classified as either one-host (all
stages on one host), two-host (two stages on one host),
or three-host. (all stages on different. hosts) ticks.
Common Soft Ticks in North Americo
ARGAS SPP.
· In the United States, distributed along the Gulf of
Mexico and the Mexican border.
·Parasitize wild and domestic birds,occasionally
humans.
· Active primarily in evening hours.
· Annoyance leads to decreased egg production;
heavy infestations may cause anemia.
 Development. from egg to adult may take as little as
30 days; may survive months (larvae, nymphs) or
more than 2years (adults) without a blood meal.
OTOBIUSMEGNINI(SPINOSEEARTICK)
·Generally distributed throughout North America.
·Parasitize cattle, horses, other domestic animals, and
humans.
10
Arthropods
·One-host tick in which larvae and nymphs feed in
the ear canal; unfed nymphs can survive as long as 2
months.
· Adults have vestigial mouthparts and do not feed;
therefore, adult females lay a single clutch of eggs.
Common Hord Ticks in North Americo
RHIPICEPHALUS SANGUINEUS (BROWN DOG TICK)
● Three-host. tick with all stages preferring dogs; can
feed on humans.
·Originally found in the tropics; cannot. overwinter in
cold, temperate regions but. will survive indoors in
these areas; found in most of the United States and
parts of southeast Canada.
● Egg to egg development may be completed in as lit-
tle as 2 months;unfed adults may survive for over a
year.
·Transmit. Babesia canis, Erlichia canis, possibly Hepato
ununapuoo
AMBLYOMMA SPP.
·Two species are common—Amblyomma americanum
(lone star tick)and Amblyomma maculatum(Gulf
coast tick).
·Both are three-host ticks-adults prefer feeding on
larger animals (cattle and other livestock) and
Arthropods
11
other stages prefer feeding on foxes and similar-
sized animals.
●In the United States, A. maculatum is distributed
along Atlantic and Gulf coastal areas, whereas A.
americanum is distributed in the southeastern region,
into the Midwest. and on the Atlantic coast.
Ambylomma americanam can produce severe anemia
and may transmit tularemia, Rocky Mountain spot-
ted fever, and Lyme disease.
·Amblyomma maculatum produces painfulbite wounds
that swell and may become secondarily infected;
implicated as a cause of tick paralysis; transmit. Hepa-
DERMACENTORSPP.
●Dermacentor variabilis(American dog tick)—disjunct
populations occur across the United States, into
Canada, and Mexico.
·Dermacentor andersoni(RockyMountain wood tick)—
widely distributed across western United States and
Canada
·Both are three-host. tickslarvae and nymphs prefer
feeding on small rodents, adults prefer larger ani-
mals (including dogs and humans).
· Both can transmit Rocky Mountain spotted fever,
tularemia, and can cause tick paralysis.
12
Arthropods
IXODES SPP.
·Several species or subspecies found across the
United States.
·Three-host. tick with larvae and nymphs preferring
small rodents and adults preferring deer.
●Transmits Lyme disease.
Other important Genero
BOOPHILUS SPP.
· Two species of importance in North America-
Boophilus microplus and Boophilus annulatus (Ameri-
can cattle tick).
·One-host ticks with B. annulatus preferring cattle
and B. microplus preferring large animals in general
(catfle, goats, deer, etc.).
· Has been eradicated from the United States and,
therefore,if encountered must be reported to state
and federal authorities.
Boophilus annulatus transmits Texas cattle fever ( Babesia
bigemina); both can transmit. Anaplasma marginale.
HAEMAPHYSALIS SPP.
· Important parasite of wild mammals and birds;
rarely of dogs, cats, or humans.
· Three-host ticks distributed fromAlaska to
Argentina.
Arthropods
13
Diagnosis
Ticks should be collected carefully in order to keep the
mouthparts intact. Preserving intact. specimens in 70%
ethanol or isopropyl alcohol is recommended, although
5%formalin will do.The specific identification of ticks
can be challenging, particularly if dealing with larval or
nymphal forms. However, adults can be identified to
genus using the shape of their capitulum and length of
their mouthparts, the presence or absence of markings on
the scutum, and body structures. Table 2-2 presents key
morphologic characteristics that can be used to distin-
guish the North American genera of hard ticks.
Treotment and Control
For dogs, dichlorvos, carbaryl, fipronil, and selamectin
can be used. Fipronil on cats is highly effective. Flea and
tick collars are available for dogs and cats. To control R
sanguineus indoors,spray building with Diazinon.
Remove vegetation and debris from bed and yards to
decrease tick survival. Spray or dust with acaricide to kill
those that remain.
For lactating dairy cattle, coumaphos and dichlorvos
can be used. These and malathion may be used in non-
lactating beef and dairy cattle.Coumaphos is effective
for horses. Environmental modification for livestock is
often impractical.
Insecticidal dusts or emulsion concentrates are used
in the treatment of O. megnin? infestations.
14
Arthropods
Festoons
Absent
Present
Present
Present
Present
Absent
Markings
Inornatet
Inomate
Inomate
Omate
Inomate
Omate
Absent
Present
Present
Present
Absent
Present
Tinornate = no white marks on the scutum; ornate = white marks present on scutum.
Eyes
 Second palpal seg-
Mouthparts much
Rectangular basis
lat-
Mouthparts long
Hexagonal basis
basis capituli
ment flared I
Hexagonal basis
longer than
capituli, short
BasisCapitulior
mouthparts
Mouthparts
capituli
capituli
erally
Genera of Hard Ticks and Boophilus
Location of groove, if present, in relation to anus.
Anal Groove
Anterior
Postenior
Posterior
Postenior
Absent
Absent
Rhipicephalus
Amblyomma
Dermacentor
s
Boophilus
Haema-
Genus
sODox
Arthropods
15
Mites (Arachnida)
Mites can be divided into two major groups: sarcopti-
formand nonsarcoptiformmites.Thesarcoptiform
mites canbe subdividedinto those thatburrow ortunnel
within the epidermis and those that do not. Sarcopti
form mites are distinguished from nonsarcoptiform
mites by possessing a round to oval-shaped body. The
legs of sarcoptiform mites also have pedicels (stalks) at
the tips that may be long or short. If long, they may be
the stalk. These characteristics are very important for
identification. Although geographic distribution varies
with species of mite, in general, mites are found through
out the world.
Life Cycle
[ n   si  
stages resembling adults.
● Separate sexes with females laying eggs on the host.
● Larva (six legs) hatches, may or may not. feed, and
molts to nymph
· Nymph (eight legs) feeds on host and molts to
another nymph (sarcoptiform mites living on sur-
face) or adult (burrowing sarcoptiform mites; non-
sarcoptiform mites).
● Except for some mites of birds, mites tend to spend
entire life on the host; for most mites, transmission
16
 Arthropods
 s      
play a role.
Sarcoptiform Mites
TUNNELINGSARCOPTIFORMMITESTable2-SpreSents
the host spectrum and characteristic lesions of the com-
mon tunneling sarcoptiform mites.
SURFACE-DWELLING SARCOPTIFORMMITES Table 2-4
presents the host.spectrum and characteristiclesions of the
common surface-dwelling sarcoptiform mites.
Non-SarcoptiformMites
DEMoDEX SPP.These host-specific mites live in the hair
follicles and sebaceous glands of humans and most
domestic animals. In most. animals,these mites are con-
sidered normal,nonpathogenicfauna of the skin.How
ever, particularly in the dog, serious disease can result.
Transmission is by direct. contact. The cigar-shaped body
makes these mites easily recognizable.
Demodex conis
● Localized demodecosis: patchy alopecia, especially
of the muzzle,face, and bony projections on extrem-
ities; nonpruritic; most recover spontaneously;
recurrence is rare.
Arthropods
17
(continues)
Zoonotic
Zoonotic
Other
nose, eyes)
spreads to
neck, shoul
Common Sites
abdomen
ders, back
Ears, lateral
Head (ears,
elbows,
initially;
ventral
crusty, thick-
with intense
erythema-
tous, then
becoming
ened with
Inflammation,
papular;
erythema,
alopecla,
alopecia,
ns
Lesions
Initially
5800
581d
Sarcoptiform Mites
qD5
Sarcoptes
Mite
18
Arthropods
Most common
Infestations can
name: scaly
anorexia
and death
of feline
scabies
lead to
cause
Common
Other
Common Sites
Starts on ears;
spreads to
face, neck,
paws, and
hindquar-
 shoulders
Back, neck,
ters
s8a7
 Dry, scaly skin 
with alope-
cla, dermati-
tis, extreme
Hyperkeratosis
Yellow crusts,
thickened
with legs
becoming
thickened,
alopecia
defomed
prunitis
skin,
Lesions
Guinea pigs
Wild birds
Rabbits
Poultry
(Continued)
Cats
Cnemidocoptes
Table 2-3
Trixacarus
Mite
Arthropods
19
facial lesions
= scaly face
 actively pull
out feathers
name for
Common
Birds may
 pads of feet,
wing, breast,
thighs, vent
cere, vent
area,back
 Shanks and
Back, top of
area
Leg lesions as
cnusty mass 
Inflammation,
break easily
mutans;
onbeak
rsund
feathers
for C.
Parakeets
Cananies
Poultry
Pigeons
Cnemidocoptes
Cnemidocoptes
C.jamaicensis
gallinae
pilae
20
Arthropods
horses, goats,
quarantinable
Reportable and 
Has been eradi-
cated from
uo punoj
the United
Host, Species, Key Characteristics, and Lesions Caused by Surface-
Can also be
sheep
States
Other
Wooled areas of
Common Sites
Withers, back,
the body
rump
Ears
pinna; brown
discharge; oti-
tis media may
Prunitic areas con-
 sisting of pap-
thickened skin
Extremely pruritic;
constant rub-
bing leads to
tion; wool falls
ules, crusts,
self-mutila-
Dried cnust in 
out; skin
result
Lesions
Dwelling Sarcoptiform Mites
Rabbits
Cattle
Sheep
150H
Table 2-4
cuniculi
s
bovis
5/0
Mite
Arthropods
21
If untreated, per-
some states
the tympanic
 Reportable in
foration of
membrane
can occur
hind legs, tail-
head, escutch-
Extermal ear, ear
 Skin of lower 
canal; has
been found
around the
base of the
tall
cracks, bleeds
easily; sheep
become debil-
itated and can
 overly pruritic
 Intensely pruritic;
cerumen pro-
duced; head
hematoma of
 Skin becomes
much dark
shaking can
becomes
thickened,
thickened,
 crusty; not 
the aural
cause
pinna
die
Ruminants
Horses
Ferrets
s800
Cats 
Otodectes
cyanotis
spp.
22
Arthropods
· Generalized demodecosis: occurs as a result of an
immunodeficiency; diffuse alopecia, erythema, and
secondary bacterial infections; pruritic; rancid odor;
difficult. to ameliorate; poor prognosis.
genic;however, lesions have been associated with
infestations.As for the dog,concomitant. diseases are
usually present with severe infestations.
●Demodex cati and D. gatoi (cat) can cause alopecia, ery
thema, scaly or crusty dermatitis on face, neck, and ears.
·Demodexbovis(cattle)and D.caprae(goats)can cause
pinhead and larger-sized pustules; found on the
shoulders, trunk, and lateral aspect of the neck.
·Demodex ovis (sheep)can cause localized,scaly
lesions;rare.
·Demodex phylloides (pigs) can cause pustules around
the eyes and on the snout; can spread to ventral sur-
face of the body.
·Demodex caballi and D.equi (horses)may produce
pruritis, alopecia with scaling, or pustules; starts on
the neck or withers, spreading to head,forelimbs,
and back.
● Demodex aurati and D. criceti (hamsters, gerbils) can
cause alopecia with scaling or scabs; found on the
rump and back (hamster) or face (gerbil).
Arthropods
23
PNEUMONYSSOIDES(EPNEUMONYSSUS)CANINUM
· Oval, pale yellow; 1.0-1.5 mm in length; all legs are
on the anterior half of the body.
· Lives in nasal and paranasal sinuses of dogs; preva-
lence in the United States is unknown.
· Generally thought to be nonpathogenic; has been
associated with sneezing, sinusitis, labored breath-
ing, and disorders of the central nervous system (a
result. of the sinusitis).
CHEYLETIELLA SPP.
·Species include Cheyletiella blakei (cats), C parasitivo
rax (rabbits), and C. yasgur (dogs).
oo 311 21q 1a2s 1n 1 99 x 98 0n d 
accessory palpi on anterior end.
● Mites are very motile; resemble moving flakes of
dandruf (common name: walking dandruff) .
● Causes a dry, scaly dermatitis; mild alopecia; perhaps
skin thickening.
● May infest humans causing a mild dermatitis.
DERMANYSSUS GALLINAE(REDMITE OF POULTRY) AND
ORNITHONYSSUSSYIVIARUM (NORTHERNFOWLMITE)
length.
·Parasitize chickens, wild birds; occasionally humans.
24
Arthropods
·Ornithonyssus sylviarum usually found on birds, but
also can be found in nests and poultry houses; D.gal
inaeusuallyfoundoffbirds.
●Feeding activities cause irritation, weight loss, decreased
egg production, and anemia; may lead to death.
Diognosis
The experienced clinician often can make an accurate diag-
nosis based on the typical distribution and manner of the
spread of lesions. However, a positive diagnosis depends on
recovery and identification of the mites. Skin scrapings,
deep enough to draw blood, are the most. common diag-
nostic tool. Some mites are extremely difficult to find; there-
fore, negative skin scrapings are inconclusive and animals
should be examined repeatedly. Scrapings should be at the
margins of active lesions. Additionally, for Demodex spp.
areas of normal skin should be scraped to determine if the
infection is generalized. For Cnemidocoptes spp., remove and
examine the underside of a loose scale. A strong hand lens
may be used to view Cheyletiella on the animal.
Table 2-5 presents a key to differentiate the common
sarcoptiform mites. Characteristic morphologic features of
nonsarcoptiform mites have already been presented.
Treatment and Contro!
Dogs and cats: oral or SQ ivermectin at. 0.2-0.4 mg per kg
or topical ivermectin at 0.5 mg per kg is effective against sar
Arthropods
25
coptic mange in dogs. Clip hair and remove crusty material
with keratolytic shampoo first. Ivermectin at 0.3 mg per kg
effective against notoedric mange in cats. Otodectic acaria-
sis in dogs and cats requires a thorough cleaning of the ear
canal followed by acaricidalotic solutions.Selamectin is
approved for use against this parasite. Oral (three treat-
ments at. weekly intervals) or SC (two treatments at 2 weeks
   si  d  oo re  
Ivermectin at 0.2-0.5 pg per kg administered orally, SC, or
topically is effective in cats. Treatment intervals for oral and
SC in cats is as for dogs; use a minimum of two treatments
given 2 weeks apart. for pour-on. For demodectic mange in
dogs, the localized form has been treated with 1% rotenone
Table2-5Key to theGeneraofCommonSarcoptiform
Mites
1a. Short, unjointed pedicels.
1b. Long pedicels..
3
2a. Pedicels on first, second, and fourth pairs of legs of
females and all legs of males; body of males with large.
posteriorlobes.
..Choroptes
2b. Pedicels on first and second pairs of legs of females
and all legs of males; body of male with small, posterior
lobes. ...
Otodectes
3a. Long, jointed pedicels .. .
..Psorpotes
3b. Long, unjointed pedicels 
4a. Anus at postenior margin of body... .
.Sarcoptes
4b. Anus on dorsal surface of body ............Notoedres
26
Arthropods
ointment or 5%benzoyl peroxide once or twice daily. Dc
not.use Amitrazfor treatment. of thelocalized form.How
ever, Amitraz is approved and recommended for use against.
the generalized form. Continue treatment until no live
mites are found on two successive skin scrapes. Daily oral
ivermectin at. 0.6 mg per kg until resolution of infection (4
months) and daily oral milbemycin oxime at. 0.52-3.8 mg
per kg for varying periods has also been used with mixed
success. For P caninum, milbemycin oxime at 0.5-1.0 mg
perkg orallyonceaweekfor3weekswaseffective.For
Cheyletiella, acaricidal shampoos approved for use on dogs
or cats are effective as is fipronil in dogs. lvermectin at
0.2-0.4 mg per kg every 7 (orally) or 14 (SQ) days for 6-8
weeks or pour-on ivermectin at. 0.5 mg per kg given 2 weeks
apart has alsobeen used.Be sure to treat premises with
residualacaricidalspray.
Ruminants:acaricides effective against lice are also
good for chorioptic mange in catfle. Eprinomectin is
approved for use in lactating dairy cattle. Sarcoptic
mange is reportable in catfle; should it occur, treatment.
and control requirements will be outlined at that time.
Psoroptic mange is also reportable and treatment and
control requirements will be outlined at that time
Horses:lindane applied two times at.weekly intervals
has been effective. Thoroughly clean stall and associated
equipment (e.g., feed buckets, curry combs).
Pigs: ivermectin at 0.3 mg per kg SQ is used against
sarcopticmange.
Birds: efforts against. D. gallinae are directed towards the
environment. Periodic removal of litter and nest materials
Arthropods
¥27
thorough cleaning, and high-pressure application of
residual acaricides are recommended. For control of O.
such as malathion, carbaryl, or permethrin. As with all
medications, read and follow label directions. Cnemido-
coptic mites may be treated with ivermectin at 0.2 mg per
kg, administered parenterally or orally.
Guinea pigs: T. caviae can be treated with two doses
of ivermectin at. 0.2-0.5 mg per kg SQ or orally, given 1
week apart.
Rabbits: P cuniculi can be treated with two injections
Lice (lnsecta)
Lice are distributed across two orders, the Anoplura (suck-
ing lice) and the Mallophaga (biting or chewing lice) . Table
2-6 outlines the important characteristics of each family.
Although geographic distribution varies according to each
species of louse,ingeneral,lice are distributed worldwide.
Life Cycle
 ss   si  
bling adults.
· Spend en tire life on the host; transmission primarily
by direct contact, but fomites can also play a role.
· Separate sexes with adult females laying small
(0.5-1.0 mm), whitish, oval eggs (nits); attached
firmly to hair or feathers.
28
Arthropods
Rounded head, broader than
Tends to be mobile, easy to
Table 2-6 Important Characteristics Distinguishing the Two Orders of Lice
Egg, three nymphs, adult 
Mallophaga (Chewing Lice)
Chewing mouthparts 
Tend to be yellow
thorax
remove
Somewhat pointed, narower than
 Bupuadap pal io Aeg aq ol pual
on how much blood has been
Egg, three nymphs, adult 
Anoplura (Sucking Lice)
ingested
thorax
Mouthparts
Life stages
Attachment
Character
Color
Head
Arthropods
29
 Nymphs hatch from eggs; three nymphal stages
occur prior to reaching the adult stage.
 After mating, the adult female will lay eggs and the
life cycle begins again.
● The time from egg to egg can take as little as 3-4 weeks.
● Eggs generally do not hatch and neither nymphs nor
adults will live much longer than l week if removed
from the host.
Common Lice
·Lice are relatively host. specific with most species of
animals having some type of louse (common species
and hosts are presented in Table 2-7); human lice
(Phthirus pubis,Pediculus humanus)can occasionally
be found on dogs.
● Sucking lice do not parasitize cats or birds.
Importance
·Most lice problems manifest. under crowded condi
tions, often in winter.
· The presence of either type of louse can cause irri-
tation, pruritis, scratching, licking, and restlessness
leading to loss of condition, poor weight gain,
decreased milk production, etc.
· Sucking lice can cause anemia.
·Bite wounds can become secondarily infected
30
Arthropods
sdss xo
(seot ose) spad snuuo
(sieo ose) sno snuoubou
Ss
Hoplopleura meridionidis
Linognathus stenopsis
Linognathus africanis
Linognathus setosus
Haematopinussuis
Haematopinusasini
Linognathusvituli
Sucking Louse
(Order: Anoplura) Lice Associated with Domestic Animals
None
None
None
Damalinia (=Bovicola) limbata
Damalinia (=Bovicola) ovis
Damalinia (=Bovicola) equi
Damalinia (=Bovicola) bovis
Columbicola spp. (pigeons)
Menopon spp. (poultry)
Gonoides spp. (poultry)
Felicolasubrostratus
Trichodectes canis
Cliricola porcelli
Chewing Louse
None
None
None
Guinea pigs
Rats/mice
Swine
Sheep
s
Horses
Cattle
Gerbils
Birds
Cats
s800
Arthropods
31
·TrichodectescanisisanintermediatehostofDipylidium
caninum;Linognathus setosus is an intermediate host
forAcanthocheilonemareconditum,Haematopinussuis
transmits swine pox and probably Eperythrozoon.
Diagnosis
Lice and their eggs can be detected through careful
examination of hair or feathers and are easily seen with
the naked eye. A hand-held magnifying lens may assist. in
their visualization.
Treotment and Contro!
Dogs and cats: carbaryl shampoos, sprays, or dips, applied
in two treatments at l week intervals, are effective.
Beef and nonlactating dairy catfle: numerous sprays,
dips, and pour-ons are available for use against lice as are
insecticidalear-tags.Macrolide injectibles and pour-ons
have excellent. activity against. anopluran infestations and
pour-ons also work against. mallophagans. If a herd has a
history of infestation, fall treatment is recommended to
avoid winter increase in lice populations. Beware of poten-
tial host-parasite reactions to catfle grubs that may be con-
currently in the esophagus or spinal canal (see Hypoderma).
Lactating dairy cattle: a few compounds that can be
applied as sprays or used in back rubbers or dust bags are
available for this group of animals. Eprinomectin is also
approved and has no withdrawal time.
32
Arthropods
Pigs: injectible or premix formulations of avermectins or
pour-on organophosphates are available for lice control.
Horses: two spray applications of coumaphos 2 weeks
apart. are effective. Dusting horses with a mixture of rotenone
and a synergized pyrethrin in winter may be less stressful.
Fleas (lnsecta)
Adult fleas are wingless, laterally compressed insects with
enable them to feed on a host's blood by piercing a
blood vessel and imbibing the blood from the lumen.
Life Cycle
· Complex metamorphosis with egg, maggotlike lar-
val stages, pupa, and adults.
·Adults are parasitic; other stages are found primarily
in the host's environment.
● Separate sexes with adult females laying small (about.
0.5 mm long), oval eggs on the host or in the envi-
ronmenf.
· Larvae hatch from eggs; three larval stages growing
from about 2 mm to 5 mm in size, white, turning
brown after feeding (primarily on flea feces).
 sso s s ais  sd is   s
tant to environmental stress and chemical control efforts
Arthropods
33
· Heat, carbon dioxide, and movement stimulate
adults to emerge from pupae.
·Fleas tend to survive bestin humid conditions
Fleas Encountered in North Americo
CTENOCEPHALIDESFELISANDCTENOCEPHALIDESCANIS
·Parasitize a wide variety of mammals; will feed on humans.
·Ctenocephalides felis is the most commonly encountered flea
of cats and dogs.
● Generally distributed throughout. the United States, par-
ticularly prevalent. in humid areas.
· Life cycle can take as litfle as 3 weeks or as long as 20
months.
● Feeding causes irritation resulting in the animal bit-
ing and scratching; can cause anemia in very heavy
infestations.
· Some animals become sensitized to the salivary
secretions resulting in an intensely pruritic reaction
(flea-bite hypersensitivity or flea allergy dermatitis).
·Intermediate host for Dipylidium caninum,Acan
thocheilonema reconditum;transmits Bartonella henselae
(cat scratch fever).
ECHIDNOPHAGAGALLINACEA(STICKTIGHTFLEA)
· Parasitize poultry and other domestic birds; will feed
on dogs, cats, rabbits, horses, and humans.
34Arthropods
· Present in United States as far north as Kansas and
Virginia.
●Life cycle completed in 30-60 days.
· Females remain attached at site of feeding; causes
swelling andulceration;if near eyes,lesions may
cause blindness.
XENOPSYLLA CHEOPIS (ORIENTAL OR TROPICAL RAT FLEA)
·Parasitize rats; will feed on humans.
·PresentinUnited States asfar north as the northern-
most. states.
● Life cycle completed in as litfle as 3 weeks.
·Primary importance is as vector of plague ( Yersinia pestis)
● Parasitize humans; will feed on dogs, cats, pigs, and
rats.
· Life cycle takes about 1l month to complete
· This is a human parasite capable of transmitting
plague; when recovered from a pet, must. tactfully
explain to the owners they are the reason the animal
has fleas.
Treotment and Contro!
Dogs and cats: lufenuron, fipronil, and imidacloprid
have dramatically changed flea control. All can be
Arthropods
35
administeredat monthlyintervalsalthoughIufenuron
also has a long-acting injectible formulation providing
action longer than a l-month duration. Lufenuron does
not kill adult fleas, but prevents eggs from hatching.
Because the vast majority of all fleas are found in the
environment. as eggs, larvae, or pupae, environmental
control should be considered in flea control programs
with these or any other products. Numerous over-the-
counter products are available as shampoos, collars, or
topicals, which provide adequate control when com-
bined with proper environmental control programs.
Myiasis-Producing Flies (lnsecta)
The larvae of certain dipterans are capable of developing
in the tissues of many domestic animals. This results in a
condition called myiasis. There are two types of myiases:
(1) facultative myiasislarvae are free-living, but can
become parasitic under certain conditions; and (2)
obligatory myiasislarvae are always parasitic, i.e., without.
a proper host, the flies cannot complete their life cycle
Life Cycle
· Complex metamorphosis with egg, larval stages
(instars), pupa, and adults.
● Separate sexes with adult females laying eggs or lar-
vae on host. or in environment.
● Larvae hatch from eggs; three larval stages (maggots).
36
Arthropods
· Third larval stage pupates with adults emerging
from pupae.
Obligatory Myiasis-Producing Flies
Adults of the obligatory myiasis-producing flies tend to
resemble honeybees. They have only vestigial mouthparts
and, therefore, do not. feed. They are quite annoying to
their hosts as the females buzz around the animal, laying
her eggs. These flies are extremely host- and site-specific.
Because they are so specific,the third-stage larvae can be
provisionallyidentifiedtogenus based on host and site
alone.However,first-and second-stage larvae must be dif-
ferentiated from larvae of the facultative myiasis-
producing flies, particularly if in an abnormal host.
OESTRUS OVIS (SHEEP NASAL BOT)
· Females fly around nostrils of sheep and goats during
the hottest part. of the day; deposit. tiny, white to yellow,
first-stage larvae; crawl into nasal sinuses, and develop
into large (3 cm), dark brown third-stage larvae.
· Third-stage larvae crawl out of the nostrils or are
sneezed out; pupate in the ground; adults emerge
3-6 weeks later; if begin pupating in fall, pupate
overwinter and adults emerge in spring;larvae can
also overwinter in nares of host.
●Larvae produce a purulent. rhinitis or sinusitis leading to
head shaking, restlessness, snorting; may lead to dam
Arthropods
37
· Diagnosis based on seeing large, dark brown larvae
dropping out of nostrils; postmortem diagnosis
achieved by sawing skull in half longitudinally, rins
ing key areas with water, and examining the rinsings
for larvae with a magnifying lens.
● Ocular myiasis of humans has been reported.
GASTEROPHILUS(OR GASTROPHILUS) SPP.(HORSE
STOMACH BOT)
· Three species in horses—G. nasalis, G. hemorrhoidalis,
G. intestinalis.
● Adult females attach elongate, operculated eggs to
hairs of the intermandibular space (G. nasalis), the
lips (G. hemorrhoidalis), or forelegs and shoulders (G.
intestinalis) during late summer and early fall.
● Eggs around the mouth hatch spontaneously; those
elsewhere hatch in response to sudden warmth pro
vided by the breath of the horse.
· Larvae penetrate and migrate in oral mucosa and
tongue;eventually reach the stomach or duodenum
and attach to the wall.
● Third-stage larvae pass out in feces in spring; pupate
in the soil for 3-9 weeks.
· Generally considered benign parasites except for
the annoyance associated with the adults; mucosal
and submucosal inflammation and mucosal ulcera-
tion of the duodenum has been associated with
infections of G. nasalis in ponies.
38
Arthropods
● Diagnosis is based on seeing eggs attached to hairs
or distinctive third-stage larvae in feces; one can also
find larvae at necropsy; usual attachment sites are
the first ampulla of the duodenum for G. nasalis, the
nonglandular part of the stomach at the margo pli-
catus or in the saccus cecus for G intestinalis, the
duodenum and rectum for G. hemorrhoidalis.
HYPODERMA SPP. (CATTLE GRUBS; HEEL FLIES)
· Two species infesting catfle and bison—H. bovis
(northern cattle grub)，H.lineatum (common or
southern catfle grub).
· Hypoderma lineatum is present in the southern United
States; both species are present in the northern
United States and into Canada.
●Entire life cycle of both species takes about. 1 year to
complete.
·Adult H.lineatumbecomes active with the start of
warm weather, remaining active for about. 2 months;
H. bovis becomes active about the time H.lineatum
stops, remaining active into summer.
● Larvae hatch spontaneously, crawl down hair shaft,
penetrate skin, and migrate through the subcuta
neous tissues.
·Larvae,in 45 months,come to rest in either the
submucosal connective tissue of the esophagus (H.
lineatam) or the epidural fat (H. bovis); remain there
forabout.3months.
Arthropods
39
● Resume migration to subcutaneous tissues of the
back, cut breathing holes and increase in size as they
develop to the third-stage larvae.
·When fully developed, larvae exit. through breathing
holes, fall to ground, and pupate with adult flies
emerging in 45weeks.
· Egg-laying activity disturbs animals; they run about
aimlessly (gadding) in an attempt to escape the flies;
results in loss of production.
·Larval infestation leads to carcass damage and dam-
age to hide from the breathing holes; if animals are
treated when larvae are in resting sites (esophagus,
spinal canal), signs of bloat/choke or central ner-
vous system disease can result.
● Diagnosis is made by finding either the eggs on hairs
of the legs or the larvae in the back.
· Infestations of horses and humans have been
reported, although rare.
COCHLIOMYIAHOMINOVORAX
[AMERICAN PRIMARY SCREVWORM]
Only fly in North America attracted to unconta-
minated skin wounds of domestic animals; will
infest. any living warm-blooded animal (including
humans) with a wound.
● Adult females lay many eggs in batches of 15-400 at
the edge of wounds.
40
Arthropods
· Larvae hatch spontaneously and enter wound feed-
ing on secretions and living flesh; become third-
stage larvae in 5-7 days.
· Larvae drop to ground, burrow in soil and pupate;
adults emerge in one to several weeks.
· Life cycle can be completed in as litfle as 24 days; lar-
vae cannot. overwinter where soil freezes.
· Fatal if not treated; can kill a full-grown steer in 5-7
days.
·Massive eradication effortsused insecticidal treatment
of all infested animals and release of sterile flies to elim-
inate this parasite from the United States and Mexico.
Because females mate once and the wild population of
the fly is relatively small,release of billions of sterile
the chance of a successful mating.
· Occasionally reenters the United States in imported
animals;larvae encountered in wounds(particularly
ofimported animals or animals in border areas with
Mexico)must be differentiated from facultative myi-
asis-producing flies. If encountered, it must be
reported to state and federal authorities.
CUTEREBRASPP.
· Primarily parasites of rabbits and rodents; will infest.
dogs and cats;although rare,most frequent. cause of
endemic human myiasis in North America.
Arthropods
41
● Adult females lay eggs near entrances to burrows or
along rabbit. runs.
· Larvae hatch in response to presence of animal,
crawl into fur, and en ter subcutaneous tissues of host.
through natural body openings.
● Cut breathing holes and develop to large (up to 3
cm), black third-stage larvae in subcutaneous cysts.
· In dogs and cats, generally found in neck and head
region in late summer and early fall; also found in
aberrant sites including anterior chamber of the eye
and the brain.
· Generally benign unless secondary bacterial infec-
tion of cyst. occurs or larvae migrate to aberrant sites.
●Diagnosis is based on finding characteristic cysts with
breathing holes in which second- or third-stage lar
vae are usually present.
Facuitative Myiasis-Producing Flies
GENERA OR SPECIES INVOLVED
·Lucilia (green or copper botfle flies)
·Phoenicia (green botfle flies)
·Phormia (black blow flies)
·Calliphora (blue bottle flies)
·Sarcophaga (flesh flies)
·Cochliomyia macellaria(secondary screwworm)
42
Arthropods
IMPORTANCE
· Normally, adults lay eggs in carrion or feces; also
atfracted by suppurative wounds, necrotic areas, skin
soiled with urine, feces, or vomitus (bacterial growth
generates odors attractive toflies);condition called
fly strike or strike.
· Females feed and lay eggs; larvae hatch; feed on
necrotic debris and exudates
· Larvae can cause further damage; some may invade
healthy subcutaneous tissue producing large cavities
or tunnels; host becomes anorexic and weak.
·Infestation can lead to death as a result of sep-
ticemia, toxemia, or shock.
DIAGNosIS Diagnosis of maggot infestation is not. diffi-
cult because the larvae are easily observed in the wound or
within the hair coat. Species diagnosis, however, is depend-
ent on morphologic characteristics of the larvae, particu
larly of the spiracular plates on the posterior end of the
larvae. Depending on the situation, larvae may need to be
differentiatedfromthoseofCochliomyiahominivorax.In
that case, collect. larvae, preserve in 70% ethanol, and sub-
mit to proper authorities for identification.
Treotment and Controf
For bots of sheep, horses, and grubs of catfle, avermectins are
effective. Treatment of catfle should be done immediately
after fly season ends but before the larvae reach the esopha
Arthropods
43
gus or spinal cord; destruction of larvae in these tissues
causes severe inflammatory reactions and clinical signs cor-
responding to the locality of the larvae. The danger period
for treatment is estimated to be 6-8 weeks before the larvae
appear in the back, which occurs around mid-September in
the southern United States, late December in areas such as
Ohio, and late January in the more northern areas of the
United States.Although adverse reactions are considered to
be rare occurrences these days, they must still be kept in
mind in designing parasite control programs for cattle.
Infestations of C. hominivorax are reportable; should
it. occur, treatment and control requirements will be out-
lined at.that. time.
Treatment of Cuterebra consists of manual extraction
of thelarva.
Treatment of facultative myiasis infestations includes
present, treating secondary bacterial infections.
Keds (lnsecta)
This is a group of dorso-ventrally flattened insects that.
may or may not. have wings.Although there are numer-
ous species of keds in North America, only one is gener-
ally encountered in veterinary medicine.
Melophagus ovinus (Sheep Ked)
· Entire life cycle spent on sheep or goats; transmis-
sion is by direct. contact. although fed females may
live up to a week off the host.
44
Arthropods
abdomen until ready to pupate; time until adult.
emergence depends on ambient temperature.
●Most numerous in cold months (fall,winter) with
fewer present. during warm months; more prevalent.
in northern United States and Canada.
●Feed onblood which may cause anemia;bites are
also pruritic leading to biting, scratching, and rub-
bing which damages wool; ked feces stains wool,
decreasing value.
· Coumaphos, malathion, and other insecticides are
effective against.thisparasite.
Biting Gnats and Mosquitoes (lnsecta)
These dipteran insects are periodic parasites; that is, the
only role vertebrate hosts have in the insects' life cycle is
as a food source for the adult females. However, these
insects have a primary role as biological vectors of various
disease-causing agents. Because the insects are only peri-
odic parasites, they are usually not found on the animals.
Life Cycle
· Complex metamorphosis with egg, up to five larval
stages, pupa, and adults.
● Separate sexes with adult females laying eggs in
aquaticorsemi-aquatichabitats.
Arthropods
¥45
● Larvae hatch from eggs; final larval stage pupates;
adults emerge.
● Adult females need bloodmeal for egg development;
males do not feed on blood.
Simulium spp. (Black Flies; Buffalo Gnots)
● Tiny flies (1-6 mm long) that tend to swarm;
require well-aerated water for eggs; limits geo-
graphic distribution to areas of swiftly running
water.
· Serrated, scissor-like mouthparts; lacerates tissue to
form a pool of blood; bites very painful; ears, neck,
and abdomen are favored feeding sites.
· Swarming and biting can cause annoyance, resulting
in decreased production in livestock.
● Transmit. Leucocytozoon spp. (hemoparasites of birds),
Onchocerca gutterosa.
Culicoides spp. (No-See-Ums, Biting Midges)
● Tiny gnats (1-3 mm long); habitat requirements
vary with species; strong fliers that tend to remain
close to breeding grounds; active at dusk or dawn.
●Bites are very painful; favored feeding sites are either
on dorsal or ventral aspect. of host, depending on
species involved.
·Bites cause annoyance.
46
Arthropods
· Allergic dermatitis in horses; begins as discrete
papules on dorsum; areas of alopecia form as hair
mats, crusts, then falls off; intensely pruritic leading
to scratching and rolling behavior which may lead to
injury or se condary infection.
·Transmit. bluetongue virus, Onchocerca cervricalis, Haemo-
proteus, and Leucocytozoon spp. (hemoparasites of birds).
Anopheles spp., Aedes spp., Culex spp.
(Mosquitoes)
●Small flies (3-6 mm long)that tend to swarm; la)
eggs on water or in dry places that. flood periodically;
complete entire life cycle in as little as 1-2 weeks.
● Have piercing-sucking mouthparts; pierces blood ves-
sel and feeds from the luumen; bites can be painful.
● Swarming and biting can cause annoyance leading to
decreased production in livestock; rarely causes anemia.
· Transmit eastern and western equine encephalitis
Plasmodium species (malaria), Dirofilaria immitis.
Treotment and Control
Because these pests are not found on the host except
when feeding,insecticidal treatment. is ineffective unless
repeated every few days; this becomes too expensive and
impractical. Consequently, control is aimed at killing
pre-adult stages.
Arthropods
47
Horse Flies, Deer Flies (lnsecta)
Like mosquitoes and biting gnats, horse flies and deer
flies are periodic parasites in which only the adult
females feed on blood.
Life Cycle
· Complex metamorphosis with egg, larval stages,
pupa, and adults.
● Separate sexes with adult females laying eggs in
aquatic or semi-aquatic habitats.
first- and second-stage larvae do not feed; later stages
feed on insect larvae, snails, young frogs, organic
matter, etc.; in temperate regions, larvae may over-
winter and pupate the following spring.
● Pupae are found in dry soil; adults are active only
during warmer months in temperate regions.
·Adult females need blood for egg development;
interrupted feeders—feeds several times in multiple
sites on one or more hosts until replete; preferred
feeding sites are ventral abdomen, legs, neck, with-
ers; prefers feeding on larger animals.
Genera fnvoived
·Tabanus (horse flies)
·Chrysops (deer flies)
8t
Arthropods
Importance
· Large flies (up to 3.5 cm with horse flies being big-
ger than deer flies).
● Bite very painful; scissor-like mouthparts lacerate tissue
to form pool of blood; bite causes restlessness, annoy-
ance, avoidance behavior, which interferes with grazing
and resting resulting in decreased production.
●Mechanical vectors of anaplasmosis, anthrax, equine
infectiousanemiavirus.
· Tabanus spp. are intermediate hosts for Elaeophora
schneideri (arterial worm of deer, elk, sheep).
Treotment and Contro!
Difficult to kill or repel. Flies rarely enter roofed areas so
stabling during hours of peak fly activity helps. Keeping
animals inside a fence 2.4 m in height with a 0.6 cm mesh
helps reduce the attack rate. Keep grazing animals away
from the edge of wooded areas also helps reduce the
attack rate.
Stable Flies, Horn Flies, Face Flies (lnsecta)
These flies are periodic parasites with different feeding
habits. Both male and female stable and horn flies feed
on blood whereas only female face flies feed on mucus,
saliva, and tears.
Arthropods
49
Life Cycle
· Complex metamorphosis with eggs, larvae, pupae,
and adults.
● Separate sexes with adult females laying eggs in
decaying organic matter (stable fly) or fresh cow
man ure (horn fly, face fly).
● Larvae hatch from eggs; final larval stage pupates;
adults emerge.
Stomoxys calcitrans (Stable Fly)
● Flies similar in size to house fly (6-7 mm long);
piercing-sucking mouthparts.
· Distributed primarily in central and southeastern
United States.
● Horse preferred host, but will feed on most. domes-
fic animals and humans; feed 1-2 times per day
depending on ambient temperature; feed primarily
on legs and flanks of cattle and horses, ears of dogs,
ankles ofhumans.
· Bites are painful; annoyance can lead to decreased
production in livestock.
· Mechanical vectors of anthrax and equine infectious
anemia virus; intermediate host for Habronema
microstoma (stomach nematode of horses).
50
Arthropods
Haematobia irritans (Horn Fly)
●Dark-colored, small flies (3-6 mm long); piercing
sucking mouthparts.
·Distributed throughout North America.
●Feed on catfle; rarely on horses, sheep, dogs
·Adults spend most. oflife on host, leaving only to lay
eggs; adults cluster on shoulders, back, and sides; if
ambient. temperature<7o°F, cluster aroundbase of
horns; if quite hot, cluster on ventral abdomen.
·Irritation associated with feeding activities results in
lost beef and/or dairy production; of all blood-suck-
ing flies in the United States, this fly is most respon-
sible for reduced weight gains and milk production.
·Intermediate host. for Stephanofilaria stilesi(filarid
nematode of cattle).
·Can cause a focal, midline dermatitis in horses.
Musca autumnalis (Foce Fly)
●Medium-sized flies (about. 6 mm long); sponging
mouthparts.
·Generally distributed in North America except. for
the southwestern United States; adults will hibernate
in large groups inside buildings.
· Feed on all types of livestock, horses, and bison.
· Flies' feeding activity is irritating to the host; can
lead to decreased production.
Arthropods
51
·Mechanical vectors ofinfectious keratoconjunctivitis
(pinkeye).
● Intermediate host. for Thelazia spp. (eyeworms) of
cattle.
Treatment and Contro!
Treatment with insecticides is possible; read the label
and follow directions carefully.Insecticidal ear tags can
be effective fly controlaids.Pour-on avermectins are
effective against horn flies
3
Introduction to the Endoparasites
Endoparasites are those parasites that live within the body
of the host. There are four major groups of endoparasites-
nematodes, acanthocephalans, platyhelminths (trematodes
and cestodes), and protozoans. Table 3-1 provides distin-
guishing characteristics of the helminthic parasites.
Nematodes
Appearance and Morphology
· Variable length, 1 mm to several meters.
· Body covered with cuticle, may form specialized
structures (e.g., alae).
● Usually sexually dimorphic with males smaller than
females.
53
54
Introduction to the Endoparasites
tened, leaf-
shaped, not
segmented
esophagus,
Monoecious
(exceptions)
Dorso-ven-
trally flat-
Acoelomate
Incomplete
intestine)
Trematodes
(mouth,
Patyhelminthes
segmented
(hemaphro-
Acoelomate
Monoecious
Dorso-ven-
trally flat-
elongate,
Cestodes
tened,
Absent
 Characteristics of the Major Helminth Groups
Phylum
Acanthocephala
gate, anterior
appears to be
Round, elon-
with spiny
segmented
proboscis,
Pseudocoel
Dioecious
Absent
Nemathelminthes
both ends, not
 intestine, anus)
gate, generally
Round, elon-
tapering at
segmented
esophagus,
Pseudocoel
Complete
(mouth,
Dioecious
(separate
(saxas
Characteristic
Body shape
Table 3-1
Digestive
Coelem
tract
saxas
fnfroducfiontotheEndoparasites
55
Classificotion
Nematodes are divided among two classes: the Secer-
nentea and the Adenophorea. The Adenophorea con-
tains the whipworms, capillarids, and Trichinella spiralis,
while the Secernenteacontains theremainder of thepar
asitic nematodes. Numerous advancements have been
madein our understanding of therelationships ofmany
of these parasites. As a consequence, some nematodes
have been reassigned to different. genera (Table 3-2).
While some consider presenting current. and future vet-
erinarians with proper taxonomic nomenclature to be
impractical, others consider not to do so to be a disser-
vice to their continuing education and development.
Therefore, those changes in species level nomenclature
which have achieved general acceptance among the sci-
entific community are presented herein. Tables 3-3, 3-4,
3-5, 3-6, and 3-7 present the orders, families, and
species of the parasitic nematodes by host. group.
Life Cycle
· All nematodes, whether parasitic or free-living, have
the same stages in the life cycle: egg, four larval
stages (L, molts to L, molts to L, molts to L), imma-
ture adult (sometimes called L,), which matures into
adult.
· Stages occurring in the external environment are sub-
jected to stresses (temperature, desiccation, sunlight,
etc.) that may kill or delay development (develop
56
Introduction to the Endoparasites
Site of Infection
Nasal, parana-
sal sinuses
Stomach, small
Small intestine
bladder
bladder
intestine
Urinary
Urinary
s8un7
Definitive Host
Canids, felids,
mustelids
Canids, mus-
Mustelids,
raccoon,
pig, cat
8op xo
telids
Felids
Cattle
Intermediate/
ParatenicHost
None known
None known
Earthwom
Earthwom
Earthwom
Earthwom
s
Pearsonema
Pearsonema
Aonchotheca
Aonchotheco
New Name
Eucoleus
bovis
Capiflaria plica
Capillaria bovis
gerophila
Capillaria
bohmi
Capillaria
 Old Name
Capillaria
fnfroducfion to fhe Endoparasites
57
Small intestine
Subcutaneous
 Small intestine 
Red blood cells
Esophagus,
Esophagus,
Abomasum
mouth
sanss0
crop
crop,
Widevariety
of birds
Wide variety
Ruminants,
especially
Chickens,
of birds
sheep
Canids
Horses
Felids
earthworm
Earthworm
Fleas, lice
lxodid ticks
Noneor
Rodents
None
None
Baruscapillaria
cheilonema
circumcincta
reconditum
obsignata
Teladorsagia
Theileria equi
contortus
Eucoleus
Eucoleus
Acantho-
DIDOOXO
Dipetalonema
circumcincto
DiDubisqo
contortus
Babesia equi
Capillaria
Capillaria
Ostertagia
58
Introduction to the Endoparasites
Metastrongylus apri; M. puden-
Hyostrongylus rubidus
Stephanurus dentatus
dodectus; M. saimi
Ascarops strongylina
O. brevicadum
Trichinella spiralis
Trichuris suis
Table 3-3 Classification of Nematodes Encountered in Pigs 
Species
Trichostrongylidae
 Metastrongylidae
 Strongyloididae
Strongylidae 
Syngamidae
Ascarididae
Spirocercidae
Trichinellidae
Tnichunidae
Rhabditida
 Strongylida
Ascaridida
Spirunida
 Enoplida
Order
Adenophorea
Secementea
fntroductiontotheEndoparasites
59
(=Micronema) deletrix*
Cyathostomum spp. and
other small strongyles
Rhabditis（=Pelodero)
Dictyocauiusarnfieldi
Trichostrongylus axei
Draschia megastoma
Habronema muscae;
Onchocerca cervicalis
Parascaris equorum
H. microstoma
Thelazialacrymalis
Halicephalobus
basux
Classification of Nematodes Encountered in Horses
Species
Trichostrongylidae
Habronematidae 
 Strongyloididae
Dictyocaulidae 
Onchocercidae
Strongylidae
Ascanididae
Oxyuridae
Thelazidae
Family
Not mentioned further in this book.
Table 3-4
 Rhabiditida
 Strongylida
Ascanidida
Oxyurata
Spirurida
Order
60
Introduction to theEndoparasites
Teladorsagia circumcincta
Oesophagostomumradio-
snsoluidod sapiobuons
Ostertagia ostertagia;
Haemonchus contortus;
tum; O. venulosum;
Trichostrongylus axei;
T. cofubriformis
O.cojumbianum
Vematodirus spp.
Chabertia ovina
Cooperia spp.
Bunostomum
H.placei
Table 3-5  Classification of Nematodes Encountered in Ruminants 
Species
Trichostrongylidae
Ancylostomatidae
Strongyloididae
 Strongylidae
Molineidae
Family
Rhabditida
 Strongylida
Order
Secementa
s
fntroductiontotheEndoparasites
61
Thelazia skrjabini; T. gulosa
Congylonema puichrum;
Onchocercagutterosa;
Protostrongylus spp.
Stephanofiariastilesi
Trichuris bovis; T. ovis;
Dictyocaulusfilarig;
Muellerius capillaris
G.verrucosumt
Aonchotheca bovis
D.viviparus
O. fienalis
T.skrjabini
*Several other species of Ostertogio exist and may cause or contribute to disease.
Gongylonematidae
Protostrongylidae
Dictyocaulidae
Onchocercidae
Thelazidae
Capillanidae 
Trichuridae
Filaridae
Spirurida
tNot mentioned further in this book.
 Enoplida
Adenophorea
62
Introduction to the Endoparasites
tubaeforme; A. braziliense
Aleurostrongylus abstrusus
 Strongyioides stercoralis
Ancylostoma caninum; A.
Filaroides osleri; F hirth*
Uncinaria stenocephala
Angiostrongylus spp.*
Baylisascaris procyonis
Thelaziacaliforniensis
Crenosoma vuipis*
Toxascarisleonina
Physaloptera spp.
Spirocercalupi
Species
Ancylostomatidae
Angiostrongylidae
Strongyloididae
Crenosomatidae
Physalopteridae
Spirocercidae
Molineidae
Filaroididae
Toxocaridae
Ascaridiidae
Thelaziidae
Family
Rhabditida
 Strongylida
 Ascaridida
Spirurida
Secementea
s
Introduction to the Endoparasites
63
Eucoleus gerophilus
Pearsonema feliscati
Acanthocheilonema
Dracunculus insignis
Dioctophyme renale
Aonchothecaputori
Pearsonema plica;
Dirofilaria immitis
reconditium
Eucoleusbohmi;
T. serroto
Onchocercidae
Dracunculidae
Dioctophyma-
Capillaridae
Trichundae
tidae 
 Dioctophymida 
Enoplida
Not mentioned further in this book.
Adenophorea 
64
Introduction to the Endoparasites
Baruscapillaria obsignata
Strongyloides avium
Syngamus trachea
Heterakis gallinarum
Eucoleus annulatus
Eucoleus contortus
Ascaridia galli
Species
Strongyloididae
Syngamidae
Heterakidae
Ascanididae
Capillaridae
Rhabditida
Strongylida
 Enoplida
Order
Gallinaceous Birds
Secernentea
Adenophorea
s
infroducfiontofheEndoparasites
65
mental times presented throughout the book are
minimum times required under optimal conditions).
● For most parasitic nematodes, the third-stage larva is
the infective stage (i.e., the stage that initiates infection
in the definitive host); infective larvae cannot. feed and
are usually ensheathed—the third-stage larvae do not
completely shed the cuticular sheath of the second-
stage larvae until some point. after being ingested; the
mental conditions; after the infective L, sheds the
sheath of the Lg, they are referred to as parasitic Lg
· Transmission may be direct (no intermediate host
requured) or indirect (intermediate host required or
paratenichost.involved).
· Development to adulthood may proceed normally
or, under certain circumstances, larvae may arrest
development and remain quiescient until reacti-
vated at a later time.
●Adults infect. a variety of organs; larval migration may or
Acanthocephalans (Thorny-Headed Worms)
Appearance and Morphology
·Variable length, 6 mm to 30+ cm.
·Proboscis is retractable into body; body covered with
tegument; absorbs nutrients.
66
Introduction to the Endoparasites
●Usually sexually dimorphic with males smaller than
females.
Classificotion
Higher-levelclassification of the acanthocephalans is not
presented here because only one species, Macracan
thorhynchushirudinaceus(swine)hasbeen generallyencoun
tered in veterinary medicine. Recognition of the parasite in
the host and understanding the characteristics of the phy
lum are sufficient for most. practicing veterinarians.
Life Cycle
●All acanthocephalans have indirect. life cycles; stages
include egg, acanthor, acanthella, cysticanth, adult.
● Essential first. intermediate host is some type of arthro
pod; simplest life cycle requires only one intermediate
host, while more complicated cycles involve the addi-
tion of a second or even third intermediate host.
·Adults live in the intestinal tract only; extra-intestinal
migration does not. occur.
Cestodes
Appearance and Morphology
· Body divided into scolex, neck, strobila.
·Scolex may contain holdfast. organs in the form of
suckers or slits and/or rostellum armed with hooks.
●Neck is the germinal region from which the strobila arises.
Introducfionto fheEndoparasites
67
·Strobila is the rest. of the body; composed of proglottids
each of which contains one set of reproductive organs;
proglottids mature as they move away from the neck
with gravid (egg-containing) proglottids at end of body
Clossification
The tapeworms of veterinary importance are divided
among two groups—the Eucestoda and the Pseudophyl
lidea. Table 3-8 presents the families and species of these
two groups of tapeworms encountered in North America.
Life Cycle
All cestodes have an indirect life cycle; however, the
worms are found in the intestinal tract.(or ducts of asso
ciated organs) while larval stages (metacestodes) can be
found in avarietyof organs.
EUCESTODA
· Stages include egg, hexacanth embryo, metaces-
tode, adult.
· Gravid proglottid usually passes out of host with
feces; ruptures releasing eggs.
· Eggs contain embryo with six hooks (hexacanth
embryo); must be ingested by intermediate host to
develop to metacestode stage.
·Metacestode can take several forms; if ingested by arthro
pod, develops into cysticercoid; if ingested by mam-
malian host, develops into cysticercus, strobilocercus,
Dogs, cats
Camivores,
humans
Definitive
Canids,
 felids
Hosts
Horses
5800
 strobilocercus
plerocercoid
plerocercoid
coenurus,
Metacestode
Procercoid,
Cysticercus,
Hydatid cyst 
Procercoid,
Cystercoid
Type
Intermediate
 Pigs, rumi-
rodents
Ruminants,
rodents,
humans
nants,
Hosts
Fish
riumlatum
Echinococcus
Spirometra
Taenia spp.
cephala
man
Species
 SPp.
Anoplo-
spp.
bothridae
Anoploceph-
Diphyllo-
Taenidae
alidae
Family
phyllidea
phyllidea
Table 3-8
Pseudo-
Cyclo-
Order
68
Ruminants
Dogs, cats,
humans
Sheep
Canids
metacestode
unknown;
Tetrathyrid-
Cystercoid
Cystercoid
Cystercoid
ILm
unknown;
Rodents
Heas, lice
First 1H
Mites
Mites
Moniezia spp.
unpdia
Mesoces-
5D
spp.*
Mesocestoid-
 Avitellinidae
Dilepididae 
*Not mentioned further in this book.
idae
69
70
Introduction to the Endoparasites
coenurus, hydatid cyst, or tetrathyridium; metacestode
type is characteristic of the cestode species involved.
· Definitive host. becomes infected by ingesting the
infected intermediate host; extra-intestinalmigra
tion in the definitive host. does not. occur.
PSEUDOPHYLLIDEA
· Stages include operculated egg, coracidium (ciliated
hexacanth embryo), metacestode, adult.
· Eggs are expelled from the gravid proglottid; pass
out with feces.
·Coracidium hatchesin water;first. intermediate host
is a copepod; ingested coracidium develops to pro
cercoid (metacestode).
· Copepod is ingested by the second intermediate
host; procercoid develops into another metacestode
stage called the plerocercoid.
●Definitive host. becomes infected by ingesting the inter
mediate host. containing the plerocercoid; extra-intestinal
migration in the definitive host. does not occur
Trematodes
There are two types of trematodes—digenes and mono-
genes.Monogenetic trematodes have direct life cycles
and are primarily ectoparasites of aquatic vertebrates.
Digenetic trematodes have indirect life cycles and are
IntroductiontotheEndoparasites
 71
endoparasites of a wide variety of vertebrates. Unless the
veterinarian is involved in fish farming or treating aquar-
jum fish, monogenetic trematodes are not. encountered
very often. Consequently, the emphasis of this book will
be on the digenetic trematodes.
Appearance and Morphology
· Variable length, 0.5 mm to 10 cm.
· Body is covered with tegument; may have spines.
● Does not have anus; must regurgitate cecal contents
to rid body of waste products.
· Most possess a muscular organ of attachment called
an acetabulum (ventral sucker).
·Most. are hermaphroditic (exception is the schisto
somesblood flukes);self-fertilization or cross-fertil-
ization can occur.
Classificotion
Table 3-9 presents the families and species of digenetic
trematodes encountered in North America.
Life Cycle
● All digenes have indirect life cycles; stages include
operculated egg, ciliated embryo (miracidium),
asexual reproductive stages (sporocyst, redia), cer-
caria,metacercaria,adult.
72
Introduction to the Endoparasites
Definitive Host
 Classification of the Digenetic Trematodes Encountered in Veterinary
Ruminants,
Ruminants
s8id
Cervids
Cattle
Felids
Intermediate
woodlice
/s8nqMos
Second
None
None
None
Ants
Intermediate
 amphibi-
sieus sno
Freshwater
Freshwater
Freshwater/
snails
snails
Terrestrial
snails
Terrestrial
 snails
Host
Dicrocoelium
hepatico
Fasciofoides
dendniti-
Dubou
Platynoso-
Fasciola
mum
xdds
mum
Species
Paramphistomatidae
Dicrocoelidae
Table 3-9
Fasciolidae
Medicine
Family
introducfion to fheEndoparasites
73
oppossum,
camivores
Dogs, cats,
raccoon
 Dogs, mink
Raccoons
Dogs, cats,
mink,
wild
hoppers
Numerous
Probably
Tadpoles/
Crayfish
ys!
frogs
ous snails
Aquatic snails
amphibi-
Freshwater
 Terrestrial
 snails
Aquatic/
snails
Nanophyetes
saimincoia
Eurytrema
kellicotti
Alaria spp.
xdds
*Not mentioned further in this book.
Troglotrematidae
Diplostomatidae
Introduction to the Endoparasites
● First intermediate host is some type of snail; miracid-
ium penetrates or is ingested; asexual reproduction
occurs resulting in cercarial stage;one miracidium
in can equal hundreds to thousands of cercariae out.
· Cercariae can penetrate and encyst in second inter-
mediate host, encyst. on vegetation, or penetrate
definitive host (schistosomes); encysted stage is
calledmetacercaria.
● Definitive host becomes infected by ingesting plants
or intermediate hostwith metacercarialstage;the
cercariae of blood flukes (schistosomes) are directly
infective to the definitive host.
● Juvenile fluke migration can be extensive; adults live
Protozoa
Protozoans are single-celled organisms, varying greatly in
size and shape. Of all the protozoans in the world, only a
small number are parasitic. Of these, many are not harm-
ful to the host, although those that. are pathogenic can
cause severe and devastating disease. The pathogenic
comastigophora(flagellates and amoebae),Ciliophora
(ciliates)，and Apicomplexa (apicomplexans which
include the coccidia). Table 3-10 lists the protozoans
that may be encountered in veterinary medicine.
fnfroduction to theEndoparasites
75
Cats, sheep, goats, pigs, humans 
Ruminants, horses, pigs, poultry
 sueuny Bupnpu sjewwen
Mammals indluding humans 
Pigeons, chickens, raptors 
 Parasitic Protozoans Encountered in Veterinary Medicine 
Pigs, rats, dogs, primates
Gallinaceous birds
Horses,oppossums
Dogs, pigs, cats
Dogs, cattle
Bobcat, cats
Cattle
Cattle
Cattle
Horses
Horses
Host*
5800
s800
Histomonas meleagridis
Hepatozoon americanum
Trichomonas gallinae
Tritrichomonas foetus
Giardia duodenalis
Sarcocystis neurona
Neospora caninum
Cytauxzoon felis
Babesia bigemina
Balantidium coli
Babesia cabali
Eimeria spp.
isospora spp.
Theileriaequi
Babesia canis
Species
Protozoan Group
Apicomplexans
Table 3-10
Flagellates
Ciliates
76
Introduction to the Endoparasites
Flagellates
· Possess at least one flagellum for locomotion in the
trophozoite stage.
Reproduce by binary fission.
· Some species form cysts that are resistant to external
environmental conditions.
Ciliates
●Possess cilia for locomotion in the trophozoite stage.
· Possess two types of nuclei—macronucleus and
micronucleus.
● Form cysts that are resistant to external environ-
mental conditions.
Apicompfexans
· Obligatory intracellular parasites.
 Multiply through strict sequence of asexual and sex-
ual reproduction.
· May have direct. or indirect life cycles.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal
Tract I--Nematodes
Swine
Stomach
HYOSTRONGYLUSRUBIDUS
●Worldwide distmibution in domestic and wild swine; locally
significant depending on management and control.
·Common name: red stomach worm of swine.
Life Cycle
· Direct.
LL
78  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
● Eggs passed in feces; L, develops and hatches; infec-
tive L, develops in about 1 week.
● Pigs acquire infection by ingesting infective Ls; Lg
enters gastric glands, molts to L, then immature
adult; returns to lumen and matures to adult.
● Larvae may arrest development. in older sows or
upon reinfection.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
● Developing larvae can cause blood loss (anemia),
acute gastritis with nodule formation.
· Adult worms may be associated with chronic
catarrhal gastritis.
· Clinical signs may include decreased feed intake,
weight loss or decreased weight gain, diarrhea,
and/or agalactia in nursing sows.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Presumptive diagnosis based on finding typical
 trichostrongyle-type eggs on fecal flotation (Figure 4-1).
Eggs are oval, thin shelled, 71-78 x 35-42 μm, con-
taining morula with 16-32 cells.
· Definitive diagnosis through identification of infec
tivelarvaerecovered from coproculture(usuallynot
performed by the practitioner).
Figure4-1
Nematode eggs featured here could be either tri-
dhostrongyle-type or strongye-type, depending on whether the
host was a ruminant,a pig (trichostrongyle-type),or a horse
(strongyle-type)(1o0x).
79
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
POSTMORTEM
· Small, red worms, 0.41.1 cm in length; may be eas
ily missed on gross necrospy.
Treotment and Contro!
· See Table 41 for anthelmintics.
· Control programs for Ascaris suum also control this
nematode.
ASCAROPSSTRONGYLINA,
PHYSOCEPHALUS SEXALATUS
· Worldwide distribution in domestic and wild Suidae;
sporadic occurrence.
●Common name: thick stomach worms of swine.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
·Intermediate host: coprophagous beetles.
● Larvated eggs are passed in the feces; ingested by
beetles; L,hatches and develops to infective L, in
approximately 30 days.
Pigs acquire infection by ingesting beetles con-
taining the infective Lg;larvae mature to adult in
stomach.
·Prepatent. period is 46-50 days for A. strongylina and
30-40 days for P sexalatus.
o Buow on joud jo ee uodn sid japaa, nean umoue ajaq uee pue upaaq aojaq sep 1- Sl pue smos iea 
Uiee pue upaalq alojaq yruow auo slg pue sos iean essaau se io Ayuow neadal pue ae jo syaa al-g ie iea
s
Metastrongyius
Strongyloides
Hyostrongyius
Table 4-1Partial List of Nematodical Anthelmintics for Pigs
 ai  e  as sxa n xaid e se ai  
wojsobpydosag
Ascaris
In water
In feed
In feed
In feed
Route
QS
See label
Seelabel
See label
See label
asesoa
(8y/8u)
2'0
20
Active Ingredient
Pyrantel tartrate
Fenbendazole
Ivemectin2.3
before farrowing.
Piperazine!
Doramectin?
Hygromycin
clean quarters.
81
82
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Infections may be associated with gastritis.
·Clinical signs may include anorexia, weight loss, or
decreased weight. gains.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Presumptive diagnosis based on finding eggs on
fecalflotation(sodiumnitrate probablybest
medium); eggs similar for both species.
● Eggs are thick-shelled, larvated, 3440 × 15-20 μum
POSTMORTEM
● Worms are robust, up to 2.2 cm in length; genera can
be differentiated based on morphology of the pharynx
Treatment and Contro!
● Drugs effective against. A. suum should be tried (see
Table 4-1).
● Modern intensive management systems have greatly
reduced the incidence of these parasites.
Smaff Intestine
ASCARIS SUUM
●Worldwide distribution in domestic and wild pigs
whether infects humans or not is debated, although
ParasitesoftheGastrointestinalract!
83
allergic response to eggs has been noted; highly sig-
nificant.
Life Cycle
· Direct; indirect with paratenic host.
· Eggs passed in feces; infective Lg develops within the
egg in approximately 3 weeks; eggs extremely resis-
tant to environmental conditions, remaining viable
up to 5 years.
· Transmission occurs primarily through ingestion of
pulmonary migration—larvae hatch, enter the wall
of the small intestine, migrate to the liver, then pro-
ceed to the lungs (via caudal vena cava, heart, pul.
monary artery, capillaries), and molt to L; larvae
break out into alveoli and migrate or are coughed up
to be swallowed; matures in lumen of small intestine.
● Migratory phase is 10-15 days; prepatent period is
89 weeks; live 7-10 months.
· Earthworms and dung beetles can be paratenic
hosts.
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
·Larvae spend 46 days migrating in the liver causing
cellular destruction and multiple interstitial hepati
tis that.willresolve within3-6 weeks aftercessation of
larval exposure.
84
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
·Pulmonaryreactions include petechialand ecchy-
motic hemorrhages, bronchitis, and edema.
·Adult. worms interfere with host. nutrition; damage
to small intestine is minor, generally limited to a
catarrhalenteritis;rarelydoesobstruction orperfo
ration of the small
intestine occur;immune
expulsion of adults.
· Clinical signs may include rapid, shallow breathing
characterized by audible expiratory efforts (called
"thumps") or other signs of severe respiratory dis-
tress, unthriftiness,colic, weight loss or reduced
weight gain, stunted growth.
·Infections generally more prevalent. in young pigs
(3-6 months old); older pigs and adults may harbor
subclinical infections
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
· Eggs are ovoid, golden brown, thick-shelled with a
( a)  0g-0 x g-g u.ad 
● Pigs are coprophagic, therefore, may pass eggs with-
out being infected (false positive).
· Adult worms may be passed in feces (after treatment.
or spontaneous expulsion).
Ascaris
Trichuris
Figure 4-2 Fecal flotation from a pig with both A. suum and
I. suis eggs (200x).
85
86   Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
POSTMORTEM
●Adult A.suum is the largest. nematode occurring in
pigs—up to 40 cm in length, very stout, white; found
in the small intestine.
● Fibrosis in the liver associated with larval migration
mince liver or lung and place in Baermann appara
tus to recover migrating larvae.
Treatment and Controf
· See Table 41 for anthelmintics; may need to repeat
treatments in 2-3 weeks.
●Strict. sanitation must. be enforced; treat. sows 2 weeks
before farrowing; repeat. treatment. approximately 4
days before farrowing; remove all dirt and fecal con-
tamination from sow by washing and then move to
clean farrowing pen; pigs bought. for finishing should
be treated before entering the unit;further recom
mendations will depend on the individual producer
STRONGYLOIDES RANSOM!
● Worldwide distribution; low significance.
· Common name: threadworm.
Life Cycle
·Direct..
· Has two reproductive cycles, a parasitic (homogo
nic) cycle and a free-living (heterogonic) cycle.
ParasitesoftheGastrointestinalTract!
87
· Only parthenogenetic females are parasitic; eggs are
laid in the small intestine and L, develops within; lar-
vated eggs are passed with the feces; larvae hatch and
develop into either infective Lg capable of infecting
another pig or continue developing to free-living
adults; if progress into free-living generation, both
males and females develop, mate and produce eggs;
offspring of free-living generation are usually parasitic;
when environmental conditions are unsatisfactory, the
homogonic cycle predominates; when environmental
conditions are satisfactory, the heterogonic cycle pre-
dominates.
·Routes of transmission to the definitive host include:
Percutaneous—larvae penetrate the skin, travel by
way of blood and lymph to the lungs, migrate up
thebronchitothe tracheaand are swallowed;
mature in the small intestine.
Peroral—after ingestion of infective Lg, most. are
thought to penetrate the oral mucosa and
migrate as for thepercutaneous route;those that
are swallowed do not. have extra-intestinal migra
tion; rather, they develop directly to partheno-
genetic females in the small intestine.
Transmammary—following percutaneous expo-
sure in older animals, larvae inhibit development.
during migration in skeletal muscles, subcutis,
etc.; shortly after birth, larvae “reactivate” and
migrate to the mammary gland and are ingested
88
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
by nursing piglets; extra-intestinal migration does
not occur.
Prenatal—larvae “reactivate" from tissues and
migrate to fetus in utero.
natal or transmammary infection and 7-10 days for
the other routes; infections tend to peak at 2-3
weeks of age, disappearing at 5-6 weeks.
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Infection in older animals is usually inapparent and
usually so in young animals as well; disease, when it
does occur, is present only in young animals.
·Transmammary infection common, although percu
taneous also may occur; areas of skin may become
erythematous and pustules may be present; catarrhal
enteritis may occur; clinical
signsmay include
bloody diarrhea, anemia, severe weight loss.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs may be found on fecal flotation; even though S.
ransomi eggs are smaller, must use fresh feces to
avoid confusion with larvated trichostrongyle-type
eggs.
● Eggs are thin-shelled, oval, 45-55 × 26-35 μm, each
containing a fully developed larva.
Parasites ofthe Gastrointestfinaf Tractf
89
POSTMORTEM
·Adult worms are embedded in the mucosa of the small
intestine; worms are extremely small in size (up to 4.5
mm in length) and will be missed at necropsy unless
mucosal scrapings are examined under a microscope.
Treotment and Contro!
· See Table 41 for anthelmintics.
· Maintain clean and dry pigpenslarvae cannot. sur-
vive 5 minutes of drying or 1-2 hours of direct. sun-
light; treat infected sow 2 weeks prior to farrowing to
prevent transmammary transmission.
Cecum ond Large Intestine
OESOPHAGOSTOMUM SPP.
●Includes Oesophagostomum dentatum and O. quadrispin-
ulatum.
●Worldwide distribution in domestic and wild swine;
moderate significance, especially in warm and
humid regions.
· Common name: nodular worm.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
● Eggs passed in feces; L, hatches; develops to infec-
tive Lg within 5 days.
90   Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
· Pigs acquire infection by ingestion of infective L; L
migrates into the wall of the cecum or colon; devel-
ops and molts to L within the wall; then returns to
lumen, molts again, and matures to adult.
· In older animals or on reinfection, larvae may arrest
development within the gut wall.
● Prepatent period is 17-21 days; if larvae arrest devel-
opment, theprepatentperiodis greatlylengthened.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Oesophagostomum quadrispinulatum is considered
nodules.
● Nodular formation may lead to protein-losing
enteropathy and hemorrhagic enteritis.
·Clinical signs may include anorexia, diarrhea, weight loss,
or decreased weight gain; death may result, but is rare.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are thin-shelled, oval, 60-80 μm, containing
morula with16-32cells; may be difficult. to differen-
tiate from eggs of Hyostrongylus.
· Definitive diagnosis is based on identification of lar
vae recovered from coproculture (usually not per-
formed by the practitioner).
Parasites ofthe GastrointestfinafTractf
¥91
POSTMORTEM
· Adult worms are white, stout, up to 2.0 cm in length
· Oesophagostomum quadrispinulatum tends to be found
in the cecum and proximal colon; O. dentatum tends
to be found more distally
· Species can be differentiated based on esophageal
structure and the length of the tail of the female.
Treotment and Contro!
· See Table 41 for anthelmintics.
●Treatment of sows before farrowing and between wean-
ing and remating helps reduce environmental con-
tamination; other control measures are as for A. suam.
TRICHURIS SUIS
●Worldwide distribution in domestic and wild swine;
moderate significance.
· Common name: whipworm.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
· Eggs passed in feces; L, develops within egg in
approximately 3 weeks; does not hatch; larvated eggs
resistant. to freezing.
· Pigs acquire infection by ingestion of egg containing
infective L,; larvae hatch in the small intestine, en ter
92
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
mucosal glands of cecum and colon, and undergo
four molts to immature adult stage; return to lumen
with anterior end embedded in mucosa and mature.
·Prepatent period is 6-7weeks;live approximately
45 months.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
●Severe infections usually occur only in young swine.
·Adults are hematophagous and more pathogenic
than larvae; can cause catarrhal enteritis with
mucosal necrosis and hemorrhage; may facilitate
invasion of the colonby entericbacteria resulting in
mucohemorrhagic colitis.
· Clinical signs may include diarrhea, dehydration,
anemia, weight loss.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
  e   a ai ti o
flotation (Figures 4-2 and 43).
●Eggs have a thick, brown shell with a smooth surface,
two polar plugs that. arelight in color and protrude
from the ends, 50-60 x 21-25 μum.
POSTMORTEM
· Adult worms are whip-like in appearance, 3-5 cm in
length; found attached to mucosal surface of cecum
and colon.
Figure 4-3Fecal flotation showing typical appearance of
whipworm (richuris) eggs (200x).
93
94
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Treotment and Contro!
· See Table 41 for anthelmintics.
·Control measures are as for A. suum.
Horses
Stomach
DRASCHIA MEGASTOMA, HABRONEMA MUSCAE
H. MICROSTOMA
●Worldwide distribution in horses; sporadic occur-
rence.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
●Intermediate hosts =Musca domestica (housefly) for
D. megastoma, H. muscae; Stomoxys calcitrans (stable
fly) for H.microstoma.
· Larvated eggs or hatched L、 passed in feces,
ingested by fly maggot; develops to infective L, in fly
as pupates.
● Infective L, migrate to head of fly, collect in labium;
larvae are deposited when fly feeds; if L, swallowed
by horse or horse ingests infected flies in food or
water, larvae enter stomach and mature; if Lg
deposited in cutaneous sores/wounds, maturation
and completion of the life cycle do not. occur.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract 195
· Prepatent period for all three species is approxi-
mately 2 months.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Stomach infection—adult. Habronema spp. live on
mucosal surface causing mild catarrhal gastritis; adult
D. megastoma elicit. fibrous nodules containing masses of
worms and necrotic debris. Clinical signs generally not.
apparent; nodule formation may cause mechanical
interference with pyloric sphincter (rare).
· Cutaneous infection (Summer sores)—caused by larval
infection of skin; sites are those areas with open sores
or wounds or areas subjected to continuous wetting
(e.g., medial canthus of the eye). Characterized by
painful, pruritic, nonhealing, granulomatous lesions
that protrude above the level of the skin and readily
bleed; wart-like lesions on nictitating membrane or
skin around the eye can cause corneal abrasion. Lesions
do not resolve until winter, after flies become inactive.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs or L, difficult to find on fecal flotation; direct.
fecal smear may be more informative.
● Eggs or L, may be found by gastric lavage.
· Eggs of both genera are elongate, thin-shelled,
40-50 × 10-12 μum.
96
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
● Biopsy of cutaneous lesions may show larvae to be
present.
POSTMORTEM
● Slender worms, 0.7-2.5 cm in length; found on gas
tric surface or in nodules.
Treatment ond Contro!
·See Table 42 for anthelmintics.
· Fly con trol or insect repellents to keep intermediate
host. away.
Small Intestine
PARASCARIS EQUORUM
●Worldwide distribution in horses and donkeys; may
be highly significant. depending on management.
and control.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
● Eggs passed in feces; infective L, develops within the
egg in approximately 2 weeks.
· Transmission occurs through ingestion of eggs con-
taining infective
migration as for A. suum.
·Migratory phase is approximately 3 weeks; prepatent.
period is 10-12 weeks; may live up to 2 years.
Strongyloides
Habronema
sunAxo
Strongyles
leus
√
√
Strongyles
 Partial List of Nematocidal Anthelmintics for Horses
Large
√
√
Parascaris
In feed
Route
Oral
Oral
Oral
Oral
Oral
Oral
Oral
See label
(8x/8u)
6.6
2.62
0
100
5
2
0.4
papaau se lo saep oe u leadan 
3Dosage of 15 mg/kg required.
4Dosage of 10 mg/kg required.
Pyrantel pamoate
Active Ingredient
Pyrantel tartrate
2Administered daily.
Oxibendazole
Fenbendazole
Oxfendazole 
Table 4-2
Piperazinel
Ivemectin
Moxidectin
6
86
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Migrating larvae can produce fibrosis in the liver
and petechial hemorrhages in the lungs.
· Adults cause a catarrhal enteritis; occasionally
mechanical obstruction of small intestine or bile
duct. or perforation of small intestine with peritoni
tis occurs.
· Clinical signs include frequent coughing and bilat-
eral mucopurulent discharge, decreased feed intake,
unthriftiness, colic, pot-bellied appearance, diar-
rhea, death.
· Infections usually more prevalent in suckling and
weanling foals; adults may be carriers without. appar-
ent clinical signs of infection.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are almost round, golden brown, thick-shelled
with a pitted surface, 90-100 μm in size (Figure 44).
● Worms may be passed in feces (after treatment. or
spontaneousexpulsion)
POSTMORTEM
●Adult P equorum is the largest nematode occurring
in horsesup to 40 cm in length, very stout, white;
found in small intestine.
Figure 4-4
Fecal flotation from a horse with P. equorum
(400x).
66
1 00  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Treotment and Contro!
·See Table 42 for anthelmintics.
· Stall sanitation important—ideally, remove manure
and bedding and clean with high-pressure cleaner or
steamjenney weekly;if toolabor intensive,thor
oughly clean foaling stall and udder and teats of mare
prior to foaling; reliance solely on anthelmintics to
decrease environmental contamination may not be
effective because the eggs are extremely resistant. and
tend to accumulate with time.
STRONGYLOIDESWESTER!
●Worldwide distribution inhorses and donkeys;low
significance.
· Common name: threadworm.
Life Cycle
· Direct.
● Life cycle as for S ransomi except. no prenatal transmis-
sion; transmammary infection most important. route.
· Infections tend to peak at 46 weeks of age, disap-
pearing at 20-25 weeks.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
·Infection in older animals inapparent and usually so
in young animals as well; disease, when it does occur
is present only in young animals.
Parasites of the Gastrointestfinaf Jract f1o1
·Acute diarrhea most. common clinical sign
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs may be found on fecal flotation; even though S.
westeri eggs are smaller, must. use fresh feces to avoid
confusion with larvated strongyle-type eggs.
● Eggs are thin-shelled, oval, 40-52 × 32-40 μm, each
containing a fully developed larva.
POSTMORTEM
·Adult worms are embedded in the mucosa of the
small intestine; worms are extremely small in size
(up to 9 mm in length) and will be missed at
under a microscope.
Treatment and Contro!
·See Table 42 for anthelmintics.
·Keep stall clean and dry.
Cecum and Cofon
STRONGYLUSVULGARIS,S.EDENTATUS,AND
S. EQUINUS
·Worldwide distribution in horses, donkeys,asses,
and zebras; moderate to high significance.
1 02 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
· Common name: large strongyles.
·Mixed infections with small strongyles common.
Life Cycle
· Direct.
· Eggs are passed in feces; L, hatches, develops to
infection by ingestion of infective L3:
[s  ad  s 
mucosa, molt to L, by 7 days post-ingestion, then invade
the submucosal arterioles; migrate along the intima to
cranial mesenteric artery where they molt. to immature
adults by 3 months post-infection; carried back to intes
tinal wall within the lumen of the arteries; nodules form
around thelarvae which eventually enter lumen of the
intestine and mature; prepatent. period is 6-7 months.
·Strongylus edentatus—larvae penetrate intestinal mucosa
and migrate to liver via the hepatic portal system; molt. to
L, in liver; after about 8 weeks, migrate back to the sub
serosa of thegut. by wayof the hepatic ligaments; nodules
formaround the larvae where they molt. to immature
adults; nodules eventually open into the lumen of the
large intestine and the parasites mature; prepatent
state may be as short. as 6 months).
· Strongylus equinus—larvae penetrate the wall of the
large intestine where they molt to L, in nodules
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Tractf103
formedinthesubmucosa;larvaeleavenodules.
enter peritoneal cavity, and migrate to liver; remain
within the liver 6-8 weeks, then move to pancreas;
molt to immature adults, return to the large
intestine, penetrate back to the lumen and mature;
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Adults—usually not considered to be of significance;
may cause diarrhea, generalized unthrifftiness, anemia.
·Larval S. edentatus and S. equinus can cause hemorrhagic
tracts in the liver and elicit nodule formation in the gut
or on the peritoneum; pancreatitis associated with
S. equnus is rare; clinical signs are not generally present.
●Larval S vulgaris are considered to be the most. patho
genic; major pathologic condition is inflammation and
thromboses of the cranial mesenteric artery, its
branches, and the iliac, celiac, and femoral arteries; may
result in aneurysms; thromboembolisms may lodge in
smaller vessels of the gut producing ischemic infarctions
and ileus of the gut; clinical signs include fever, diarrhea,
colic, intermittent or permanent lameness, death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Can find strongyle-type eggs on fecal flotation (see
Figure 41).
1 04 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Eggs are oval, thin-shelled,grayish in color, 70-90 x
40-50 μm, containing morula with 8-16 cells; eggs of
large and small strongyles are very similar and can-
not be differentiated, therefore, must be categorized
● Definitive diagnosis of large strongyles can be made on
identification of infectivelarvaerecovered from copro
culture (usually not. performed by the practitioner).
POSTMORTEM
· Adult worms are grayish-red, stout, up to 4 cm in
length; found in the cecum and colon; species can
be differentiated based on the number and type of
tooth-like projections in the buccal cavity.
Treotment and Contro!
●See Table 42 for anthelmintics; resistance to pyran-
tel has been reported.
● Con trol programs must be tailored to the individual
situation; control should not rely solely on
anthelmintics;judicious use of drugs at. key times of
theyear combinedwithimprovedpasturemanage
ment (manual or mechanicalremoval of feces at
least. 2 times per week, alternate grazing with rumi-
nants, prolonged destocking of pasture) are key
ingredients of an effective controlprogram.
Parasitesof the Gastrointestinaf Tractf105
SMALLSTRONGYLES OR CYATHOSTOMES
· Worldwide distribution in horses, donkeys, asses,
and zebras; moderate to high significance.
● Numerous genera (approximately 13) and species
(approximately 40)in North America; multiple
species infections and mixed infections with large
strongyles common.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
● Eggs are passed in feces; L, hatches, develops to
infective L, in approximately 1 week; horses acquire
infection by ingestion of infective Ls.
● Larvae do not undergo extra-intestinal migration; Lg pen
etrate the mucosa and submucosa of cecuum and colon;
molt to L, then to adult. stage; return to lumen and
mature.
● Prepatent. period is 46 weeks; however, in temperate
regions, larvae have a tendency to arrest. development. pro
● Adult horses primarily responsible for pasture con-
tamination; in temperate regions, eggs hatch and
infective larvae tend to accumulate on pasture dur-
ing late summer andearlyautumn and sharply
decrease over winter; overwintering of eggs partially
responsible for pasture contamination in early
spring: in subtropical and tropical regions, larvae are
1 06 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
present. on pasture year round with peaks occurring
during the cooler months.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Adults may be associated with generalized debilita-
tion or in termittent. soft feces.
●Larval presence in mucosa/submucosa stimulates
nodule formation;nodules are hemorrhagic (black-
ish to dark red in color)and contain lymphocytes.
plasma cells, and eosinophils.
· Synchronous emergence of arrested larvae can
cause a catarrhal or hemorrhagic enteritis and a pro
tein-losing enteropathy as a result of the destruction
of cells and disruption of cellular junctions.
· Clinical signs include sudden onset. of watery diar
rhea, rapid weight loss, emaciation, hypoalbumine
mia, colic, death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Can find strongyle-type eggs on fecal flotation (see
Figure 41).
● Eggs are oval, thin-shelled, grayish in color, 70-90 ×
40-50 μm, containing morula with 8-16 cells; eggs of
large and small strongyles are very similar and can-
not be differentiated, therefore, must. be categorized
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Tract1107
● Definitive diagnosis of small strongyles can be made on
identification of infective larvae recovered from copro-
culture (usually not performed by the practitioner).
· Bright red Lq and immature adults may be passed
with the feces or may be observed on gloves after
performing rectal palpations.
POSTMORTEM
● Worms are white to dark red, up to 2.5 cm in length;
found in the cecum and colon.
Treotment and Contro!
·See Table 42 for anthelmintics; anthelmintic resis-
tance to a variety of compounds is common.
● Essentials of good control programs are as for large
strongyles.
OXYURIS EQU!
●Worldwide distribution in horses and donkeys; low
significance.
·Common name: pinworm.
Life Cycle
· Direct.
·Adult females migrate to rectum, out. anus, and cement
masses of eggs on perineal area; infective Lg develops
1 08 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
within the egg in 45 days; environmental contamination
occurs when cementing fluid dries and cracks allowing
attempt. to relieve associated pruritis.
● Horses acquire infection by ingesting eggs containing
infective Ls; eggs hatch in the small intestine and larvae
move directly to cecuum/colon where they mature.
· Prepatent period is 4-5 months.
Pothogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Feeding activities of L, may cause inflammation of
cecal and colonic mucosa.
● Egg-laying activity of female worms causes pruritis;
may lead to persistent rubbing.
● Clinical signs may include vague signs of abdominal
discomfort and/or persistent rubbing of tailhead
which can lead tobrokenhairs and“rat.tail"appear
ance or scarification.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
●Iden tification of grayish-yellow, scale-like egg masses
on the perineal skin.
● Eggs rarely found on routine fecal flotation; detected
 p id e adeaan ade s, 
phane tape to region, then stick the tape onto a micro
scope slide and examine for eggs with microscope.
Parasites of the Gasfrointesfinaf ract f1og
· Eggs are operculated, ovoid, yellowish, thick-shelled,
and flattened on one side, may or may not be lar-
vated; 85-95 × 40-45 μum.
● May find gray-white adult. females in feces.
POSTMORTEM
● Gray-white, robust worms up to 15 cm in length;
mature females with long, pointed tail; found in
cecum, colon, and rectum.
Treatment and Controf
· See Table 42 for anthelmintics.
· Wash, every 4 days, the perineal area and underside
of tailhead with soap and water to remove egg
masses; make sure feed and water troughs are high
enough to prevent fecal contamination.
Ruminants
Abomasum
·Genera include Haemonchus, Ostertagia,Teladorsagia
Trichostrongylus; most. common worms found in graz-
ing ruminants; worldwide distribution.
● In general, Ostertagia ostertagz is the most. important
nematode among cattle in temperate regions;
Haemonchus contortus isthe
most.
important
nematode among sheep and goats; however, mixed
1 10 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
infections with multiple genera occur and usually
areresponsiblefordisease.
Haemonchus, Ostertagia, Trichostrongyfus
Teladorsagia
Life Cycle
· Direct.
·Basic life cycle essentially the same for these genera;
eggs passed in feces; L, hatches, develops to infective Lg
in 1-2 weeks; larval development. and survival depen-
dent on climate and pasture management—desicca-
tion and direct sunlight are lethal to eggs and larvae.
● Depending on climatic factors, L, may overwinter on
pasture and be partially responsible for infections
the followingspring
· Ruminant acquires infection by ingestion of infec
tive Lg; depending on species, larvae may migrate
into gastric glands, then return to the lumen; adult.
stage reached in 2-3 weeks.
Prepatent period is 2-4 weeks.
● Some species (Ostertagia ostertagi in particular) will
arrest development, which significantly alters the
prepatent. period.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
of parasites is first. year grazing calves, lambs, and kids;
Parasites of the Gastrointesfinaf Tract f11 1
bovine ostertagiosis important in weanling and year
ling classes; poor nutrition and other stress factors may
contribute to clinicaldisease in adult animals
·Both larval and adult. worms may be pathogenic; the
clinical picture produced depends on the composi-
tion of the parasites present, how many are present,
age and nutritional status of the host, and a variety
of other fact.ors.
·In mixed infections (the rule rather than the excep-
tion), the general pathologic condition is a hyper-
plastic gastritis and catarrhal enteritis.
● Clinical signs may include diarrhea, rough hair coat,
weight loss or decreased weight gain, anemia, inap-
petence.
· Ostertagiosis in cattle
Development. and emergence of larvae from gas-
tric glands cause cellular destruction; loss of pari
etal cells causes decreased production of HCl
leading to increased abomasal pH; protein diges-
tion ceases when pH is over 4.5-5.0.
Increased pH also results in loss of bacteriostatic
Cellular destruction results in disruption of junc
tions leading to enhanced permeability; plasma
proteins leak into abomasum resulting in hypoal-
buminemia, fluid accumulation in abomasal
walls, and peripheral edema (most often mani-
fested as submandibular edema or “botfle jaw")
1 12 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Lesions consist of single to coalescing, raised, umbil-
icated nodules in the abomasum;abomasal folds
may appear thicker than normal due to edema.
Clinical signs may include diarrhea,dehydration
inappetence, loss of weight or decreased weight
gain,death.
Type I ostertagiosisoccurs as a result of recently
ingested larvae developing to adulthood without
larval inhibition; occurs primarily in young catfle
(up to approximately 18 months of age) during
their first grazing season—in July-October in
subtropicalregions.
Pre-TypeII ostertagiosisoccurs during the time
period larvae are arrested; clinical signs are usu-
ally absent; seasonally, occurs in late fall in tem-
perate and late spring and summer in tropical
andsubtropicalregions.
Type II ostertagiosis—occurs months after the inges-
tion of larvae; emergence of larvae is synchronous,
cellular destruction is synchronous, and a clinically
more severe disease results with higher mortalities;
occurs in February-May in temperate and Septem-
ber- December in tropical and subtropical regions.
·Haemonchosis in sheep and goats
Both L, and adults are voracious blood-feeders,
which can lead to normocytic, hypochromic anemia.
Parasites of the Gastrointesfinaf Jract f11 3
Hypoalbuminemia associated with blood loss results
in accumulation of fluids in abomasal wall and periph-
eral edema (most. offen manifested as “botfle jaw").
Abomasitis resulting from infection may interfere
with digestibility and absorption of protein, cal-
cium, and phosphorus.
Petechial to ecchymotic hemorrhages may be
seen on mucosal surface of abomasum.
Acute disease—clinical signs include anemia,
dark feces, submandibular edema, sudden death.
Chronic disease—clinical signs include inappe-
tence, weight loss or decreased weight. gain, ane-
mia; death may occur as a result of depleted
protein and iron stores.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Clinical signs are very nonspecific and of little help.
· Knowing the grazing history and seasonal occur-
rence of parasitism in an area may be helpful.
· Can find trichostrongyle-type eggs on fecal flotation
(Figures 41 and 45).
● Eggs are oval, thin-shelled, grayish in color, 70-110 x
30-50 μm, containing morula with 16-32 cells; eggs
of Ostertagia, Teladorsagia, Haemonchus, and Tri
chostrongylus(as well as Cooperia,Oesophagostomum,
Trichostrongyle
Figure4-5
 Fecal flotation from a sheep with two types of
nematodirid eggs and a trichostrongyle-type egg (100x).
114
Parasites of the Gastrointesfinaf Jract f11 5
and Chabertia) are very similar and difficult to differ-
entiate; therefore, must be categorized as tri-
chostrongyle-type and not specific genus or species.
·Definitive diagnosis can be made on identification of
infective larvae recovered from coproculture (usul-
ally not performed by the practitioner).
POSTMORTEM
·Because of their size, most. of these nematodes are
missed on gross necropsy.
● Haemonchus is the largest nematode in this group
(up to 3.0 cm in length), Ostertagia and Teladorsagia
are mid-sized (up to 1.2 cm in length), and Tri
chostrongy/us is the smallest (up to 0.8 cm in length).
·Adult Haemonchus have a white reproductive tract
that spirals around the red (blood-filled) intestine
giving a barberpole appearance (hence the com-
mon name "barberpole worm").
· The “moroccan leather” appearance of the abomasum
is pathognomonic for Ostertagia in cattle; petechial or
ecchymotic hemorrhages in the abomasum may indi-
cate Haemonchus in catftle, sheep, and goats.
Ireotment ond Contro!
·See Table 43 for anthelmintics; anthelmintic resis
tance in sheep is an enormous problem in many
areas of the world; anthelmintic resistance in cattle
occurs, but is not yet as widespread.
Fasciola
Moniezia
Thelazia
Dictyocaulus
s
Strongyloides
Bunostomum
 Partial List of Anthelmintics for Cattle and Sheep
Oesophagostomum
Nematodirus
√
Arrested larvae
Trichostrongyles
Pour-on
In feed
Route
Oral
Oral
Oral
9
6
See label
Dosage
(8y/Bu)
45
2
2
5
Active Ingredient
Fenbendazole
Albendazole
Oxfendazole
lvemmectin2
Eprinomectin
Table 4-3
Morantel
Cattle
116
Pour-
uO
Oral
Oral
Oral
label
1 Dosage of 10 mg/kg needed.
0.5
See
0.2
Moxidectin
Levamisole
Clorsulon
lvemectin
Sheep
117
1 18 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
· Control programs must be tailored to the individual sit-
uation; control should not. rely solely on anthelmintics
judicious use of drugs at. key times of the year com
bined with improved pasture management. are essen-
fialingredients of integrated
parasitecontrol
programs; an understanding of the epidemiology of
the parasites in question is key to a successful program.
Smaff Intestine
COOPERIA SPP.
·Worldwide distribution in grazing ruminants; low
significance alone; contributes to enteritis of mixed
trichostrongylid infections.
Life Cycle
+ Direct.
·Life cycle essentially the same as for Haemonchus,
Ostertagia, and Trichostrongylus.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
● Contributes to catarrhal enteritis; clinical signs may
include diarrhea, rough hair coat, decreased weight
gain, inappetence.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
·Generally not. diagnosing Cooperia alone, but, mixed
trichostrongyle infections.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Fractf119
· Knowing the grazing history and seasonal occur
rence of parasitism in an area may be helpful.
● Can find trichostrongyle-type eggs on fecal flotation
(see Figures 41 and 45).
 Eggs are oval, thin-shelled, grayish in color, 68-82 x
3442 μm, containing morula with 16-32 cells; eggs
of Ostertagia, Teladorsagia, Haemonchus, and Tri-
chostrongylus (as well as Cooperia, Oesophagostomum,
and Chabertia) are very similar and difficult to dif-
ferentiate; therefore, must be categorized as tri-
· Definitive diagnosis can be made on identification of
infective larvae recovered from coproculture (usu-
ally not performed by the practitioner).
POSTMORTEM
· Because of their size, most of these nematodes are
missed on gross necropsy.
· Cooperia is up to 0.8 cm in length; found in proximal
small in testine.
Treatment and Controf
·See Table 43 for anthelmintics.
· Concepts regarding control are as for abomasal
nematodes.
NEMATODIRUS SPP.
●Includes Nematodirus battus, N. filicollis, N. spathiger in
sheep, and N. helvetianus in catfle.
1 20  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
·Distribution tends towards temperate regions in
domestic and sylvatic ruminants; may be locally com-
mon; variable significance (species dependent).
Life Cycle
·Direct.
● Eggs are passed in the feces; L, develops to infective
Lg within the egg; development and hatching of L
(N ayds N) ou Ae o (sng N) Keu
be seasonally constrained by temperature.
· Ruminants acquire infection by ingestion of Lg;
extra-intestinal migration does not. occur; develops
to adults in small intestine.
● Prepatent period is 2-4 weeks.
● Eggs and hatched Lg resistant to adverse environ-
mental conditions; can survive overwinter; N. baffus
eggs must overwinter before they can hatch.
· In Britain, temperature influences on the hatching
of eggs of N. battus concentrates larvae during the
spring, with a second wave in the fall; lambs are
exposed to a large number of larvae in a short
period of time in spring; mass hatching of larvae has
not been shown to occur in North America.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Except for N. battus, generally not considered patho
genic; heavy infections of N. helvetianus in dairy
calves may cause generalized unthriftiness.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract 1121
· Catarrhal enteritis is associated with N batfus infec
tions; clinical signs include a sudden loss of thrift fol-
lowed by a severe diarrhea; death can result within 2
days after the onset. of clinical signs; losses may con-
tinue for several weeks.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Generic diagnosis can be made by finding eggs on
fecal flotation (Figure 45).
● Eggs are ovoid to football shaped, 150-230 x 80-100
μm, containing morula with 48 dark, round cells;
may be yellowish-brown in color (N. battus).
POSTMORTEM
· Worms are mid- to large-sized (up to 2.5 cm in
length); found in proximal small intestine.
Treatment and Control
· See Table 43 for anthelmintics; concepts regarding
controlare as for abomasalnematodes.
STRONGYLOIDESPAPILLOSUS
· Worldwide distribution, especially in tropical
regions; low significance; may cause cutaneous larval
migrans in humans.
·Common name: threadworm.
1 22  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Life Cycle
· Direct.
· Life cycle as for S. ransomz, primary route of infection
for cattle appears to be transmammary; primary
route for sheepispercutaneous.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
●Infection in older animals inapparent and usually so
in young animals as well; disease, when it does occur,
is present only in young animals.
· Infections can cause erosion of the intestinal mucosa;
gain or weight.loss, diarrhea; larvae may be associated
withthe introduction of bacteria throughtheinter
digital skin, leading to foot. rot.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs may be found on fecal flotation; even though S.
papillosus eggs are smaller, must use fresh feces to avoid
confusion with larvated trichostrongyle-type eggs.
● Eggs are thin-shelled, oval, 40-60 × 20-35 μm, each
containing a fully developed larva.
POSTMORTEM
·Adult worms are embedded in the mucosa of the
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract1123
(up to 6 mm in length) and will be missed at
necropsy unless mucosal scrapings are examined
under a microscope.
Treotment and Controf
· See Table 43 for anthelmintics.
● Maintain clean, dry stalls if animals are housed.
BUNOSTOMUMPHLEBOTOMUM
● Worldwide distribution in cattle; sporadic occur-
rence but highly pathogenic.
· Common name: hookworm.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
● Eggs passed in feces; L, develops and hatches; infec-
tive Lg develops in approximately 7 days.
· Transmission occurs primarily through percuta
neous route with pulmonary-tracheal migration as
for Ancylostoma (see Dog and Cat section); peroral
route may also occur in which case extra-intestinal
migration also occurs.
● Prepatent period is 60-72 days; may live 1-2 years.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Migrating larvae cause dermatitis and pruritis; may
result in intense scratching.
124Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
· Feeding activities cause severe blood loss and
hypoproteinemia; clinical signs include anemia,
weight. loss or decreased weight gain, emaciation,
diarrhea with mucus and blood,and submandibular
edema ("botfle jaw"); may result in death
· Infections generally more severe in calves (5-8
months old); adults may harbor infections with no
apparent. clinical signs.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
· Eggs are oval, 79-117 × 47-70 μm, containing
morula with 48 cells.
POSTMORTEM
●Adult. worms are grayish white, stout, up to 2.8 cm in
length; anterior end is bent dorsally resulting in "hook"
found in proximal portion of the small intestine.
Treotment and Contro!
·See Table 43 for anthelmintics; concepts regarding
control are as for abomasal nematodes.
AONCHOTHECA BOVIS
●Worldwide distribution in domesticruminants;low
significance.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract f125
Life Cycle
· Direct.
● Eggs are passed in feces, develop to infective stage,
and are ingested by the definitive host; mature in
small in testine.
·Prepatent period is unknown.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· No pathological problems are associated with this
parasite; primary importance is the ability to distin-
guish eggs of this parasite from those of Trichuris.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are typical capillarid-type (Figure 46), barrel-
shaped with reduced polar plugs, colorless to yellow,
45-50 × 22-25 μm; may be slightly asymmetrical in shape
POSTMORTEM
· Adults are found in the small intestine; however,
because they are quite thin, generally are not. seen
ongrossnecropsy.
Treotment and Contro!
· Generally do not. treat. cattle for this parasite
Figure 4-6  Fecal flotation showing a typical appearance of
capillarid-type eggs (600x).
126
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract 1127
Cecum ond Large Intestine
OESOPHAGOSTOMUMSPP.
● Includes Oesophagostomum radiatum (cattle), O. venulosum
(cattle, sheep, goats), O. cohumbianum (sheep, goats).
· Worldwide distribution in cattle, sheep, goats, and
other domestic and sylvatic ruminants; moderate sig-
nificance, especially in tropical and subtropical regions.
· Common name: nodular worm.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
● Life cycle essentially as described for nodular worm
of pigs.
· Prepatent period is 28-41 days, depending on
species present.
Pathogenesis ond Clinicaf Signs
● In all ruminants, developing larvae may cause severe
inflammatory reactions resulting in nodular formation;
nodules are usually 1-5 mm in diameter and are evident
on both the serosal and mucosal side of the gut wall; nod-
ules will caseate and calcify with time; nodule formation
may not be associated with O. venulosum infections.
· Catfle
Inflammation and nodular formation can cause
loss of cellular tight junctions leading to leakage
of blood and plasma proteins.
128 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Clinical signs may include edema, anemia, pro
fuse watery diarrhea, weight loss, or decreased
weight gain; death may result.
r  aa e a  s 
sensitivity reaction in the gut wall.
·Sheep
Nodules do not occur unlessprior exposure and
sensitization have occurred.
Nodules can cause acute ulcerative colitis and may
interfere with digestion, absorption, and peristalsis
Clinical signs may include inappetence,emacia
tion, anemia, and mucoid to bloody diarrhea;
death may result.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are thin-shelled, oval, 88-105 x 44-65 μm, con-
tain morula with 16-32 cells; may be difficult to dif
ferentiate from trichostrongyle-type eggs.
· Definitive diagnosis through identification of infec
tivelarvae recovered from coproculture(usually not
performed by the practitioner).
POSTMORTEM
·Adult worms are white, stout, up to 2.2 cm in length;
found in cecumand colon.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract f129
Treotment and Controf
·See Table 43 for anthelmintics.
· Concepts regarding control are as for abomasal
nematodes.
CHABERTIA OVINA
· Worldwide distribution in sheep, goats, and other
ruminan ts; may be locally significant.
· Common name: large-mouthed bowel worm.
Life Cycle
· Direct.
● Eggs passed in feces; L, hatches; develops to infec-
tive L, within 5 days, depending on environmental
conditions.
· Ruminants acquire infection by ingestion of infec-
tive L,; L, migrate into the wall of the small intestine;
develop and molt to L, within the wall, then return
to lumen and migrate to cecum; molt to immature
adult and pass to the colon where they mature.
· Prepatent period is approximately 7 weeks.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
L, and adults attach to colonic mucosa; feed on
plugs of tissue that.leads to colitis.
1 30  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
·Clinical signs may be inapparent; when present, may
includeabloody,mucoiddiarrhea,anemia,
decreased wool production, death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are thin-shelled, oval, 90-105 × 50-55 μm, con
tain morula with 16-32 cells; may be difficult to dif
ferentiate from trichostrongyle-type eggs.
· Definitive diagnosis through identification of infec-
tivelarvae recovered from coproculture(usually not
performed by the practitioner).
POSTMORTEM
· Adult worms are white, stout, up to 2 cm in length
anterior end bent slightly ventral; found firmly
attached to mucosal surface of colon.
·Can be differentiated from Oesophagostomum spp.by
the presence of a large buccal capsule.
Treatment and Controf
● Ivermectin at. 0.2 mg per kg is approved for sheep.
· Concepts regarding control are as for abomasal
nematodes.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract f131
TRICHURISSPP.
● Numerous species described; those important in North
America include Trichuwis ovis, T. shrjabini, and T. discolor
●Worldwide distribution; low to moderate significance.
Life Cycle
· Direct.
· Life cycle essentially as described for T. suis.
●Prepatent period 7-9 weeks for T. ovis; unknown for
others.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Infections are usually asymptomatic; if clinical signs do
occur, may include inappetence and bloody diarrhea.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Typical trichurid-type eggs may be found on fecal
flotation (see Figure 43).
Eggs are 60-80 x 25-42 μum.
POSTMORTEM
● Adult worms are whip-like in appearance, 5-8 cm in
length; found attached to mucosal surface of cecum
and colon.
1 32  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Treotment and Contro!
· See Table 43 for anthelmintics.
· Control of trichostrongylid nematodes generally
also controls trichurids.
Dogs and Cats
Esophagus ond Stomoch
SPIROCERCA LUP!
●Worldwide distribution primarily in tropical and sub
tropical areas; in domestic and wild canids and wild
felids although rare in domestic cats; sporadic occur
rence; moderate significance.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
● Intermediate hosts: coprophagous beetles.
●Paratenic hosts: a variety of mammals, birds, lizards,
toads.
· Larvated eggs are passed in feces and ingested by
the intermediate host; L,hatches and develops to
infective L
●Definitive host becomes infected by ingesting inter-
mediate or paratenic host containing infective Lg:
larvae penetrate the gastric wall and migrate in the
walls of the gastroepiploic and gastric arteries to the
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract f133
celiac artery to the aorta; molt to immature adults
then migrate through the connective tissue to the
wall of the adjacent. esophagus.
·Prepatent period is 46 months.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
● Infections may be inapparent.
·Migration in the aorta produces hemorrhage,
inflammation, fibrotic nodules, necrosis of the vessel
wall, and scarring; stenosis or aneurysms may result.
· Adults cause large granulomatous nodules that.
develop cavities containing milky fluid and worms in
fibrous tissue; nodules may interfere with swallowing
or compress adjacent. trachea; chronic inflammation
may cause esophageal neuromuscular degeneration;
esophageal
]fibrosarcomas, osteosarcomas, and
hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy have been asso-
ciated with chronic infections.
· Clinical signs may include vomiting, dysphagia,
hemoptysis, sudden death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs may be found on fecal flotation using 33% zinc
sulfate or sugar solution with a specific gravity of
>1.25; may also find eggs on flotation of vomitus.
1 34Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
● Eggs are thick-shelled, 30-37 x 11-15 μm, each con-
taining a larva.
POSTMORTEM
● Worms are bright red, stout, 3-8 cm in length; found
entwined in large nodules in the lower esophagus
occasionally stomach.
Treotment and Contro!
●Diethylcarbamazine at. 20 mg per kg daily for 10 days
hasbeen effective.
·Prevent predation and scavenging whenever
possible.
PHYSALOPTERASPP.
· Worldwide distribution in felids, canids, and other
mammals; sporadic occurrence and moderate sig-
nificance in domestic cats and dogs.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
●Intermediate hosts: beetles, cockroaches, crickets.
● Paratenic hosts: snakes; possibly frogs and mice.
· Larvated eggs are passed in feces, ingested by the
intermediate host in which they develop to infective
Ls
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract1135
·Definitive host becomes infected by ingesting intermedi-
ate or paratenic host. containing infective L; larvae do not
migrate beyond the gastric mucosa; mature to adult.
● Prepatent. period is 41-83 days, depending on species.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
·Adults are firmly attached to and feed on the
mucosa of stomach; may also suck blood; causes
ulcerations, hemorrhage, and catarrhal gastritis.
· Clinical signs may include vomiting and anorexia;
less common are dark, tarry feces.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs may be found on fecal flotation; must use solu-
tion of >1.25 specific gravity.
● Eggs are thick-shelled, smooth, 49-59 x 30-34 μm,
each containing a fully developed larva.
· May find adults in vomitus; must differentiate from
ascarids; can do this by breaking open female worm
and examining eggs.
· Can see worms in stomach on endoscopy
POSTMORTEM
● Stout. worms, up to 4.8 cm in length; found attached
to gastric mucosa.
1 36  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Treotment and Controf
· Fenbendazole at. 50 mg per kg daily for 3 days has
been successful in dogs; ivermectin at. 0.2 mg per kg
once or two doses of pyrantel pamoate at 5 mg per
kg at 3-week intervals have been used in cats.
AONCHOTHECA PUTOR!!
● Primarily European and North American distribution
in mustelids, bobcats, raccoons; occasionally reported
in cats in the United States; low significance.
Life Cycle
● Details unknown; presumed to be similar to A. bovis;
earthwormsmayingest.eggs
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
● May be associated with gastritis.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are capillarid-type (see Figure 46) with flat-
tened sides and reduced polar plugs, colorless to yel-
low, 56-72 x 23-32 μm; surface has net-like
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract l37
POSTMORTEM
·Adults are found in the stomach and small intestine;
however, because they are quite small, generally are
not. seen on gross necropsy.
Treatment and Controf
● Ivermectin at 0.3 mg per kg orally appears to be
effective.
Small Intestine
ANCYLOSTOMA SPP.
● Includes A. caninum (dogs), A. tubaeforme (cats), and
A. braziliense (dogs and cats).
· Worldwide distribution; highly significant to both
veterinary medicine and public health.
·Common name:hookworm
Life Cycle
·Direct; indirect with paratenic host.
● Eggs passed in feces; L, develops and hatches; infec-
tive Lg develops in as few as 5-8 days; conditions con-
ducive to larval development include well-drained
soils, shaded areas, warmth, and humidity.
●Routes of transmission include (Table 44):
Percutaneous—In general, the most common
route of transmission; larvae penetrate skin and
enter circulatory system passing through the
1 38 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
able 4-4
Transmission Routes for the Common
Hookworms of Dogs and Cats
Routes of Transmission
Percuta-
Peroral
Paratenic
Trans-
Parasite
neous
Host
mammary
A.caninum
Yes
Yes
Yes
Major route
forpups
A.tubae-
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
forme
A. bra-
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
ziliense
U.steno-
Uncom-
Yes
Yes
No
cephala
mon
heart to the lungs; penetrate alveoli, are coughed
up and swallowed, mature in lumen of small
intestine (pulmonary-tracheal route).
Peroral—-Ingested larvae enter glands of the stom-
ach and crypts of the small intestine, molt to L
return to the lumen of the small intestine, and
mature.
Ingestion of paratenic hosts—A form of peroral
transmission.
Transmammary—Anotherformofperoraltrans
mission that occurs with A. caninam (not A. tubae
forme or A. braziliense);following exposure of
older dogs, larvae may inhibit development.
during migration in skeletal muscles or gut wall;
ParasifesoftheGasfrointesfinaffractf13g
in female dogs, larvae are “reactivated" during
the last 2 weeks of pregnancy, migrate to the
mammary gland, and are ingested by nursing
pups; larvae then mature in the pups as for the
the dam's small intestine and mature; most com-
mon route of transmission for puppies.
● Prepatent period is 2-4 weeks, depending on the
route of transmission.
Pothogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Dermatitis and pneumonia associated with migrat-
ing larvae may occur, but are uncommon.
● The most common disease problem is a hypochromic,
normocytic anemia which is a result of the feeding
activities of the parasite; as iron reserves are depleted,
hypochromic, microcytic anemia ensues; mucous
membranes are pale; feces may be soft. to liquid and
quite dark as a result. of the partially digested blood.
· Severity of disease associated with infection depends
on the number and species of parasites, and age and
immune status of host; A. caninum more pathogenic
than the other two species.
· Clinical disease in dogs associated with A. caninum
may take one of four forms:
1. Peracute—Results from transmammary transmis
sion; occurs in very young pups that are healthy at.
first then suddenly deteriorate.
1 40 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
2.Acute—Results from sudden exposure of suscep
tible older pups or adults to overwhelming num-
bers of larvae; severe anemia occurs.
3.Chronic(compensated)—Occurs in immunocompetent
animals not.exposed to overwhelming numbers of lar-
vae; clinical signs usually are not. apparent.
secondary to other problems; severe anemia results.
·Clinical disease associated with A. tubaeformein cats is
not common.
·Ancylostoma braziliense causes less blood loss than A.
caninum and is considered to be much less patho
genic.
● Cutaneous larval migrans (CLM; also called “creep-
ing eruption") in humans is mostoften associated
with A.braziliense;the disease is characterized by ser-
pentine,erythematous tracks and pruritis,a result of
theimmunologicalresponsetothemigratinglarvae
in the skin.
·Occasionally, A. caninum may mature to adults in
small intestine of humans.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are thin-shelled, oval, 55-90 × 34 45 μm, con-
taining morula with 2-8 cells (Figure 47)
Toxocara
Ancylostoma
Figure 4-7Fecal flotation from a dog with both A caninum
andT.canis(400x).
141
1 42 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
·In the case of peracute hookworm disease,eggs will
not be found on fecal flotation because the profound
anemia occurs before adults begin laying eggs.
POSTMORTEM
· Adult worms are red, up to 2.8 cm in length; anterior
end is bent dorsally resulting in "hook"; found in
small intestine,especially thejejunum.
·Genera can be differentiated based on number of
teeth in the buccal cavity.
Treotment and Contro!
· See Tables 45 and 46 for anthelmintics; supportive
therapy is often the more immediate concern but do
not delay anthelmintic treatment.
● Dogs: to prevent. transmammary transmission, infected
bitches can be treated with fenbendazole at. 50 mg per
kg dailyfrom day 40ofpregnancy through day14oflac
tation or ivermectin at. 0.5 mg per kg given 49 days
prior to whelping followed by a second treatment 10
dayslater;use concrete-floored kennels; remove feces at
least 2 times per week; keep floors clean and dry
deworming schedule for pups is as for ascarids; be sure
touse an anthelmintic effective against.migrating larvae
prevent. predation and scavenging whenever possible.
· Cats: avoid overcrowding; prevent predation and
scavenging whenever possible; deworming schedule
for kittens is as for ascarids
Parasites ofthe Gasfrointestinaf Tract!
143
Echinococcus
Taenia
Trichuris
Uncinaria
 Product is in combination with praziquantel or praziquantel and pyrantel pamoate.
Ascarids
Table 4-5Partial List of Anthelmintics for Dogs
√
Oral, 1M
Route
Oral
Oral
Oral
Oral
Oral
See label
See label
Dosage
(8y/8u)
502
5
0
2.5
Aessanau se jo sep os ui leaday
Administered daily for 3 days.
Pyrantel pamoate
Active Ingredient
Fenbendazole
 Piperazinel
Epsiprantel
Praziquantel
Febantel3
M
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Ancylostoma
Table 4-6  Partial List of Anthelmintics for Cats 
Ascarids
Topical
Route
Oral,
Oral
Oral
Oral
label
label
label
Repeat in 30 days or as necessary.
Dosage
(8y/8u)
See
See
1.25
See
5
Active Ingredient
Piperazine'
Praziquantel
Selamectin
Epsiprantel
Pyrantel
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract f145
·Prevention of cutaneous larval migrans: recommen-
dations include prevent. infections in dogs and cats,
keep pets from defecating in public places, reduce
the number of strays, and educate the public about
the disease.
UNCINARIASTENOCEPHALA
(NORTHERN HOOKWORM OF DOGS AND CATS)
● Found in northern temperate areas; moderate to
low significance.
Life Cycle
● Direct; indirect with paratenic host.
· Eggs passed in feces; L, develops and hatches; infec-
· Transmission occurs through the peroral route; no
extra-intestinal migration; percutaneous infection is
uncommon; transmammary
yinfectiondoesnot
occur (see Table 44).
·Prepatent period is approximately 2 weeks.
Pathogenesis andClinicaf Signs
· Generally not. associated with severe blood loss; may
be some catarrhal inflammation; clinical signs may
not. be apparent.
1 46  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are thin-shelled, oval, 65-80 × 45-50 μm, con-
taining morula with 8 cells.
POSTMORTEM
●Adult. worms are white,up to 1.2 cm in length; ante-
rior end is bent dorsally resulting in“hook"; found
in posterior one-third of the small intestine.
·Can be differentiated from species of Ancylostoma
based on the presence of cutting plates rather than
teeth in buccal cavity.
Treotment and Contro!
·See Table 45 for anthelmintics.
TOXASCARIS LEONINA
·Worldwide distribution in dogs, cats; commonly
diagnosed, but. of moderate significance.
Life Cycle
● Direct; indirect with paratenic host.
● Eggs passed in feces; infective L, develops within the
eggin approximately 1 week.
● Transmission occurs through ingestion of eggs con-
taining infective L, or ingestion of paratenic rodent
Parasitesof the Gastrointestinaf ractf147
host (may be the most important route; Table 47);
extra-intestinal migration does not occur; larvae
penetrate the mucosa of the small intestine, molt to
L, then return to the lumen and mature to adults.
● Prepatent period is 7-11 weeks if eggs are ingested;
weeks if infection results from eating paratenic host.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Clinical signs include unthriftiness, pot-bellied
appearance,intermittent diarrhea.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are subspherical, light, colorless, with a smooth
outer shell, 75-85 x 60-75 μm in size, single cell
present, which does not fill the egg (Figure 48).
POSTMORTEM
● Adult worms are large, white, up to 10 cm in length;
found in small intestine.
· Can be differentiated from Toxocara spp. based on
cervical alae, esophagus, and male tail.
Treotment ond Contro!
· See Tables 45 and 46 for anthelmintics.
148
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Table 4-7
Transmission Routes for the Common Ascarids
of Dogs and Cats
Routes of Transmission
Paratenic
Parasite
Peroral
Host
Transmammary
Prenatal
T.canis
Yes
Yes
Minor route
Major
route
for
pups
T.mystax
Yes
Yes
Major route
No
for kittens
T. leoning
Yes
Major
No
No
route
· See Toxocara for deworming schedule of pups and
kittens; prevent. predation and scavenging whenever
possible.
TOXOCARA SPP.
●Includes T canis (canine ascarid) and T. mystax
(feline ascarid).
· Worldwide distribution in dogs and cats; commonly
diagnosed; moderate significance to veterinary med-
icine but highly significant to public health.
Life Cycle
●Direct; indirect with paratenic host.
Figure 4-8 Eggs of T. leonina (A) and T. canis (B) (100x)
149
1 50 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
● Eggs passed in feces; infective L, develops within the
eggin3-4weeks.
●Routes of transmission include (see Table 47):
Peroral  Ingestion of infective L, in eggs; for T. canis in
young pups (1 month old or younger),larvae hatch
28days;for T. canisin older pups,larvae hatch,migrate
to the lungs, but. continue to the somatic tissues where
they inhibit. development; for T. mystax in cats, ten-
dencyfor arresteddevelopment.does not increasewith
age; prepatent. period is 2 months.
Prenatal—Larvae are “reactivated"from tissues of
dam, migrate to the lungs of pups in utero during
the last. trimester, molt. to L, mature in small intes-
tine after birth; prepatent period is 35 weeks; the
most important. mode of transmission of T canis of
dogs; does not occur in T. mystax of cats; "reacti-
vated" larvae may also migrate to the small intestine
ofbitchandmature.
Transmammary—Aformof peroraltransmission;
“reactivated"larvae migrate to mammary glands and
nificance in transmission of T. canis; most. important.
mode of transmission of T. mystax; transmammary
transmission results in development and maturation as
for T leonina (i.e., no extra-intestinal migration);
Parasites of the Gastrointesfinaf Jract 1151
Ingestion of paratenic hostAnother form of per-
oral transmission occurring for both 7. canis and
T. mystax; numerous animals can be paratenic
hosts; this mode of transmission results in devel-
opment and maturation as for T. leonina (i.e., no
extra-intestinal migration); prepatent period is
approximately 21 days.
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Verminous pneumonia, associated with larval T.
canis,mayoccur in pups.
·Adults of both species may cause mechanical dam-
age to the small intestine; in older animals, infec-
tions are often inapparent.
● Clinical signs, especially in pups and kittens, may
include vomiting, diarrhea, general unthriftiness; intes-
tinal obstruction can occur, but is not. common; death
may result from severe prenatal or lactogenic infections
in pups and kittens within 2-3 weeks of birth.
● Larvae can cause visceral larval migrans (VLM) or ocu-
lar larval migrans (OLM) in humans; embryonated
eggs are ingested, hatch, and larvae continuously
migrate through various tissues until trapped by inflam-
matory reaction; granuloma formation results with lar
val death; character and severity of problems caused
depend on the tissues the larvae are in, the number of
migrating larvae, and the frequency of reinfection.
1 52 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are subspherical, yellow-brown outer shell that.
is roughly pitted, 75-90 μm (7. canis) or 65-75 μm
( 7. mystax), containing dark, single cell that fills inte-
rior of egg (see Figures 4-7 and 48).
POSTMORTEM
●Adult worms are large,white,310 cm (T. mystax) or
10-18 cm (7. canis) in length; found in small intestine.
Treatmentand Control
· See Tables 45 and 46 for anthelmintics.
· Dogs: for control of both hookworms and ascarids
initiate treatment in pups at. 2 weeks of age; repeat at.
4, 6, and 8 weeks of age; treat. bitch concurrently
●Cats: for control of both hookworms and ascarids,
initiate treatment in kittens at 3 weeks of age; repeat.
· Recommendations for prevention of human expo-
sure are the same as for cutaneous larval migrans.
BAYLISASCARISPROCYONIS
· Distributed throughout most of the continental
United Statesinraccoons;introduced to Europe
with raccoons; highly significant to veterinary medi-
cine and public health.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract f153
Life Cycle
· Direct; indirect with paratenic host.
· Eggs passed in feces; infective L, develops within the
egg in approximately 1 week.
·Transmission occurs through ingestion of eggs con-
taining infective Lg or ingestion of paratenic host;
extra-intestinal migration does not occur; larvae
penetrate the mucosa of the small intestine, molt. to
L4,return to the lumen, and mature to adults.
● Prepatent period is 50-76 days if eggs ingested,
32-38 days if paratenic host. is ingested.
·Raccoons tend to defecate in certain areas called
latrines; thus, egg numbers can be high in discrete
areas.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Clinical signs in definitive host are uncommon.
· Primary significance is in paratenic hosts in which a
severe, fatal neurologic disorder occurs; a wide vari-
ety of paratenic hosts, including gray squirrels,
ground squirrels, rabbits, various birds, dogs, and
humans, may be infected.
· Occasionally, in dogs, may develop to maturity and
pass eggs; dogs tend to defecate anywhere and eggs
can therefore be dispersed to more areas, increasing
chance contact withhumans.
1 54Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation (raccoon,
dog).
· Eggs are ovoid, brown, with a finely pitted outer
shell, 62-70 × 52-57 μm in size, containing single
cell that. does not fill the egg.
POSTMORTEM
●Adult. worms are large, white, up to 18 cm in length;
found in small intestine (raccoon,possibly dog).
·In other hosts, identifying characteristic features of
larvae in histological sections or those recovered
from digests of brain or other tissues.
Treotment and Contro!
●Anthelmintics effective against. Toxocara canis appear
to be effective against. B.procyonisin raccoons; piper
azine at 220 mg per kg is effective against infections
in dogs; treatment of larval disease is difficult and
generally unrewarding.
STRONGYLOIDESSTERCORALIS,S.TUMEFACIENS
·Worldwide distribution, especially in tropical
regions; moderate significance; S. stercoralis may con-
tribute to cutaneous larval migrans in humans.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract f155
·Common name:threadworm.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
● Life cycle as described for S. ransomi except L, hatch
from egg in intestinal tract and are passed with the
feces.
· Routes of infection include only percutaneous and
autoinfection; autoinfection occurs when L, in intes-
tine develops to infective L, before passing out of
host; penetrates mucosa of rectum or perianal skin
and migrates as for percutaneous infections.
Pothogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
● Infection in older animals inapparent and usually so
in young animals as well; disease, when it does occur,
is present only in young animals.
● Dogs: percutaneous route is most common; dermatitis
may occur in response to larvae; catarrhal enteritis with
necrosis and sloughing of intestinal mucosa may occur;
clinical signs may include moderate to severe mucoid
or bloody diarrhea, dehydration, death; generally a
kennel problem occurring in summer when weather is
hot and humid; larvae of S. stercoralis can penetrate
human skin, causing cutaneous larval migrans (see
description under Ancylostoma).
1 56 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
· Cats: percutaneous route most. common; for S stercoralis
clinicalcourse of disease as for dog, forStumefaciens
infections may cause nodular formation on mucosal sur-
face of the colon; clinical signs include diarrhea.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
·Eggs of S tumefaciens may be found on fecal flota-
tion; must. use fresh feces to avoid confusion withlar-
vated hookworm eggs.
● Eggs are thin-shelled, oval, 114-124 × 62-68 μm,
each containing a fully developed larva.
·For S. stercoralis,use Baermann technique to detect
L, in feces.
POSTMORTEM
· Adult worms are embedded in the mucosa of the
small intestine (S. stercoralis) or the large intestine (S
tumefaciens); worms are extremely small in size (S
stercoralisup to 2.2 mm in length) and will be missed
under a microscope.
Treotment and Controf
· Ivermectin at 0.2 mg per kg, SQ, appears to be use-
ful, but may need to be repeated; thiabendazole at
100-150 mg per kg daily for 3 days repeated weekly
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract fl57
until fecals are negative for larvae can also be used in
dogs; thiabendazole at 125 mg per kg daily for 3 days
has been recommended in cats.
●To avoid human infections with S. stercoralis, isolate
infected animals; infections tend to recur in dogs so
monitor fecals monthly for at least. 6 months after
the first negative fecal to ensure larval output has
ceased.
Large intestine
TRICHURIS SPP.
● Includes T. vulpis in canids, and T. campanula and T.
serrata in cats.
·Worldwide distribution in canids with low to moder
ate significance; distribution in cats unknown
although virtually absent. from North America.
 a a s   ' o 
humans.
· Common name: whipworm.
Life Cycle
· Direct.
· Essentially as described for T. suis.
● Prepatent period for 7. vulpis is 11-12 weeks; may
live severalyears.
· Prepatent period for T. campanula is 8-13 weeks.
1 58 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Infections with whipworms in cats are rare and
apparently nonpathogenic.
· In dogs, typhilitis and colitis may occur in heavy
infections; clinical signs may include chronic,
mucoid diarrhea with frank blood, colic, inap
petance, weight loss, unthriftiness.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Typical trichurid-type eggs may be found on fecal
flotation (see Figures 43 and 7-1).
Trichuris vulpis: eggs are 70-80 × 30-40 μm.
Trichuris campanula: eggs are 63-85 × 3439 μm
POSTMORTEM
● Adults worms are whip-like in appearance, 4.5-7.5
cm (7. vulpis)or 2.2-3.1 cm(7. campanula)in
length; found attached to mucosal surface of cecum
and colon.
Treotment and Contro!
· See Table 45 for anthelmintics; retreat in 3 weeks
and 3 months.
· Keep kennels dry, remove feces daily, and thor-
  s      
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Fract1l59
Poultry and other Birds
Esophagus and Crop
EUCOLEUS SPP
· Several species exist; those important to North
AmericaincludeEaucoleusannulatus andEcontortus.
Life Cycle
· Direct or indirect.
·Eucoleus annulatusis indirect while E.contortus can be
direct or indirect. (with paratenic host).
● Eggs are passed with the feces; L, develops, but does
not hatch; eggs ingested by earthworm hatch, but
larvae do not develop further
● Bird acquires infection by ingestion of infective eggs or
infected earthworm; larvae penetrate the epithelium
of the mouth and esophagus or crop and mature.
Pothogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
·Mild inflammation and thickening of the crop occurs
with light. infections; heavier infections cause marked
thickening of the crop and esophagus, catarrhal
inflammation, and sloughing of the mucosa.
● Clinical signs may include unthriftiness, anorexia,
emaciation, and death.
1 60  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● May find capillarid-type eggs on fecal flotation; eggs
are of similar size and can be confused with other,
less pathogenic, capillarids.
POSTMORTEM
●Generally the method of choice for diagnosis; squash
preparation of esophageal or crop wall is examined to
see the parasites; if walls are too thick, take deep
Treotment and Contro!
Hygromycin is effective against capillarid nematodes.
● Intensive management. has decreased the incidence of
most. poultry parasites except coccidia; reuse of litter
may lead to build-up of high levels of contamination.
Smalf Intestine
BARUSCAPILLARIAOBSIGNAIA
●Probably worldwide distribution; sporadic occurrence.
Life Cycle
· Direct.
● Eggs are passed with the feces; L, develops, but does
not hatch.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Tract 1161
● Bird acquires infection by ingestion of infective eggs;
larvae penetrate the epithelium of the small intestine.
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
·Mild inflammation and thickening of the small in tes-
tine occur; heavy infections cause catarrhal inflam-
mation and sloughing of the mucosa.
· Clinical signs may include unthriftiness, anorexia,
emaciation, and death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● May find capillarid-type eggs on fecal flotation; eggs
are of similar size and can be confused with other,
less pathogenic, capillarids.
POSTMORTEM
· Generally the method of choice for diagnosis; take
deep mucosal scrapings of the small intestine and
examine microscopically.
Treatment and Contro!
·See comments for Eucoleus.
ASCARIDIA SPP.
· Includes A. galli in chickens and game birds, A
columbae in pigeons, and A. dissimilis in turkeys.
1 62 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
·Worldwide distribution; moderate to high signifi-
cance.
Life Cycle
·Direct; indirect with paratenic host.
● Eggs passed in feces; infective L, develops within the
egg in 1-2 weeks; larvated eggs may remain viable in
the environment for approximately 1 year.
● Transmission occurs through ingestion of eggs con-
taining the infective Ls; extra-intestinal migration
does not. occur; earthworms may serve as paratenic
hosts.
● Prepatent. period varies with age of bird; in young
birds, prepatent period is approximately 5 and 6
weeks for A. galli and A. columbae, respectively; in
adult. birds, prolonged to 8 weeks or longer.
· Infections more prevalent and heavier in young
birds; older birds may be carriers.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
·Moderate infections may be inapparent; heavier
infections can cause decreased feed intake, catarrhal
enteritis, death.
·Clinical signs include off-feed, dull plummage
decreased egg production, diarrhea.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract f163
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are oval to ellipsoidal, with a thick, smooth shell,
73-92 × 40-60 μum, containing a single cell; similar to
H. gallinarum in appearance, but somewhat. larger.
POSTMORTEM
● Adult worms are white, up to 12 cm in length (varies
with species); found in the small intestine.
Treatment ond Contro!
·Piperazine, fenbendazole, and levamisole are effective.
· Prevention is generally through feeding of chicks
prophylactic levels of anthelmintics.
Cecae
HETERAKIS GALLINARUM
· Worldwide distribution in galliform and anseriform
birds; moderate to high significance.
· Common name: cecal worm.
Life Cycle
● Direct; indirect with paratenic host.
· Eggs passed in feces; infective L, develops within the
egg in approximately 2 weeks.
1 64  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract I
·Transmission occurs through ingestion of egg con
taining infective Ls; eggs hatch in the small intestine
and larvae migrate to the cecae where they mature;
extra-intesinal migration does not occur; earth-
worms may serve as paratenic hosts.
· Prepatent period is approximately 4 weeks.
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
● Hemorrhages and thickening of the cecal mucosa
occur inheavy infections.
·Importance is as a vector for Histomonas meleagridis
the causative agent of "blackhead" in turkeys (see
Chapter8).
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
●Eggs are ellipsoidal, with a thick, smooth shell, 65-80
μm in size, containing a single cell; similar in appear-
ance to A. galli but somewhat smaller.
POSTMORTEM
●Adult worms are white, small,up to 1.5 cm in length
found in cecae.
Treotment and Contro!
· Same as for A. galli.
5
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal
Tract Il--Acanthocephalans,
Cestodes, and Trematodes
Acanthocephalans
Small intestine
MACRACANTHORHYNCHUS HIRUDINACEUS
● Worldwide distribution in domestic and feral pigs;
sporadic occurrence, primarily in pigs in outdoor
management situations; occasionally found in dogs,
wild carnivores, and humans.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
165
1 66 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract II
●Intermediate host: dung beetles.
● Eggs passed in feces; beetle grubs ingest eggs; acan-
thor to acanthella to cystacanth inbeetle in about
3-6 months.
·Pigs become infected by ingesting infected grub or
adult beetle containing cystacanth; parasite attaches
to gut wall and matures.
● Prepatent. period is 2-3 months; may live 10 or more
months.
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Proboscis embedded in wall of intestine results in
inflammation and granuloma formation that is visi-
blefromtheserosalsurface of theintestine;
catarrhal enteritis may be present.
·Intestinal perforation resulting in peritonitis rarely
occurs.
·Decreased feed intake,diarrhea, decreased weight gain
or weight loss, or acute abdominal pain may result.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
●Eggs in feces; sedimentation techniques preferred as
eggs do not. float well in most flotation media.
· Eggs are almond shaped, with a thick, dark brown
shellthat contains the acanthor; approximately
67-110 × 40-65 μum.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract ff167
POSTMORTEM
· Adults are quite large, 6-40 cm in length, pinkish
ance; proboscis embedded in intestinal wall.
Superficially resembles Ascaris suum; can be differ-
entiated by the presence of a proboscis that is
attached to the intestinal wall.
Treatment and Controf
· Ivermectin, SQ, at 0.3 mg per kg is effective.
●Prevent. access of pigs to intermediate hosts if possible.
Cestodes, Cyclophyllidea
Small Intestine
DIPYLIDIUM CANINUM
· Worldwide distribution in felids and canids, occa-
sionally humans; low significance.
· Common name: double-pored tapeworm
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
●Intermediate hosts: fleas (Ctenocephalids felis, Pulex
writans), lice ( Trichodectes canis)
●Metacestode stage: cysticercoid.
● Prepatent period is 2-3 weeks.
1 68 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract II
Pothogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Usually nonpathogenic; proglottids may cause pruri-
tis as they migrate in perianal area.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
·Gravid proglottids, which resemble rice grains when
dried, may be found in feces, on pets' hair, or in their bed-
ding; when fresh or rehydrated, shaped like a cucumber
seed with a lateral pore on each side (double-pored),
● Eggs, approximately 50 μm in diameter, occur in
packets; crush proglottid to demonstrate egg pack-
[a uo sla [enpun no siaed pug ae isia
flotation (Figure 5-1).
● Individual eggs difficult. to differentiate from those
of Taenia spp.
POSTMORTEM
● Up to 50 cm in length; scolex with four suckers,
retractable rostellumarmed withthree rows of
rosethorn-shaped hooks; mature and gravid seg-
ments longer than wide, cucumber-seed shaped.
double-pored; lives in small intestine.
Treatment and Controf
·See Tables 45 and 4-6 for treatment.
●Flea and louse control to eliminate the intermediate hosts.
Figure 5-1
Egg packet of D. caninum containing at least 17
eggs(400x).
169
1 70  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract II
TAENIASPP.
●Worldwide distribution; moderate to highly significant.
·Over 60 species have been described; only 6-8 regu
larly seen in veterinary medicine.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
·See Table 5-1 for intermediate hosts and metaces-
tode type.
· Cysticercus is thin-walled, fluid-filled vesicle contain-
ing a single invaginated scolex,range from pea-size
(T.pisiformis)up to 8 cm (T.hydatigena);for every
cysticercus ingested by the definitive host, one tape-
worm develops.
·Strobilocercus is a variation of the cysticercus;consists
of a scolex attached to a long neck attached to the
fluid-filled bladder;for every strobilocercus ingested
by the definitive host, one tapeworm develops.
· Coenurus is a single, large fluid-filled bladder con-
taining numerous invaginated scolices attached to
the inner wall; for every coenurus ingested by the
definitive host, several tapeworms can develop.
● Prepatent. period is 1-2 months, depending on the
species.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
·Infections in the definitive host. are generally non-
pathogenic.
Parasites ofthe Gastrointestinaf Tractff
171
cavity, liver
 cavity, liver
Nervous tissue
Musculature,
Primarily liver,
Primarily liver,
Abdominal
muscles
Abdominal
subcutis 
cardiac
Skeletal,
s&un
sgunl
Metacestode
Liver
Site
Strobilocercus 
Cysticercus
Cysticercus
Hydatid cyst 
Cysticercus
Hydatid cyst
Coenurus
Coenurus
Type
Intermediate Hosts
cats,humans
Rodents, horses,
pigs, humans
Rabbits, rarely
macropods,
horses, pigs.
Lagomorphs 
Sheep. goats 
Domestic and
Table 5-1  Taeniid Tapeworms of Carnivores
wild rumi-
Ruminants,
humans
nants
Rodents
Canids,rare
Canids, cats
Definitive
In cats
Hosts
Canids
Canids
Felids
Canids
Canids
Canids
toeniaeformis
E. multilocularis
T. hydatigena
E. granulosus
s
s
s
Species
T. ovis
1 72 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Il
· Intermediate hosts:
Taenia pisiformis: heavy or acute infections may
cause digestive disturbances, liver damage, death.
Taenia ovis: usually nonpathogenic; meat. con-
demnations result in economicloss.
Taenia hydatigena: may cause liver dysfunction if
large numbers are present; liver condemnations
resultineconomicloss.
Taenia taeniaeformis:usuallynonpathogenic;occa
sionally associated with hepatic sarcomas.
Taenia multiceps. developing coenurus in CNS
causes pressure necrosis;clinical signs may include
inappetence, weight loss, head pressing, blindness,
circling, and other signs of CNS disorder.
Taenia serialis. generally nonpathogenic
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
·Definitive hosts only: gravid proglottids may be
found in feces, on pets' hair or in their bedding;
when fresh or rehydrated,somewhat. rectangular
with a single lateral pore; eggs may be found on fecal
flotation; eggs are brown, slightly oval, up to 49 μm
(depending on species) in size, shell has radial
striations; cannot be differentiated from those of
Echinococcus spp. (Figure 5-2).
Figure 5-2 Cestode egg featured here was recovered on fecal
fotation from a dog. It is probably Taenia, but could also be
Echinococcus(6o0x)
173
1 74Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Il
POSTMORTEM
·Definitive hosts: tapeworms may be up to 2 m in
length; scolex with four suckers, armed rostellum
withtworowsofhooks;matureandgravidsegments
rectangular, single-pored; lives in small intestine.
·Intermediate hosts:finding metacestodes in charac-
teristic sites is usually enough to suggest the most.
likely species involved; definitive identification
requires specialist.
Treatment and Controf
· See Tables 45 and 46 for treatment.
· Prevent. scavenging and predation by dogs or cats
whenever possible; do not feed raw meat.
ECHINOCOCCUS SPP.
●Includes Echinococcus granulosus and E. multilocularis;
moderate significance to veterinary medicine but.
highly significant to public health.
● Distribution of E granulosus includes North and
South America, England, Africa, the Middle East,
Australia, and New Zealand; distribution of E. muiti
locularis includes north-centralEurope,Japan,
Alaska, Canada, and the central United States.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
● See Table 5-1 for intermediate host spectrum
Parasites offthe GastrointesfinafJract ff175
●Metacestode: hydatid cyst; develops in approxi-
mately 5 months for E. granulosus and 2-3 months
for E multilocularis; cysts may die or persist for the
life of the intermediate host.
·Echinococcus granulosus produces unilocular cysts
characterized by a thick, multilayered cyst wall with a
thin, internal germinal membrane; protoscolices
and daughter cysts, containing more protoscolices,
may form internally; cysts are contained by a
connective tissue capsule and do not invade sur-
rounding tissue; E multilocularis produces a multi-
locular cyst characterized by a thinner cyst wall;
daughter cysts bud from the germinal layer and infil.
trate surrounding tissue.
● For every hydatid cyst ingested by the definitive host,
many tapeworms can develop.
● Prepatent. period for E. granulosus is approximately 7
weeks and approximately 4 weeks for E. multilocularis.
Pathogenesis ond Clinicaf Signs
· Adult tapeworms in carnivore definitive host are usu-
ally nonpathogenic.
· Hydatid cysts in the rodent and ungulate intermedi-
ate hosts appear to be well tolerated with clinical
signs usually only in older animals; hydatid cysts in
ratory disease; if cyst ruptures, anaphylaxis results.
1 76 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Il
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Definitive hosts only: eggs may be found on fecal flota-
is un   o d 'o us 'u a sa o
shellhasradial striations;cannot.bedifferentiated from
those of Taenia spp. (see Figure 5-2); a coproantigen
test kit is commercially available in Germany; because
of their small size, gravid segments are generally over-
looked whenshed withfeces.
POSTMORTEM
●Definitive hosts: very small tapeworms, 2-7 mm long,
scolex with four suckers,armed rostellum with twc
rows of hooks; lives in small intestine; definitive iden-
tification requires specialist. Note: because of the
seriouszoonoticpotentialof theseparasites,extreme
caution is required in handling suspect. material.
● Intermediate hosts: finding hydatid cyst is enough to
diagnoseechinococcosus.
Treatment ond Contro!
·See Table 45 for treatment.
● Prevent. scavenging and predation by dogs and cats
whenever possible.
MONIEZIA SPP.
● Worldwide distribution in ruminants; low to moder-
ate significance in adult. animals, may be highly sig-
nificant. in young
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Jract ff177
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
· Intermediate hosts: oribatid mites.
● Metacestode: cysticercoid; develops in approximately 4
months after mite ingests hexacanth embryo.
· Prepatent period is 4-7 weeks; lives approximately 3
months.
· Lambs and calves begin acquiring infections at the
start. of grazing.
· A seasonality exists in the release of eggs and/or
proglottids; in temperate zones, it begins in May,
peaks in June, and rapidly declines thereafter.
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Generally asymptomatic in light infections.
· Substantial numbers in lambs and kids may cause
digestive disorders, diarrhea, cachexia; death may
occur, but is rare.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Proglottids, which are wider than long, may be
found in feces.
· Eggs are of typical anoplocephalid type (Figure 5-3);
can be found using standard fecal flotation procedures.
 Aaexodde 'aenbs ane ssa pg z o
pum in diameter.
Figure 5-3 Cestode egg featured here is typical anoplo-
cephalid-type that is representative of Aoniezia, Anoplocephala,
and Paranoplocephala (4oox).
178
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Tract ff179
● Moniezia expansa eggs are triangular, 56-67 μum in
diameter.
POSTMORTEM
·Moniezia benedenz up to 4 m in length and 25 mm in
width; scolex with four prominent suckers, without
rostellum or hooks; segmen ts wider than long; inter
proglottidal glands at the posterior margin of seg-
ments occupy midzone of segment (seen in stained
specimens only); lives in small intestine.
·Moniezia expansa:up to 6 m in length and 15 mm in
width; scolex with four prominant suckers, without
rostellum or hooks; segmen ts wider than long; inter-
proglottidal glands at. the posterior margin of seg-
ments extend the full width of the segment (seen in
stained specimens only); lives in small intestine.
Treatment and Contro!
· See Table 43 for treatment.
● Prevent pasture contamination by a strategic treat-
ment in the spring; reduction of mites on pasture
impractical.
Smaff and Large fntestines, Cecum
ANOPLOCEPHALA PERFOLIATA, A MAGNA, AND PARA-
·Worldwide distribution in equids;A.perfoliata most
common.
180
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract II
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
●Intermediate hosts: oribatid mites.
●Metacestode: cysticercoid; develops approximately 4
months after mite ingests hexacanth embryo.
·Prepatent. period is 48 weeks.
Pothogenesis andClinical Signs
·Anoplocephala magna and P mamillana not usually
considered to be pathogenic.
·Attachment. of A.perfoliata causes damage to intes
final mucosa that tends to increase in severity with
increasing numbers of cestodes.
· Lesions vary from slight mucosal congestion with
raised focalulceration to mucosalthickening with
ulcers and nodular swellings at site of attachment to
granulomatous lesions projecting into the lumen at.
the ileocecal junction.
· Inflammation, combined with change in bowel
diameter at the ileocecal junction(common attach-
ment site) may predispose to intussusception.
· Clinical signs include those of colic; less severe clini
cal signs include general unthriftiness, intermittent
diarrhea,and weight loss.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf ract ff181
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs are of typical anoplocephalid type (see Figure
5-3); difficult to find on fecal flotation due to spo-
radic shedding of proglottids/eggs; repeated fecal
flotations using saturated sugar may be necessary.
· Anoplocephala perfoliata eggs are thick-walled, round
to “D" shaped, 65-80 μm in diameter.
·Anoplocephala magna eggs similar to A. perfoliata but.
smaller (50-60 μm).
·Paranoplocephala mamillana eggs are thin-walled, oval,
approximately 50 x 37 μum.
POSTMORTEM
·Anoplocephala perfoliata: 48 cm in length, up to 1.2
cm in width; scolex robust, with four prominent
suckers, without. rostellum or hooks, with flap of tis-
sue (lappet) posterior to each sucker; segments
wider than long; lives in terminal ileum, cecum,
large intestine, particularly near ileocecal junction.
Anoplocephala magna: 20-80 cm in length, up to 2.5
cm in width; scolex robust, with four prominent
suckers, without rostellum, hooks, or lappets; seg-
ments wider than long; lives in jejunum.
·Paranoplocephala mamillana: 0.6-5 cm in length, up to
0.6 mm in width; scolex narrow, with four suckers,
without rostellum, hooks, or lappets; segments wider
than long; lives in proximal small intestine.
1 82  Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Il
Treatment and Controf
·Pyrantel pamoate at. 13.2 mg base per kg is effective;
daily administration of pyrantel tartrate at 2.64 mg
perkgremoves tapeworms andpreventsreinfection.
· Prophylactic treatments will prevent and control
infections by reducing pasture contamination; iso-
late newarrivalsandtreatprior toturn-outon
pasture.
Cestodes, Pseudophyllidea
Small Intestine
SPIROMETRA MANSONOIDES
●Distribution includes North and South America in
bobcats, raccoons, dogs, and cats; minor significance.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
●First. intermediate host: copepod.
· Second intermediate host: water snakes and frogs
most.likely,although anyvertebrategroupexcept
fish can fill this role; plerocercoid that. develops is
called a sparganum.
· Paratenic host: any vertebrate group except fish;
includes raccoons, cats, dogs, and humans.
●Prepatent period is 10-30 days.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract ff183
Pothogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
mittent diarrhea.
· Second intermediate host: may cause subcutaneous
lumps that migrate over time; eventually, spargana
die, calcify, and are enclosed in a fibrous capsule.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● In the definitive host, eggs are released through the
uterine pore, rather than by detaching segments;
once eggs have been discharged, several senile seg-
ments are intermittently passed, they are often
missed by the owner and practitioner.
● Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are ovoid, operculated, 60-65 × 35-37 μm,
pointed at both ends; may be confused with fluke eggs.
POSTMORTEM
· Definitive host: slightly pinkish tapeworms up to 75
cm in length, scolex with two bothria, gravid seg-
ments with central uterine pore and spiraled uterus;
found in the small intestine.
● Second intermediate host: sparganosis is provisionally
identified upon finding the ribbon-like, whitish spar
gana(plerocercoids) within themusculature orsubcutis.
1 84 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Il
Treatment and Contro!
●A single dose of praziquantel at. 20 mg per kg is effective.
wheneverpossible.
DIPHYLLOBOTHRIUMLATUM
· Distribution includes central Finland, central
Europe, Italy, Japan, regions of the Baltic Sea and
Volga Basin, and the northern United States.
·Common name: broad fish tapeworm.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
● First intermediate host: cope pod.
·Second intermediate host:freshwater fishes;heaviest
infections in large, predatory fishes such as pike
walleye, and trout.
● Paratenic hosts: large, predatory fishes.
● Definitive host: domestic dog and cat, human, pig:
bear, and other fish-eating mammals.
·Prepatent period is 21-28 days.
Pothogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
● Usually inapparent in all but humans where it can
cause pernicious anemia.
Parasites of fthe Gastrointestinaf Jract ff185
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● In the definitive host, eggs are released through the
uterine pore, rather than by detaching segments;
once eggs have been discharged, several senile seg-
ments may be passed in feces together; because seg-
ments are intermittently passed, they are often
missed by the owner and practitioner.
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are ovoid, operculated, 67-71 × 40-51 μm, yel-
lowish, rounded at both ends; may be confused with
fluke eggs.
POSTMORTEM
● Definitive host: 1.5-4 m in length, scolex with two
bothria, segments wider than long, gravid segments
with central uterine pore and rose tte-shaped uterus;
found in the small intestine.
Treatment and Contro!
● Praziquantel at 35 mg per kg orally has been effective.
●Freeze fish at-10°C for 72 hours or cook adequately
to kill larvae; do not. feed raw fish to pets; prevent
scavenging and predation by pets whenever possible
1 86 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract II
Trematodes
Small Intestine
NANOPHYETUS SALMINCOLA
●Distribution limited to Pacific Northwest. region of North
America and easterm Siberia; definitive hosts include rac-
coon, mink, fox, coyote, dog, cat, and human.
· Common name: salmon poisoning fluke.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
●First intermediate host: aquatic snails.
· Second intermediate host: numerous species of fish;
salmonid fish most susceptible; me tacercariae found
primarily in kidneys, but also muscles and other
parts of the body; infective within 10 days; may sur-
vive5ormoreyears.
·Extra-intestinalmigration does not occur in the
definitive host.
●Prepatent. period: 5-8 days.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Second intermediate hosts.
Fish can toleratelarge numbers of metacercariae;
however, can be highly pathogenic if rate of
acquisition is rapid.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Tract ff187
Renal edema, hemorrhagic areas in skin (due to
invading cercariae),and obstructive and mechan-
ical injury to heart muscle, retina, kidney tubules,
pancreatic tissue, and gallbladder may occur
Signs may include exophthalmia, decreased or
erratic swimming activity.
·Dogs.
Flukes may produce hemorrhagic enteritis,
although rarely cause disease.
Importance  is in the transmission of  Neorickettsia
helminthoeca, the cause of "salmon-poisoning disease."
The rickettsial organism is transovarially transmitted
and is found in all developmental stages of the
fluke.
The disease is restricted to canids; clinical signs
appear 6-10 days postingestion; signs include a
sudden onset of fever accompanied by marked
vomiting, diarrhea (may be hemorrhagic), ocular
discharge, and lymphadenopathy.
Mortality is 50-90%.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
·Fluke infection—identification of eggs on fecal flota-
tion or sedimentation; eggs are 64-97 x 34-55 μm,
yellowish brown with indistinct operculum
1 88 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Il
·Rickettsial infection—based on combination of clin
ical signs compatible with the disease and demon-
stration of fluke eggs in feces (disease is not.
transmitted without the fluke being present).
POSTMORTEM
· Parasites are white, extremely small, 0.5-2.0 mm in
length; live in small intestine; because of small size
detection of the fluke may require scraping gut and
checking material under a microscope.
Treatment and Controf
● Praziquantel at 7-38 mg per kg given SQ or IM is
effective.
● Prevent. scavenging and predation by dogs whenever
possible; do not feed raw fish to dogs.
ALARIA SPP.
·Several species in wild carnivores in South America,
Europe, Africa, Australia, and northern North Amer-
ica; occasionally dogs; minor significance.
Life Cycle
+ Indirect.
●First intermediate host: freshwater snails.
·Second intermediate host: tadpoles.
·Paratenic host: mice, rats, snakes, birds, humans.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Tract ff189
● Definitive host becomes infected by ingesting the second
intermediate or paratenic host; immature fluke migrates
through the abdominal and thoracic cavities to lungs or
arrives in lungs via the circulation; flukes migrate up the
trachea, are swallowed, and mature in the small intestine.
·Prepatent period: 3-5 weeks.
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
● Generally asymptomatic; heavy infections may be associ-
ated with a catarrhal enteritis; human death resulting
from massive fluke migrations has been recorded.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found in feces with either flotation or
sedimentation technique; sedimentation does not
distort. eggs whereas flotation media can.
● Eggs are ovoid, operculated, dark yellow, 98-134 x
62-68 μm.
POSTMORTEM
· Parasites are small, 2-6 mm in length, with a flat,
expanded anterior half and cylindrical posterior
half; found in the small intestine.
Treotment and Contro!
● Praziquantel at 20 mg per kg is effective.
● Prevent predation and scavenging whenever possible.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal
Tract Ill--Protozoans
Apicomplexans
Small and Large Intestines
EIMERIA SPP.
·Worldwide distribution in rodents, lagomorphs
ruminants, pigs, birds, occasionally horses; high sig
nificance.
● Numerous species described including Eimeria bovis,
E.zuernii,E.auburnensis,E.alabamensis,and E.ellip
soidalis of cattle; E. ahsata, E. ovinoidalis, and E. ovina
in sheep; E arloingi, E.alijevi, and E. christenseni in
goats; E. scabra in pigs; E. tenella, E. brunetti,
191
1 92 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
E.acervulina,and E.necatrix in chickens; E.melea
grimitis,E.adenoeides, and E.gallopavonisin turkeys; E
leuckartiin horses.
· High degree of host specificity, although a few
species can infect other related hosts.
Life Cycle
·Direct..
·Each cycle has several asexual generations and one
sexual generation.
· Unsporulated oocysts are passed in the feces;
becomes infective through a process called sporula
tion; each zygote divides into four cells; each cell
forms a sporocyst; each sporocyst develops two
·Infection is acquired by ingestion of sporulated oocysts;
sporozoites are released and penetrate the intestinal
wall; each species enters a specific type of host cell;
reproduce asexually forming meront. (= schizont) con-
meronts destroy host. cells and release merozoites that
penetrate new cells; each speciesundergoes a set. num-
ber of meront. generations (usually 2, can be 3 or 4);
merozoites then penetrate new host cells and enter sex-
ual phase; produce male and female gamonts called
microgametes and macrogametes, respectively; microga
metes leave cell to fertilize macrogametes; fertilized
macrogametes become oocysts; oocysts break out. of host.
cell to be passed in the feces.
Parasites of the Gastrointesfinaf Jract fff193
· Prepatent period is 422 days, depending on species.
· Because each species has a set number of asexual
generations and a single sexual generation, infec-
tions are said to be selflimiting.
· Ingestion of a single sporulated oocyst can result in
production of several hundred thousand oocysts.
Pothogenesis and ClinicafSigns
depends on the species present and the number of
oocysts ingested; if low nuumbers are ingested, disease is
repeated infections; if moderate numbers are ingested,
disease is usually mild and immunity produced; if large
numbers are ingested, disease is usually severe and death
may result; immunity is speciesspecific and incomplete.
● Destruction of host cells is the primary pathogenic
mechanism; clinical signs include a severe, sometimes
bloody, diarrhea and rapid loss of condition; death may
occur during the prepatent period; survivors suffer
long-term negative effects on growth rate; disease occurs
most. commonly in young animals and tends to be asso-
dated with stress: parturition, weaning, shipping, feed
changes, adverse weather, intensive animal husbandry.
· Cattle: infection is common but disease is sporadic;
lisually calves<l year old; light infections cause soft to
watery feces and reduced weight gain; severe infec-
tions cause projectile bloody diarrhea containing
1 94Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
mucus, rectal tenesmus, inappetence, dehydration
and weight loss; signs last approximately 1 week.
· Sheep: infection is common but disease is usually
limited to lambs <6 months old; clinical signs as for
cattle, but blood and tenesmus usually not present.
●Goats: infection is common with disease occurring
in kids >2 weeks old; especially prevalent. 2-3 weeks
after weaning;clinicalsigns include pasty,watery
diarrhea and dehydration.
· Pigs: infections are common but disease is not;
Isospora suis responsible for neonatal porcine coc-
cidiosis (see next section).
·Horses: prevalence unknown; infections usually
inapparent.
·Chickens:infections are a major problem for the
industry due to lost.production; severe disease usually
occurs in 3-6-week-old chicks; infections may be inap-
mucoid diarrhea (may be bloody) or death may
occur; recovery in 1-2 weeks but. adverse effects on
production continue.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Unsporulated oocysts may be found on fecal flota-
tion; presence or absence of oocysts does not neces-
sarily correlate with presence of disease.
Parasites of the GastrointestinafTract ff195
● Oocysts generally medium to large size (>12 μm; Fig
ure 6-l); those of E. leuckarti are unusually large
(80-88× 55-59 μm) and require flotation media with
higher specific gravity or the use of sedimentation to
recover them; most species can be distinguished on
basis of morphological features; however, most. practi-
tioners usually do not. differentiate species.
POSTMORTEM
· May see developmental stages in histological sec
tions of affected intestinal tract.
● In chickens, gross lesions in specific areas of the
intestinal tract may be diagnostic.
Treotment and Contro!
● Because available drugs target. early asexual stages,
ability to treat. infections is limited; treatment. may
consist of supportive therapy only; resistance to
many compounds occurs, especially in coccidia of
poultry; minimize exposure of other animals to
oocysts and stressful conditions.
· Catfle: amprolium, monensin, or sulfa drugs (e.g-,
sulfamethazine) for treatment; amprolium, deco-
quinate, lasalocid, and monensin for prophylaxis.
· Sheep: decoquinate, lasalocid, and sulfaquinoxaline
for prophylaxis.
· Goats: decoquinate and monensin for prophylaxis.
Figure 6-1 Sporulated (S) and partially sporulated (U) oocysts
ofEimeria spp.(200x).
196
Parasites of the Gastrointesfinaf Jract fff197
·Poultry: sulfa drugs, amprolium, monensin, and sev-
eral others are available for prophylaxis.
● Young animals should be kept. in clean, dry areas, not.
overcrowded or stressed; a live vaccine is available for
use in chickens (breeders and layer replacements).
ISOSPORASPP.
·Worldwide distribution in carnivores and pigs; low to
moderate significance.
● Numerous species described including Isospora canis
and I. ohioensis of dogs; I. felis and I. rivolta of cats; I.
suis of pigs.
· Highly host. specific.
Life Cycle
·Direct; indirect with paratenic host.
●Direct. life cycle is similar to that. of Eimeria, sporula-
tion of oocysts passed in feces results in two sporo
·● Prepatent. period is 4-11 days, depending on species.
● Indirect. life cycle occurs in I canis and I. felis; oocysts
ingested by mice and birds; sporozoites penetrate small
intestine, migrate to various organs, enlarge (do not.
reproduce), and encyst (now called hypnozoite); cat or
dog becomes infected when ingesting infected paratenic
host; importance of this route of transmission is unknown.
· Some authorities use the genus Cystisospora for those
capable of developing in intermediate hosts.
1 98 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
Pothogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Similar to that described for Eimeria, destruction of
host. cells primary pathogenic mechanism; infec-
tions tend to be selflimiting.
· Carnivores: often inapparent; clinical signs of diar-
rhea, abdominal pain, dehydration, anorexia, and
weight loss have been reported; disease associated
with debilitated or very young hosts, massive infec-
● Pigs: causes neonatal porcine coccidiosis characterized
by pale, watery, fetid diarrhea and decreased growth in
piglets 5-15 days old; high morbidity and low mortality.
Diognosis
ANTEMORTEM
●Unsporulated oocysts may be found on fecal flota-
tion; presence or absence of oocysts does not nec-
essarily correlate with presence of disease.
● Oocysts generally medium to large size (>12 μm);
oocyts ofIsospora of cats arelarger than those of Tox
oplasma gondii, oocysts of I. suis of pigs can be differ-
entiated from those of Eimeri spp. based on number
of sporocysts and sporozoites within the oocyst.
POSTMORTEM
· Asexual and sexual stages can be seen in histologi-
cal sections of affected intestinal tract.
Parasites ofthe Gastrointestinaf Tractfff
661
Treotment and Contro!
● Dogs: sulfadimethoxine administered at. 55 mg per
kg for 1 day, then 27.5 mg per kg for 4 days or until
the dog is without clinical signs for at. least 2 days,
has been used.
· Pigs: neonatal porcine coccidiosis is apparently
nonresponsive to treatment; on farms known to be
highly contaminated, can prophylactically treat
sows for 2 weeks prior to farrowing or piglets for
the first 3 weeks of life.
SARCOCYSTIS SPP.
·Worldwide distribution in canids and felids; gener
allylow significance.
● Numerous species described (Table 6-1).
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
· Free sporocysts or sporulated oocysts containing
the feces; ingested by the intermediate host; sporo-
zoites enter vascular endothelial cells and undergo
two meront generations; merozoites then invade
skeletal and cardiac muscles and produce sarco-
cysts containing several hundred to thousands of
bradyzoites;
development to infective stage
requires 1-2months.
200
Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Il1
Dog, coyote, fox, wolf raccoon, jackal
 Species of Sarcocystis Encountered in Veterinary Medicine
Dog, fox, raccoon, jackal
Humans, primates 
Humans, primates 
Dog, coyote, fox 
Dog, coyote, fox 
Definitive Host
Opossum*
Cat
800
800
Cat
800
800
Intermediate Host
*Sorcocystis neurono is presented in Chapter 8.
Unknown
Cattle
Sheep
1805
Horse
Species of Sarcocystis
miescheriana
Daubie
porcifelis
Table 6-1 
bertram
S. neurona
hirsuta
tenella
foyeri
si
Si
Si
Si
S
Si
Si
Si
Si
Parasites of the Gastrointesfinaf Tract fff201
·Definitive host acquires infection when ingesting
bradyzoites; bradyzoites pene trate cells of the small
intestine, form micro- and macrogametes; oocysts
develop after fertilization.
ing on species.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Generally nonpathogenic for definitive host
· Pathogenicity varies for intermediate host; species
with canid definitive hosts generally more patho-
genic than those with felid definitive hosts.
·Disease uncommon; naturally occurring clinically
acute disease has only been reported in cattle; clini-
cal signs usually associated with second generation
meronts in the blood vessels; signs may include fever,
inappetence, anemia (normocytic, normochromic),
emaciation, abortion,death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
may be found on fecal flotation; oocysts are dumb-
bell-shaped, 15-20 x 12-16 μum in size, with thin
·Intermediatehost:difficultandnotusually
attempted by the practitioner.
202 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
POSTMORTEM
· Intermediate host: generally by finding sarcocysts in
skeletalor cardiac tissue inhistologic section.
Treotment
·Generally do not treat. domestic animals for infection.
·Control in intermediate host. consists of eliminating
fecal contamination of feed; elevate feed and water
troughs to prevent feeding off contaminated ground.
·Practical control in definitive host consists of elimi
nating raw or undercooked meat from the diet.
TOXOPLASMA GONDI!
·Worldwide distribution in domestic and wild felids;
moderatesignificancetoveterinarymedicine;may
be highly significant. to public health.
Life Cycle
· Indirect with paratenic host or direct.
· Unsporulated oocysts are passed in feces; sporulate
to infective oocysts within approximately 24 hours;
     o  o
zoites;infective to virtuallyallwarm-bloodedani-
mals; in paratenic host, sporozoites invade intestinal
cells and associated lymph nodes to become rapidly
dividing tachyzoites; rupture cells, spread through
out the body, encyst, and form bradyzoites
Parasites of the Gastrointesfinaf Jract fff203
· Paratenic host can also be infected by ingesting
bradyzoites; these form tachyzoites and the cycle
repeats as before.
· Only felids are definitive hosts; become infected by
ingesting either tissue cysts containing infective
bradyzoites (most common route) or oocysts;
bradyzoites or sporozoites invade epithelial cells of
the small intestine, undergoing several asexual gen-
erations ending with production of micro- and
macrogametes and oocysts.
· Prepatent period is 310 days if tissue cysts are source
of infection and 19-21 days if oocysts are source of
infection; excrete oocysts for only 1-2 weeks.
· Felids can also harbor tissue cysts.
● Transplacental transmission can occur if dam is
infected during pregnancy; tachyzoites migrate to
fe tus; congenital infections important for humans,
sheep, and goats.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
·Varies with the host, route of infection, immune sta-
tus, and organ affected.
● Cats: infections are usually inapparent; clinical infec-
tions most. commonly associated with pneumonia.
· Sheep and goats: infection of dam during pregnancy
may result in abortion, macerated or mummified
feti, stillbirths, or perinatal mortality; infection may
also be fatal in adult goats.
204 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
· Pigs: infection in adults is usually inapparent, but
pregnant. sows may abort. or give premature birth; in
piglets (<12 weeks old), infections may be associated
with fever, pneumonia, myocarditis, and encephalitis
·Dogs: clinical disease uncommon; usually occurs
concurrently with canine distemper virus infection
and involves the lungs, liver, and CNS.
·Humans: infections occur primarily through inges-
tion of undercooked meat although oocysts may alsc
cause infections; chorioretinitis most common
sequelae of congenital infection but hydrocephalus,
mentalretardation,andjaundice may also occur; an
estimated 1 in 1,0o0 children are born infected with
T. gondu in the United States.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Felids: unsporulated oocysts may be found on fecal
flotation; oocysts are subspherical, 10 × 12 μm; cannot.
distinguish T. gondii oocysts from those of Hammondia
hammondi, another coccidian parasite of cats, without
experimental life cycle studies, so all 10 × 12 μum oocysts
should be considered T. gondii unless proven other
wise; serologictests are available,butneed to measure
bothIgM andIgG and/or dopaired serum tests.
●Paratenic hosts: may be able to demonstrate organ-
isms on stained impression smear of lymph node
biopsy.
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract ff205
POSTMORTEM
·Demonstration of antiT. gondi IgM antibodies in goat,
sheep, or pig fetus indicates infection because IgM
does not. cross the placenta in ruminants and pigs.
· May find organism in histologic sections of enlarged
lymph nodes or other lesions.
· Other techniques (i.e., isolation of organism from
infected tissue in mice or tissue culture) are available
from specialized laboratories.
Treotment and Contro!
·Generally do not. treat domestic animals for infection.
· Clinically ill cats can be treated with clindamycin
hydrochloride; begin with 25 mg per kg,twice
daily, orally with food and progress to 50 mg per kg,
twice daily; treat for a minimum of 2 weeks.
· Control in the domestic cat consists of confining
the animal indoors to prevent hunting and feeding
the cat only commercially prepared cat food.
· Control in humans is achieved by cooking all meats
to at least 7o*C and washing hands and utensils
with soap and water; cat litter should be emptied
daily to remove oocysts before they sporulate; cat.
pan should be rinsed with boiling water; wear rub-
ber gloves when gardening; wash raw vegetables
thoroughly.
206 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
NEOSPORA SPP.
·Includes Neospora caninum of cattle, dogs, sheep,
goats, and horses, and N. haghesi of horses; serologic
evidence for human exposure to N. caninum exists.
· Worldwide distribution.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
· Details are incomplete; dogs can be both intermedi-
ate and definitive host;cattle,sheep,and goats are
intermediate hosts.
·Tachyzoites and tissue cysts with bradyzoites are
found in the intermediate host; cysts tend to be
found primarily in CNS, but also in peripheral
nerves and retina.
· Thought that dogs acquire infection by ingesting tis
sue cysts; shed unsporulated oocysts that sporulate
within72hours;eachoocysts containstwo sporocysts
withfoursporozoites.
· Congenital transmission also occurs.
Pothogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
● Primary pathogenic mechanism may be cellular
destructionresulting frommultiplicationof the
tachyzoites.
● Catfle: a primary cause of abortion in dairy cattle in the
United States; any age cow may abort from 3 months
Parasites of the GastrointestinafTract ff207
gestation to term with most. occurring mid-gestation
(5-6 months); cows do not. need to acquire infection
congenitally infected calves may be underweight,
unable to rise, and present with signs of CNS disorders;
reduced milk production in first-lactation heifers can
occur in chronically infected animals.
· Dogs: disease is most. severe in congenitally infected
pups, but fatal infections have been reported in dogs
8-15 years old; dogs are bright, alert, and present
with an ascending paralysis; hind limbs more often
affected than front limbs; other clinical signs may
include paralysis of the jaw, muscle flaccidity or atro-
phy; dermatitis in adult dogs may occur.
· Goats: abortions have been reported in pygmy goats
and dairy goats.
· Sheep: experimental infections will induce abortion,
but reports of natural cases are rare.
● Horses: infections have various manifestations rang-
ing from apparent abortion to CNs disorders;
whether N. hughesi or N. caninum is primarily respon
sible for disease is unclear.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Antibodies against N. caninum can be detected with
various serological tests,many of which are available at.
208 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
specialized laboratories; interpret with caution—in cat-
fle, a negative test. for an aborted cow can exclude N.
caninum as the cause of abortion in individual cows; a
positive serologic testfor anaborted cow or fetusindi
cates only infection,not abortion; a negative serologic
test for a fetus does not. rule out infection.
·Although naturally infected dogs have yet to be identified
as shedding oocysts, be on the lookout for unsporulated
oocysts in feces that are spherical to subspherical and
10-11 μm in diameter; must be differentiated from
Isospora.
POSTMORTEM
· May find tissue cysts on histological section; tissue cysts of
N.hughesiare smallerthan those of N.caninum,have thin
ner cyst. walls (≤ 1 μm) and smaller bradyzoites;immuno
histochemical staining required for definitive diagnosis.
Treotment and Contro!
· Currently, there is no effective treatment.
fecal contamination of feed and water by dogs.
CRYPTOSPORIDIUMSPP.
·Worldwide distribution in mammals (including
humans), fish, reptiles, and birds; highly significant.
to veterinary medicine and public health.
Parasites of the GastrointestinafTract flff20g
lncludes C.parvamofmammals (including humans)
C. muris of rodents and possibly catfle, C. anderson? of
catftle,C baileyi and C. meleagridis of chickens and
turkeys; based on molecular analyses, more species
probably exist.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
· Sporulated oocysts are passed with the feces; after
ingestion, sporozoites invade microvillous border of
gastric glands, lower half of the small intestine, bile
duct, or respiratory tract; lie in a vacuole just beneath
the host. cell membrane (intracellular but. extracyto
plasmic); undergo two or three meront generations
(species dependent) followed by asexual development
and oocyst production within 72 hours; oocysts sporu-
late before leaving the cells; two types of oocysts pro
duced—thin-walled that break and reinfect the host,
and thick-walled that. pass in the feces.
● Prepatent period can be as short as 3 days
· Oocysts are extremely resistant to environmental
conditions and most. man-made chemicals.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Transmission among people or animals is by fecal
contamination; infection may occur in any age ani-
mal but disease is usually limited to the very young
(≤ 3 weeks old) or the immunocompromised.
2 10 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
· Pathogenesis not completely understood; little tissue
reaction occurs as a result of the parasite; the parasite
may decrease disaccharidase activity resulting in
reduced breakdown of sugars resulting in bacterial
overgrowth，formationof volatile fatty acids,and
changes in osmotic pressure; these changes then cause
the characteristic severe, watery diarrhea.
·C parvnum: disease is selflimiting, lasting 1-3 weeks in oth-
erwise healthy animals; lesions present. are mild to moder-
ate villous atrophy, changes in surface epitheliuum and
shortening of microvilli; severityof disease is exacerbated in
the presence of other pathogens (e.g., rotavirus in calves).
●C andersoni (possibly C muris): infects the abomasum; clin
ically mild with possible adverse affects on weight gain and
milk production; generally found in older cattle.
·C. baileyz may infect bursa of Fabricius (BF), cloaca or
respiratory tract.of chickens,turkeys,ducks;the disease
usually manifests as respiratory disease in chicks < 11
weeks old with intestinal diseaseless common;results
in air sacculitis, pneumonia, sinusitis, conjunctivitis
clinical signs of respiratory infection include coughing.
sneezing,dyspnea,rales; severity of disease is exacer
bated in the presence of other pathogens (e.g., infec-
tious bronchitis virus); infection of BF may diminish
humoral immune response to vaccines.
·C. meleagridis. infects BF,cloaca, or respiratory tract
of chickens and turkeys; disease apparently only
occurs in turkeys.
Parasites of the Gastrointesfinaf Tract fff211
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Detection methods include:
rated sugar recommended (specific gravity of 1.33).
Directnormal saline smear—can beair dried and
stained with one of several methods to help visul
alize oocysts; not as good as fecal flotation.
ELISA testseveral test kits commercially available
for humans; may be useful in other mammals;
detects parasite antigen in feces; can be expensive.
Immunofluorescence—numerous test. kits commer-
cially available; in general, better sensitivity and
specificity than stained smears; however, requires
immunofluorescent.microscope.
· Oocysts are tiny, subspherical, 3-7 μm in diameter.
POSTMORTEM
● In addition to antemortem methods, may find devel-
opmental stages on histological section in microvil-
lous border of affected tissue.
Treotment and Contro!
·Paromomycin has been shown capable of preventing
     ss s
output in calves, kids, and cats.
2 12 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
·Control is difficult; strict sanitation is needed; separa-
tion of susceptible animals from dams may be required
including separate personnel to care for each.
Flagellates
Smalf Intestine
GIARDIADUODENALIS
●Worldwide distribution in mammals,birds,and
amphibians.
· Five species currently recognized including Giardia
duodenalisin domestic and wild mammals (including
humans) and G. muris in rodents; based on molecu
lar analyses, more species may exist.
·Note:three names are given to the species that
infects humansG. intestinalis, G. lamblia, and G
duodenalis;basedontherulesofzoologicalnomen
clature，the name G.lamblia is without. taxonomic
basis and is invalid;however, either G. duodenalis or
G. intestinalis can be used; G. duodenalis will be used
here in keeping with the most recent proposal.
Life Cycle
·Direct..
·Transmitted by the fecal-oral route,primarily
throughfeed and/orwatercontaminatedwithcysts;
cysts are passed with the feces; each cyst contains two
trophozoites; upon ingestion, trophozoites leave the
cyst, attach to the brush border of the jejunum, and
Parasites of the Gastrointesfinaf Jract fff213
multiply through binary fission; subsequently, each
trophozoite forms a cyst; asexual reproduction
occurs resulting in two trophozoites within the cyst.
· Trophozoites can also be passed with the feces, partic
ularly during acute infections, resulting in transmission
of the parasite; however, cysts are more resistant to
external environmental conditions and are the stage
most. often responsible for continued transmission.
·Prepatent period is 5-16 days.
·Infections are more common in young animals; are
probably the most important source of environmen-
tal contamination; adults, especially dams, can be
cyst excretion has been shown to occur in sheep.
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Infections have been shown to cause villous atrophy
and crypt hyperplasia; this results in a decrease in
the absorptive surface area of the small intestine;
glucose, water, and sodium absorption is hindered.
· Decreased activity of disaccharidase also occurs,
which impairs digestion.
● Ruminants—clinical signs are often absent; when pres-
ent, they may include diarrhea and weight loss;
impaired growth rate in lambs has been documented.
● Horses—clinical signs are often absent; have been
associated with diarrhea, ill thrift, and reduced growth
rate in foals.
2 14 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
· Dogs and cats——clinical signs are offten absent; when pres
ent,they mayinclude acute,chronic,orintermittent foul
smelling, fatty diarrhea, vomiting, dehydration, anorexia.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
·Detection of trophozoite or cyst. in feces; intermittent
shedding makes diagnosis difficult; therefore,giardiosis
should not be ruled out. based on a single negative fecal
exam;it. is recommended three fecal examinations over a
period of 7-10 days be performed.
· Detection methods include:
Fecal flotation—-centrifugal or simple flotation used to
detect cysts; zinc sulfate usually listed as the recom-
mended flotation medium,however, saturated sugar
also works; diluted iodine added to prep allows for bet-
ter visualization of morphology.
Direct normal saline smear——-best. if performed within 20
minutes of sample collection; motile trophozoites
detected in unstained prep; diluted iodine added to
prep kills the organisms but. allows for better visualiza-
tion of morphology.
ELISA test——several testkits commercially available for
humans; may be useful in other mammals; detects par-
asite antigen in feces; can be expensive.
Immunofhuorescence-numeroustestkitscommercially
available; detects cysts and/or trophozoites with fluo
rescent. antibodies; in general,better sensitivity and
Parasites ofthe Gastrointestinaf ract f2l5
specificity than iodine-stained smears; however,
requires immunofluorescent. microscope.
Duodenal aspiration—fluid is aspirated and the sedi
ment examined for trophozoites; requures either
endoscopy or laparotomy; usually only recommended
if animal has not been treated, zinc sulfate flotafion has
not. been performed, and the animal is undergoing
upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.
· Trophozoites are pear-shaped, bilaterally symmetri-
cal with a concave adhesive disc on the ventral sur-
face, with two nuclei and four pairs of flagella, 9-21
X 515 μm; when stained, resemble a "clown face.
· Cysts are oval, with 2-4 nuclei and other elements
characteristic of the trophozoites that they contain,
9-13 x 7-10 μm.
POSTMORTEM
·In addition to the antemortem detection methods, a
direct saline smear of the scrapings of the small
intestine can be used to detect trophozoite stages.
Treatment and Controf
· Dogs: fenbendazole at the same dosage used for
helminths has been used; metronidazole (22 mg per
kg orally twice daily for 5 days) has also been effec-
tive; metronidazole is still the drug of choice followed
by fenbendazole in the case of treatment. failure.
·Cats:metronidazole as for dogs.
2 16 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
·Calves: fenbendazole at varying dosages (a single 10
mg dose, 10-20 mg per day for 3 days, 0.833 mg daily
for 6 days) or albendazole at 20 mg per day for 3 days
has been used.
·Because of the potential of transmission to humans,
treatment. ofhousehold pets is warranted; cysts survive
best. under cool, humid conditions so keeping areas dry
nium solutions recommended for kennel disinfection
so prompt. removal of feces and frequent. and thorough
cleaning of kennels is recommended.
Upper Gastrointestinal Tract
TRICHOMONASGALLINAE
● Widespread distribution in pigeons, doves, raptors,
gallinaceous birds; moderate significance.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
·Avian host becomes infected by ingesting the parasite
with feed, water, litter, regurgitated crop contents, or in
the case of raptors, prey (e.g., doves) .
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Causes an inflammation and ulceration of the
mouth, sinuses, esophagus, crop, and proventricu-
lus, which may extend to the liver, serosal surface of
the in testinal tract, pancreas, and heart.
· Clinical signs include yellowish circumscribed
Parasites of the Gastrointestinaf Jract ff2l7
lesions or caseous nodules anywhere from the oro
cavity to proventriculus; caseous, greenish exudate
may accumulate, exuding from the beak.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Parasites may be found on direct saline smear of crop
contents; characterized by four anterior flagella.
POSTMORTEM
· Typical lesions may be found within the digestive
tract, liver; direct saline smear of crop contents to
demonstrate organisms.
Treotment and Contro!
· Can use metronidazole at 30-60 mg per kg orally,
twice daily for 5-7 days; 10 mg of carnidazole orally
in a single dose has been used in nonfood pigeons;
resistance to both drugs has been reported.
●Minimize contact. of poultry with pigeons or doves; raise
birds on wire platforms to avoid fecal contamination; do
not feed pigeons or doves to raptors in rehabilitation.
Ciliates
Colon
BALANTIDIUM COL!
●Worldwide distribution in pigs; rarely humans, other
primates, rats, dogs
2 18 Parasites of the Gastrointestinal Tract Ill
Life Cycle
·Direct.
·Transmitted through the fecal-oral route via cysts or
trophozoites; cysts more resistant to external envi-
ronment.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Generally nonpathogenic to pigs; may invade
colonic mucosa if damaged by other pathogens.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
●May find trophozoites in direct. smear of feces or
cysts on fecal flotation.
· Trophozoites are oval, with funnel-shaped mouth
macronucleus and usually micronucleus, covered
with cilia, 30-150 × 25-120 μm.
● Cysts are spherical, with double membrane, 40-60 μum
POSTMORTEM
●In addition to antemortem techniques, may find
trophozoites in histological sections of colonic tissue
Treotment and Controf
· Generally do not. treat pigs for infection.
● To prevent human infections, use good hygiene
7
Parasites of the
Cardiopulmonary System
Nematodes
Respiratory Tract
DICTYOCAULUS SPP.
● Includes D. viviparus of cattle, D. filaria of sheep and
goats, and D. arnfieldi of donkeys and horses.
● Worldwide distribution; D. vivipamusmoderate sig-
nificance, especially in dairy calves in temperate and
moist regions of western and central Europe; in the
United States, infections may be widespread, but. dis
ease is not; D. filariamoderate to high significance
219
220 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
especiallyinyounganimalsineasternEurope,India
central and northeastern United States; D. arnfieldi
very common in donkeys, rare in horses.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
·Dictyocaulus vivipamus and D.filaria:L,develops and
hatches from eggs either in bronchi or the gastroin-
testinal tract; L, is passed in the feces; infective L
develops in 46 days.
·Dictyocaulus arnfield: L,hatches within a few hours of
eggs being passed in the feces; infective Ls develops
in 3-7 days.
·Animals become infected by ingestion of infective
Lg; larvae penetrate the small intestine, progress to
the mesenteric lymph nodes, and molt to L; larvae
continue to the lungs via the lymphatic and circula-
tory system，arriving there approximately1week
after ingestion; they break out. into the alveoli, molt
to the adult stage, and mature.
· Prepatent period is 3-8 weeks, depending on
the prepatent period to 5 months.
·L,extremely susceptible to desiccation; rainy
weather and damp or wet places in pastures favor
development and survival; D. viviparus larvae do not
migrate readily and rely on rain for dispersal.
Parasites of the Cordiopulmonary System
221
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
·Dictyocaulusviviparus
Larvae can cause inflammation anywhere in the
lungs; alveoli may collapse or become epithelial
ized; clinical signs may include tachypnea, dysp
nea, and a nonproductive cough.
Adults can cause chronic bronchitis with affected
lobes becoming consolidated as a result of fibrosis;
clinical signs may include tachypnea, severe dysp
nea, head extended in air hunger position, harsh
cough, anorexia, weight loss, emaciation, death.
Severity and duration of disease are related to
how many and how fast larvae are ingested.
Secondary bacterial  infections and/or  pul-
monary edema and emphysema may occur.
In temperate regions, disease usually occurs during
the second half of the first. grazing season in calves.
·Dictyocaulusfilaria
Causes a catarrhal bronchitis; exudate passes into
alveoli leading to atelectasis or pneumonia; sec-
ondary bacterial infections may occur.
Clinical signs include marked coughing, tachypnea,
dyspnea, nasal discharge, weight loss, emaciation,
death.
Disease usually occurs during the second half of
the first grazing season in lambs and kids.
222
 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
·Dictyocaulus arnfieldi
Patency usually only achieved in donkeys and
mules; rare in horses.
Donkeys are usually asymptomatic.
Causes an eosinophilic pneumonitis in horses.
Clinical signs may include chronic coughing,
decreased exercise performance, general unthriff-
iness,respiratory distress.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Dictyocaulus viviparus: can detect L, in feces with the
Baermann technique; use of flasks superior to fun
nels; can detect. eggs and larvae in lavage fluid; lar-
vae are 390-450μm with a pointed tailand brown
food granules in the intestinal cells.
Dictyocaulus filaria: can detect L, in feces with the
Baermann technique; larvae are 550-580 μm, with
an anterior cuticular knob, blunt tail, and brown
food granules in the intestinal cells.
·Dictyocaulus arnfield: usually cannot. detect. larvae in
feces from affected horse; clinical signs and grazing
history are the most. helpful; can detect L, in feces
from donkeys cograzing with affected animal with
the Baermann technique; may also be able to detect
eggs on fecal flotation if collected per rectum and
examined quickly.
Parasites of the Cordiopufmonary System
223
POSTMORTEM
·Dictyocaulus viviparus and D.filaria:parasites are
white, up to 8 cm (D. viviparus) or 10 cm (D. filaria)
in length; easy to recover from the trachea, bronchi,
and bronchioles.
·Dictyocaulus arnfieldi: adults are white, up to 7 cm in
length; found in smaller bronchioles in donkeys
mules; in horses, unlikely to find worms on gross
necropsybecause they do not. tend to mature.
Treotment and Controf
· Ruminants: see Table 43 for treatment; maintain
adequate levels of nutrition; avoid overstocking and
grazing of damp areas favoring larval survival; radia-
tion-attenuated larval vaccines are commercially
available in certain areas of Europe.
·Horses: possibly benzimidazoles or avermectins may
be used; do not pasture donkeys and horses together.
MUELLERIUSCAPILLARIS
· Cosmopolitan distribution in small ruminants;
locally abundant in areas of the United States; low to
moderate significance, mostly in goats.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
●Intermediate host: terrestrial snails and slugs.
224  Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
·First-stage larvae develop and hatch from eggs laid in
lungs, are coughed up, swallowed, and passed in the
feces; penetrate snail or slug and develop to infective
L, in approximately 2 weeks.
· Ruminant acquires infection by ingesting mollusc
containing infective L,; larvae are released from the
mollusc, penetrate the intestine, and follow lym
phatic system to right heart and lungs; enter alveoli
and bronchioles and mature.
·Prepatent period is 38-48 days; parasites may
undergo arrested development as immature adults,
thereby prolonging the prepatent period.
Pothogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Usually inapparent.
·Infection associated with inflammation resulting in
nodules that. are granuloma-like areas containing
mature worms, eggs, and L-
● Clinical signs may include dyspnea, coughing, and
other signs of interstitial pneumonia.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Can detect L, in feces with Baermann technique; use
of flasks is superior to funnels.
· Larvae are approximately 300 μm in length; larval
tail with undulating tip and dorsal spine.
Parasites of the CardiopulmonarySystem
225
POSTMORTEM
● Finding typical pulmonary lesions at necropsy; may find
nematodes in histological sections of affected lung.
Treatment and Contro!
·Generally do not. treat for infection.
METASTRONGYLUSSPP.
● Worldwide distribution in pigs in outdoor manage-
ment. situations; also found in wild swine; moderate
significance.
·Includes M.apri, M. pudendotectus, and M. salmi, mixed
infections of M. apri and M. pudendotectus appear to be
required for either to develop in the host.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
●Intermediate host: earthworms.
· Fully larvated eggs are laid in lungs, coughed up,
swallowed, and passed with the feces; earthworms
ingest. eggs; L, hatches in earthworm; infective Lg
present. in 10-30 days.
● Pigs acquire infection by ingesting earthworms con-
taining the infective L,; larvae invade the small intes-
tine, entering lymphatic vessels to reach the lungs by
way of the right heart; molt to L4 approximately 3
days postinfection in lymph nodes or lungs; molt. to
immature adult in lungs.
226 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
· Prepatent period is 3-6 weeks, depending on
species; may live up to 6 months.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
● Usually inapparent; disease, when present, occurs
only in young pigs.
·Can cause bronchitis, hypersecretion of mucus, hypertro
phy of the bronchiolar musculature, and emphysema
leading to consolidation of the diaphragmatic lobes.
● Clinical signs primarily limited to coughing; may
also include dyspnea, cyanosis, inappetence, weight.
loss, or decreased weight gain.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs may be found on fecal flotation; eggs are dense
1.25 or greater (e.g., saturated magnesium sulfate).
● Eggs are ellipsoidal, rough-shelled, 45-60 × 38-42
pum, each containing a larva.
● In older animals, egg shedding is intermittent and
repeated fecal examinations may be necessary.
POSTMORTEM
· Adult worms are grayish white, 1.5-4.5 cm in length;
found by squeezing the incised areas of consolida-
Parasites of the Cordiopufmonary System
227
tion; species can be differentiated based on spicule
morphology of the males.
Treotment and Contro!
· See Table 41 for treatment.
● Control by housing pigs, cultivating infected pasture,
or cograzing with unsusceptible species of livestock.
SYNGAMUSTRACHEA
·Worldwide distribution in domestic fowl, game
birds, ratites, raptors, passerine birds; moderate sig-
nificance, especially in chicks, turkeys, pheasants,
and partridges under range conditions.
· Common name: gapeworm.
Life Cycle
· Direct; indirect with paratenic host.
· Paratenic hosts: earthworms, slugs, beetles, and
other arthropods.
●Eggs are laid in the trachea, coughed up, swallowed,
and passed with the feces; L, develops to infective L,
within the egg in 1-2 weeks; eggs may or may not.
hatch.
● Definitive host. becomes infected by ingesting egg with
infective L, L, after hatching, or paratenic host. con-
  sh a      
228 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
break out into alveoli, and molt to immature adult;
migrate up bronchial tree to trachea and mature.
● Prepatent period is 17-21 days; may live up to 5
months in chickens and 7.5 months in turkeys.
●Chickens<10 weeks old are most. susceptible; older
birds can tolerate more nematodes than younger
birds;infections tend to occur in summer when
earthworms are active.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Larval migration may cause petechial hemorrhages,
inflammation, and edema; clinical signs may include
dyspnea and depression
●Adult parasites cause tracheitis, excess mucus produc-
tion leading to partial occlusion of the airways, respi-
ratory distress; adults also ingest blood leading to
anemia; clinical signs may include coughing, weak-
ness, emaciation, dyspnea, or signs of asphyxiatior
including open-mouthed breathing ("gaping"), death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are ellipsoidal, thin-shelled with nearly parallel
sides,70-100 × 43-46 μm,with a thickened opercul
lum at. each pole, containing morula with 8-16 cells
Parasites of the Cordiopuimonary System
229
POSTMORTEM
· The bright red female (0.5-3.0 cm in length) and
smaller, white male (0.2-0.6 cm) live in permanent
copulation appearing as the letter Y; found attached to
the mucosa in the middle to distal parts of the trachea.
Treotment and Contro!
· Thiabendazole at 300-1500 mg per kg daily for 3
days is highly effective.
· Control by rearing chicks indoor to 45 weeks of
age; separate chicks from adults; prevent contami-
nation of yard by wild birds; keep yards dry.
AELUROSTRONGYLUS ABSTRUSUS
· Cosmopolitan distribution in cats; low to moderate
significance.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
●Intermediate hosts: snails and slugs.
· Paratenic hosts: small rodents, birds.
● Adult females deposit eggs in “nests" in the lung
parenchyma; L, develops, hatches, is carried up the
bronchial tree and trachea, swallowed, and passed in
the feces; penetrate the intermediate host and
develop to infective L, in 2-5 weeks.
230 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
 Ingestion of paratenic host is most probable route of
infection for the cat; larvae migrate from the stomach to
the lungs through the peritoneal and thoracic cavities.
● Prepatent. period is 46 weeks.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
 n      
pleural nodules, smooth muscle hypertrophy of the
bronchioles and alveolar ducts, bronchitis.
● Clinical signs may include coughing, dyspnea, sneez-
ing, nasal discharge, inappe tence.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· L, may be found in feces using the Baermann tech-
nique.
· Larvae are 360-390 μm long with an S-curved tail
bearing a subterminal spine.
POSTMORTEM
· Adult worms are long and slender, 0.5-1.0 cm in
length, and easily missed in the lung tissue.
Treotment and Contro!
● Fenbendazole at 50 mg per kg daily for 3 days or a
single SQ injection of ivermectin at 0.4 mg per kg is
effective.
Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
231
· Control is generally impractical without indoor con-
finement of animals.
EUCOLEUS BOHM!
· Distribution unknown; moderate significance in
domestic dogs.
· Common name: nasal capillarid.
Life Cycle
·Unknown.
● Most. likely direct; earthworms may play a role in
transmission as well.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Parasites live in the epithelium of the nasal
turbinates, frontal sinuses, and paranasal sinuses;
epithelium becomes hyperemic and hyperplastic;
excess mucus is produced.
● Clinical signs include sneezing, nasal discharge that.
may be bloody.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs may be found in nasal discharge or on fecal
flotation.
       
x 30-35 μm, containing a multicellular embryo that
232  Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
does not. fill the egg; close examination reveals a deli
cately pitted surface; must be differentiated from other
capillarid-type eggs that. may be found in dogs.
● May find capillarid-type nematodes in nasal biopsy.
POSTMORTEM
·Because of their small size,these nematodes may be
capillarid-type nematodes in histologic section.
Treatment and Contro!
· A single oral dose of ivermectin at 0.2 mg per kg has
been reported to be effective.
EUCOLEUS AEROPHILUS
· Worldwide distribution in felids, canids, and
mustelids; generally of Iow significance.
Life Cycle
·Direct;indirect. with earthworm.
● Eggs are laid in the lungs, coughed up, swallowed,
and passed with the feces; L, develops, in 5-7 weeks,
but. does not hatch; eggs hatch if ingested by earth
worm, but larvae do not. develop further
·Carnivore acquires infection by ingestion of infective
eggs; larvae hatch in the intestine and migrate to
lungs in 7-10 days.
·Prepatent period is approximately 40 days.
Parasites of theCordiopufmonary System
233
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Infections in domestic dogs and cats are, generally,
inapparent.
●May cause bronchiole disease characterized by
coughing and wheezing; secondary bacterial infec-
tions may occur.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal flotation.
● Eggs are capillarid-type (see Figure 4-6), 59-80 × 30-40
pm with a net-like pattern on the surface; must. be dif
ferentiated from other capillarid-type eggs that may be
present.
POSTMORTEM
·Adults live in the bronchi; generally do not. see adult
worms at necropsy; rather, usually find them on his-
tologic sections.
Treatment and Controf
sp g roy Aep Aeo Sy 1ad l og re aozepuaquag ●
may be effective.
Circulatory System
DIROFILARIA IMMITIS
● Distributed in tropical, subtropical, and warm temperate
regions of the world in dogs, wild canids, cats, ferrets;
234Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
within the United States, endemic in all 50 states, but
more common along the Aflantic and Gulf coasts, and
the Mississippi River and its major tributaries.
·High significance to veterinary medicine; moderate
significance to public health.
●Common name:heartworm.
Life Cycle
+ Indirect.
●Intermediate host: mosquitoes.
· Adult females, living in pulmonary arteries/arteri-
oles, produce microfilariae (mff); mosquito ingest
mff with blood meal; develops to infective Lg in
10-14 days.
·Definitive host becomes infected when mosquito con-
taining the infective L, feeds; larvae escape from
mouthparts to enter through the puncture wound left
by mosquito; reside in skin and molts to Lq within 10
days; migrates to muscle bundles and subcutaneous tis-
sues where they reside for 2-3 months; molt to imma
ture adult. 60-70 days postinfection; migrate through
venule walls and are carried to the heart and pul
they mature; may accidentally migrate to aberrant. sites
such as the brain and anterior chamber of the eye.
● Prepatent. period is 6-9 months; adult. can live 7+
years in dogs and 2-3 years in cats; mff can survive 2
years in dog's circulation.
Parasites ofthe CardiopulmonarySystem
235
· Transplacental transmission of mff has been
reported.
·Larval development in mosquitoes does not occur
when average daily temperature is below 17°C limiting
the potential for heartworm transmission to 6 months
or less in most of the continental United States.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
·Dogs
May be inapparent.
Chronic heartworm disease: eosinophilic pneul
monitis may occur; pulmonary endarteritis leads to
proliferation of the intima and arterial hypertro-
phy; this favors thrombus formation and stenosis of
the pulmonary artery; arteries lose elasticity; steno-
sis and loss of elasticity lead to persistent pulmonary
hypertension that leads to right ventricular
enlargement and chronic congestive heart failure;
dead worms may form emboli that. obstruct vessels;
granulomatous reactions result; vessels are further
occluded and infarcts develop; may be fatal; clinical
signs may include chronic cough, dyspnea, periph-
eral edema, ascites, exercise intolerance.
Vena cava or caval syndrome: in very heavy infec
tions, worms may also reside in right heart. and pos
terior vena cava; endocarditis, valvular insufficiency,
venous stasis, and hemolysis occur; clinical signs are
characterized by a sudden episode of profound
lethargy and weakness, hemoglobinuria, dyspnea,
236 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
tachycardia,icterus; fatal collapse occurs within
2-3 days.
Glomerulonephritis:occasionaloccurrence;a
result. ofglomerular deposition ofimmune com-
plexes involving mff.
·Cats
May be inapparent.
Harbor fewer worms than dogs (asfew as two can
be fatal); if infection becomes patent, mff are low
in concentration and transient in the blood.
Pathologic lesions similar to dogs; cats develop inter-
hypertension and heart failure or caval syndrome.
Clinical signs less specific than in dogs; may include
coughing,intermittentvomitingusuallyunrelated
to eating; occasional difficulty in breathing, pant-
ing, or open-mouth breathing; gagging, dyspnea,
tachypnea, lethargy, anorexia, weight loss; death
may occur suddenly, preceding clinical signs; clini-
cal signs tendtobeassociatedwitheither arrivalof
of mature worms resulting in thromboemboli and
pulmonary arterial infarction and lung injury.
·Ferrets
Infections probably under-recognized.
May harbor only 1 worm and up to 30 worms;
microfilaremia appears to be rare.
Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System 237
Infections may result in a severe pulmonary
arteritis and an eosinophilic or granulomatous
pneumonitis.
Clinical signs are similar to the dog but. progress
much more rapidly; signs include dyspnea
anorexia, holosystolic heart murmur, ascites,
coughing,sudden death.
·Humans
Numerous human cases have been reported; worms
may reach the pulmonary artery but. tend to die; results in
pulmonary emboli and granuloma formation around
pieces of dead worms; gives rise to coughing, dyspnea.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Dogs: antigen tests, which detect specific antigens
from adult female worms, recommended as the first.
step; most. tests detect infections that. are 7-8 months
old, infections with three (or sometimes fewer)
maturefemaleheartworms andare almost100%
specific; antigen tests generally do not detect. infec-
tions of <5 months' duration, male-only infections,
and are less accurate when <3 females are present;
follow-up tests to detect mff in the blood are per-
formed prior to chemotherapy; mff can be detected
with wet mount of blood or with various concentra-
tion techniques (preferred) including the modified
Knott's technique and filter tests; both concentrate
and filter hemolyzed blood; must differentiate mff
238 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
from those produced by Acanthocheilonema reconditum
(Table 7-1).
·Cats: difficult; low worm numbers present. are below
detection limit. of many antigen tests; tests also cannot
detect.infectionswith immature worms or infections
with only male worms; antibody detection tests are
available for screening cats for heartworm infection.
● Ferre ts: antigen tests appear to be useful for detect-
ing infections and can be used on thoracic or
abdominal effusion as well.
POSTMORTEM
· Adult worms are white, slender, 12-30 cm in length
found in pulmonary arteries, possibly heart and pos
teriorvenacava.
Treotment and Contro!
· Treatment is complicated and must be monitored
carefully; dead and degenerating worms present. post-
treatment may worsen the clinical condition; treat-
ment strategy consists of eliminating adults first,
followed by elimination of mff if present, and then
administration ofpreventives; the ivermectin monthly
preventive has been shown to be capable of killing
adult heartworms over prolonged periods of time.
· Melarsamine dihydrochloride and thiacetarsamide
ParasitesoftheCardiopufmonarySystem
239
Comparisons of Morphological and Other Characteristics of Microfilariae
Acanthocheilonema
Progressive
Button hook
feconditum
Blunt
Curved
<310
Few
<275
<240
0'9>
<5.0
Dirofilarig immitis
Numerous
Stationary
Tapered
Straight
Straight
>310
>275
>240
>6.0
>5.8
of D. immitis and A. reconditum
Head shape-Knott, filter test
Length (μum)-wet smear
Length (μm)-Knott test
Length (μm)-filter test
1sat nouy-(wrl) yip
Width (μm)-filter test
Motility—wet mount
Body—Knott test
Tail-Knott test
Characteristic
Table 7-1
240 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
worms; after adulticide therapy, ivermectin at 0.05
mg per kg or milbemycin oxime at. 0.5 mg per kg can
be used to remove mff.
●Treatment in cats is even more complicated than in dogs
because the infection appears to be self-limiting, cats are
offten not. treated or treated symptomatically
● Treatment of ferrets is marginally successful as ferrets are
at. high risk of sudden death from worm emboli.
·Several preventives are available for both dogs and
cats; ivermectin at 0.22 mg per kg has been used suc-
cessfully in ferrets for prevention.
Trematodes
Respiratory Tract
PARAGONIMUSKELLICOTT!
· Eastern North American distribution in wild mam-
mals, especially in the Mississippi River and tributar-
jes;low to moderate significance in cats,dogs;may
also occur in pigs.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
·First intermediate host: aquatic or amphibious
snails.
·Second intermediate host:crayfish;metacercariae
released from dead crayfish remain viable up to 3
weeks.
ParasitesoftheCordiopulmonarySystem
241
·Paratenic host: rodents.
● Eggs are laid in the cysts within the lungs, pass through
connecting channels to the bronchi, are coughed up,
swallowed, and passed in the feces; miracidia develop
in 2-7 weeks, hatch, and infect. snails; cercariae are
produced in 78-93 days, leave the snail, and infect the
crayfish; metacercariae become infective in 42-46
days.
● Definitive host acquires infection by ingesting infected
crayfish or metacercariae-contaminated water; meta-
cercariae penetrate the intestine, migrate across the
peritoneal cavity, penetrate the diaphragm and enter
the lungs as early as 5 days postinfection; the flukes
tend to pair up, form cysts, grow, and mature.
● Prepatent period is 30-36 days; may remain viable
for up to 4 years.
Pothogenesis ond Clinicaf Signs
·Infections may be inapparent.
· May cause eosinophilic peritonitis, pleuritis, and mul-
tifocal pleural hemorrhage during migratory phase.
· Chronic bronchiolitis, hyperplasia of bronchiole
epithelium, and chronic eosinophilic granuloma
tous pneumonia associated with degenerating eggs;
cyst rupture maylead to acute pneumothorax.
· Clinical signs may include intermittent coughing,
dyspnea, lethargy.
242 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Eggs may be found on fecal flotation or sedimenta-
tion; may also be found in direct smear of fluid
obtained fromlungs.
●Eggs are yellowish brown, 75-118 × 42-57 μum, with sin-
gle operculum surrounded by distinct rim (Figure 7-1).
POSTMORTEM
●Worms are reddish brown,7.5-16 mm in length
found in cysts within the lungs.
Treatment ond Contro!
· Albendazole at 50 mg per kg daily for 21 days,
fenbendazole at 50 mg per kg for 10-14 days, or
praziquantel at. 25 mg per kg 3 times a day for 2 days
(dogs) or 10 mg per kg daily for 10 days (cats) is effective.
·Control is impractical without indoor confinement
of animals.
Protozoa
Circulatory System
BABESIA AND THEILERIA SPP.
· Numerous species worldwide; species important. to
North America include Babesia canis (dogs), B. bigem
ina (cattle), B. caballi, and Theileria equi (horses).
Toxocara
Trichuris
Paragonimus
Figure 7-1
Fecal flotation from a dog with P. kelficotti, T. canis,
and T. vuipis (200x).
243
244Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
· Definitive host: ixodid ticks.
·Babesia:all stages of ticks can transmit. the organism;
ticks become infected when ingesting a blood meal;
gamonts fuse to form motile zygotes that invade various
tissues; those invading oocytes result in transovarial
transmission to the next. tick generation; those invad
ing salivary glands develop sporozoites that are passed
tothe mammalian host with the next blood meal;
sporozoites penetrate erythrocytes,undergo asexual
reproduction, and leave the cell to invade new cells;
eventually, some organisms form gamonts, while others
continue asexual reproduction; this cycle of reproduc
tion and infection of new cells continues until the host
controls the infection or dies; calves and colts are much
less susceptible than older animals, but. pups are more
susceptible; prepatent period is 7-14 days.
·Theileria:life cycle as for Babesia except the motile
zygotes only invade the salivary glands of the tick (no
transovariantransmission occurs solarvae cannot
transmit organisms)and sporozoites invade mam
malian lymphocytes prior to infecting erythrocytes;
prepatent. period is 12-14 days.
Pothogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
● Babesia spp.: massive destruction of erythrocytes
Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System 245
characterized by fever, anemia, and icterus; other
clinical signs include hemoglobinemia, hemoglobin-
uria (except B. caball), splenomegaly
·Theileria equi:massive destruction of erythrocytes
may include fever, depression, inappetence, anemia,
icterus, hemoglobinuria, death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Babesia spp.: may find erythrocytes with two or multi-
ples of two organisms on blood films stained with
Romanowsky stains (e.g., Giemsa); after acute phase,
specialized serologic tests are needed. Note: Babesia
bigemina has been eradicated from the United States.
·Theileria equi: may find erythrocytes with four organ-
isms in the shape of a Maltese cross on blood films
stained with Romanowsky stains (e.g., Giemsa); affter
acute phase, specialized serologic tests are needed.
Treatment and Contro!
● Dogs: no drugs are available for routine clinical use
in the United States.
● Horses: no drugs are approved for this in the United
States.
· Control is best. achieved through controlling tick
infestations.
246 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
CYTAUXZOONFELIS
●Distributed in the south-centralUnited States in
felids; sporadic occurrence, but uniformly fatal to
domestic cats.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
●Intermediatehost:Dermacentor variabilis (experimental).
· Ticks acquiring infection as nymphs transmit the
organism as adults (transstadial transmission);in
ticks, development. similar to that. of Theileria, sporo-
zoites transmitted via tick bite to definitive host,
invade mononuclear cells lining venules of lungs,
liver, spleen; grow into large meronts; merozoites
eventually penetrate red blood cells.
Pothogenesis aond Clinicaf Signs
·Infection of the mononuclear cells associated witl
the epithelia may result in partial or complete
obstructionof small and medium veinsin thelungs
spleen, and lymph nodes.
·Clinical signs include lethargy, depression, icterus,
fever followed by hypothermia in the end stages of
the disease;lymphadenopathy and splenomegalyare
uncommon; death occurs in 1-4 days after onset. of
clinical signs in domestic cats.
Parasites of the Cordiopufmonary System
247
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM AND POSTMORTEM
·●May find erythrocytes containing organisms or mononu-
clear cells with meronts on stained blood smear.
· May find meronts in macrophages in stained impres
sion smears of fine-needle aspirates of lymph node.
Treatment and Contro!
·No effective treatment. currently exists; enrofloxacin
for 10 days followed by tetracycline for 5 days was
used in one cat that apparently survived infection.
·Con trol is best. achieved by limiting tick infestations.
HEPATOZOONAMERICANUM
· Current known distribution is southeastern United
States in domestic dogs and coyotes; prevalence
unknown; moderate significance.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
·Definitive host: Amblyomma maculatum, possibly
Rhipicephalussanguineus.
● Ticks acquire infection by ingesting organisms, pre.
sumably in leukocytes, with blood meal; oocysts form
in the hemocoel.
· Dogs acquire infection by ingestion of infected ticks;
asexual reproduction occurs within muscles; further
details currently unknown.
248 Parasites of the Cardiopulmonary System
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
· Tissue stages occur predominantly in skeletal and
cardiac muscle;intense inflammatory response
accompaniesinfection.
· Clinical signs include muscle pain resulting in gait
abnormalities, depression, muscle atrophy, weak-
ness, reluctance to rise, periosteal proliferation, and
mucopurulent.ocular discharge.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
●Demonstration of organism on muscle biopsy.
● Possibly demonstrate gamonts in circulating leuko
cytes with stained blood smear.
POSTMORTEM
● Demonstration of organism on tissue section.
Treatment and contro!
· Most treatment protocols tried have some success in
clearing the parasitemia and remission of clinical
signs;however, most treatment regimens have not
prevented relapses that tend to occur 3-6 months
after treatment.
●Control is best. achieved by limiting tick infestations.
8
Parasites of other Organs
Nematodes
Eyes and Adnexo
THELAZIA SPP.
·Includes Thelazia lacrymalisin horses, T. skrjabini, and
T. gulosa in catfle, and T. californiensis in dogs, cats,
sheep, and humans.
Thelazia californiensis found in North America; others
have fairly cosmopolitan distribution; low significance.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
249
250Parasites of Other Organs
●Intermediate host: muscoid flies, including the face
fly Musca aufumnalis.
● Adult females lay L,; muscoid flies ingest larvae that
develop to infective Lg in approximately 2 weeks;
infective Lg transferred to definitive host. when fly
feeds again.
· Prepatent period is 10 days to 2 mon ths.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Generally nonpathogenic.
● Large numbers of worms may cause conjunctivitis;
infections may also be predisposing factor for bacte-
rial infections causing infectious keratoconjunctivi
tis; clinical signs of nematode infection include
lacrimation, photophobia, and opaque cornea.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEMANDPOSTMORTEM
· Adults are yellowish-white, slender, 1-2 cm in length:
found in conjunctival sac, lacrimal ducts.
Treotment and Controf
· Cattle: see Table 43.
·Dogs: ivermectin, SQ, at. 0.2 mg per kg, has been effective
· Control best achieved by proper fly control.
Parasifes of Other Organs251
Skin, Subcutaneous ond Connective Tissue
ACANTHOCHEILONEMARECONDITUM
· Distributed in areas of Europe, Africa, and North
America in canids; low significance except for need
todifferentiate from microfilariae of D.immitis
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
·Intermediate host:fleas (Ctenocephalids felis,C.canis,
Pulex irritans);also,ticks (Rhipicephalus sanguineus)
and lice ( Heterodoxus spiniger) .
 Adults produce microfilariae (mff) that circulate in
peripheral blood; flea ingests mff with blood meal;
infective L, develops in 1-2 weeks and is passed to
definitive host. with next. blood meal.
· Prepatent. period is 2-3 months.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
·Generally nonpathogenic.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Mff may be found on wet mount of blood or on
stained, direct. smear; Knott's technique or commer-
cial filter kits may be used to concentrate mff (pre
ferred); must be differentiated from D. immitis (see
Table 7-1).
252Parasites of Other Organs
POSTMORTEM
· Adults are very small and generally missed at
necropsy.
Treotment and Controf
· Generally do not treat. dogs for infection.
● Flea control will reduce the prevalence of this parasite
STEPHANOFILARIASTILES!
· Distribution includes cattle in North America; low
significance.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
●Intermediate host:horn fly (Haematobia irritans)
· Adults live in dermis of midventral abdomen; pro
duce mff that are ingested as flies feed; infective L,
develops in 18-21 days; definitive host infected when
the fly feeds again.
· Prepatent. period is 6-8 weeks.
Pothogenesis and Chinicaf Signs
· Causes circumscribed dermatitis that begins in calves
810 months old and lasts for years; lesions start as
small papules that coalesce to form larger lesions that
are moist and/or hemorrhagic; as lesions resolve, the
skin becomes thickened, dry, and hairless; eventually
the skin regains normal texture but remains hairless.
Parasites of Other Organs253
 Open lesions are usually present in catfle <3 years of age.
· Economic loss from condemnation of hides.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEMANDPOSTMORTEM
· Usually based on typical lesions on ventral midline
between navel and brisket; can find mff in a deep skin
ss s  sso  s e   ae
Treatment and Controf
· Generally do not treat catfle for infection.
· Fly control is more important. in preventing trans
mission.
ONCHOCERCA SPP.
·Includes Onchocerca cervicalis in horses and donkeys,
and O.gutturosa and O. lienalis in cattle.
·Worldwide distribution;low significance.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
·Intermediate hosts: blackflies (Simulium spp.) for O.
gutturosa and O. lienalis; biting midges (Culicoides
spp.) for O. cervicalis.
● Intermediate host ingests mff; develops to infective
L, in 2-3 weeks; definitive host infected when
infected arthropod feeds again; larvae migrate to
final sites and develop to adults.
254 Parasites of other Organs
cervicatis.
Pothogenesis and Chinicaf Signs
·Adults are nonpathogenic as are mff in cattle.
● In horses, dying mff release antigens resulting in a hyper-
sensitivity reaction; clinical signs may include alopecia
erythema, crusting with or without pruritis; must be differ-
entiated from hypersensitivity reaction to biting flies.
·Aberrant infections in or near the eye of dogs have
been reported; a few zoonotic cases have been
reported in humans in North America.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Full-thickness skin biopsy soaked in warm saline for
6-12 hours; larvae leave samples and can be found
in the sediment.
● Mff are found in the dermis of the ventral thorax and
abdomen as well as head,neck, withers, and eye (O. cer
vicalis), the neck and back (O. gutturosa), or the ventral
midline, especially near the umbilicus (O. lienalis).
POSTMORTEM
· Adults are slender, white, up to 5.5 cm in length
found in the ligamentum nuchae (O. cervicalis, O.
gutturosa) or gastrosplenic ligament (O. lienalis).
Parasites of Other Organs255
Treatment ond Contro!
·Generally do not. treat domestic animals for infection.
· A single SQ injection of ivermectin at 0.2 mg per kg
was effective in controlling dermatitis by killing mff
in horses; post-treatment. reactions to dying mff may
occur; moxidectin at 0.3-0.5 mg per kg will elimi-
nate mff from the blood of infected horses.
DRACUNCULUSINSIGNIS
· Distributed in North America in raccoons, mink,
dogs, and cats; low significance.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
● Intermediate host: copepod.
·Paratenichost:tadpoles/frogs.
· First-stage larvae are released into the water and
ingested by the copepod; develop to infective L, in
13-16 days.
·Definitive host acquires infection by drinking water
containing infected copepods or ingesting paratenic
host (may be the most. common route); larvae pene-
trate the small intestine and migrate to the subcuta
neous tissues of the thorax, abdomen, and inguinal
area; molt and mature in approximately 65 days;
males die soon after mating; females may migrate to
256Parasites of Other Organs
the subcutanous tissues of the limbs; nodules form
that ulcerate at the location of the anterior end of
the worm; whenever ulcer contacts water, the worm
projects out of the ulcer, prolapses the uterus, and
releases larvae into the water.
● Prepatent period approximately 200 days.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Clinical signs include pruritic, painful, chronic nod-
ules or abscesses, especially on the limbs or
abdomen with or without ulceration; urticaria and
fever may also occur.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM AND POSTMORTEM
· May find L, in impression smears of discharge from
lesions; larvae are 500-760 μm in length, with esopha
gus, intestinal tract, and anus, with distinctly prominent.
long, pointed tails; characteristics allow differentiation
from mff.
·Can remove adults from nodules; females are up to
120 cm in length; presence of characteristic larvae in
utero will allow differentiation from other subcuta-
neous nematodes.
Treatment ond Contro!
·Treatment consists of removalof the worm;
chemotherapy is ineffective.
Parasites of Other Organs257
· Prevent
 predation and scavenging  whenever
possible.
Peritoneum and Peritoneal Cavity
SETARIA SPP.
·Includes S. equina in equids and S. labiatopapillosa in
ruminants.
· Cosmopolitan distribution; low significance.
·Common name:abdominalworm.
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
· Intermediate host: mosquitoes.
·Adults of both species live in the peritoneal cavity of
their hosts; mff are found in the blood and ingested
by mosquitoes during a blood meal; become infec-
tive L, in 10-15 days; transmitted to definitive host
with next blood meal.
· Prepatent period is 8-10 months.
Pathogenesis and Clinicaf Signs
● Adults are nonpathogenic although can be associ-
ated with a fibrinous peritonitis.
·Migrating larval S. labiatopapillosa may reach ectopic
sites such as brain and spinal cord causing
encephalomyelomalacia of sheep and horses (not.
reported in the United States).
258Parasites of Other Organs
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Can find mff using same techniques as for A. recon-
ditum.
· Occasionally, adults may be obtained during peri-
toneal tap or found during abdominal surgery.
POSTMORTEM
● Worms are white, long, slender, 413 cm; found free in
abdominal cavity, occasionally thoracic cavity ( S. equina) 
Treatment and Contro!
● Generally do not. treat. domestic animals for infection.
Muscufoskeletaf System
TRICHINELLA SPIRALIS
· Worldwide distribution in a variety of mammals
including pigs and humans; moderate significance
to veterinary medicine but may be highly significant
to public health.
Life Cycle
·Direct.
● Unique in that the adult and infective larvae occur within
the same host with no intervening free-living stage.
●Adults live in the small intestine; females lay larvae that
penetrate the wall of the intestine and entervenules and
Parasites of Other Organs259
lymphatics; migrates via the circulatory system to skeletal
muscles; preferred sites are diaphragmatic, intercostal,
masseter, and tongue muscles; larvae enter myocytes,
ooil and grow, but. do not molt; becomes infective L, in
approximately 15 days.
· Definitive host acquires infection by eating infected
muscle tissue; larvae penetrate into the small intestinal
mucosa, molt, and mature 36-40 hours postinfection;
larviposition begins 5-6 days postinfection; adult infec-
tions are short-lived (4-6 weeks) and self-terminating.
· Sylvatic cycle involves wild carnivorous or omnivo
rous mammals and their prey species; domestic cycle
occurs when prey species, such as rats, are ingested
by pigs, dogs, or cats; human infections occur by
ingesting undercooked or raw meat such as pork,
pork products, horse, or bear meat.
Pothogenesis and Chinicaf Signs
· Larvae in the myocyte become encapsulated by a
host-derived membrane in approximately 3 mon ths;
cysts may calcify as they age but. some larvae will
remain alive for 2 or more years.
·Infections of domestic animals are generally inap-
parent; may be misdiagnosed.
● Infections in humans may be inapparent or fatal;
symptoms may include abdominal pain, diarrhea,
nausea, fever, myalgia, and malaise.
260
Parasites of Other Organs
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
·Difficult; commercial enzyme immunoassays for use
with serum, whole blood, or tissue fluids are avail-
able in the United States for testingpigs.
POSTMORTEM
● Several samples of diaphragm (total of 1-5 gm) are
pressed between glass slides and examined at
approximately 40x for larvae; de tects approximately
3 larvae per gram of muscle.
· Artificial digestion fluid can be used to break down
muscle tissue to free larvae that. can be seen in sedi-
ment with light. microscopy.
Treotment ond Contro!
· Generally do not. treat. domestic animals for infection.
· Control on-farm requires good hygiene; heat-treat. (at.
least. 60°℃ for 60 min) scraps fed to pigs; a new system
of food safety to certify pigs as free of the parasite on-
farm is being implemented in the United States.
● For humans, the best. control is proper cooking of
meat; larvae die around 57°C, so cooking of meat to
an internal temperature of 77*C is recommended;
freezing also kills larvae, but cuts must be ≤15 cm
thick and frozen at. -15°C for at least 20 days (freez-
ing does not kill some of the other species of
Trichinella such as T.nativa).
ParasifesofOtherOrgans261
Urogenitaf System
STEPHANURUSDENTATUS
·Distributed in domestic and wild pigs in tropical and
subtropical regions; locally significant in pigs raised
in outdoor situations.
· Common name: kidney worm.
Life Cycle
·Direct; indirect. with paratenic host.
● Eggs passed in urine; L, develops and hat.ches; infec-
tive L, develops in approximately 4 days; paratenic
host becomes infected by ingesting infective L3
 ae   on se  
neous route, ingestion of infective L, directly or in
paratenic host, or transplacental transmission;
ingested larvae penetrate the stomach wall, molt to
L4, and migrate to liver via portal circulation; percu-
taneous larvae molt to L, in skin and migrate to liver
via the lungs and systemic circulation; larvae migrate
in the liver for 3-9 months, molt, and penetrate the
liver capsule to migrate to the perirenal tissues and
wall of the ureters where they mature.
· Prepatent period is 9-16 months; may live 3 or more years.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Migrating larvae are more pathogenic than adults
with the liver most severely affected; hypertrophy,
cirrhosis, and thrombosis of hepatic vessels may
262Parasites of Other Organs
occur; larvae may also migrate to ectopic sites where
they are encapsulated.
·Adults are enclosed in fibrous cysts connected by
channels to ureters or renal pelvis; adults may cause
peritonitis, ure thritis, and cystitis.
● Clinical signs may include inappetence, decreased weight.
gain or weight. loss, emaciation, ascites; death is rare.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● Can find trichostrongyle-type eggs in urine sediment.
● Eggs are ellipsoidal, broad, thin-shelled, 90-120 x
43-70 μm, containing morula with 32-64 cells.
POSTMORTEM
● Adults are pinkish, stout, 2-4.5 cm in length; found
in capsules in perirenal fat, ureter walls, and adja-
cent tissues.
Treatment and Control
·See Table 41 for treatment.
● Because of the long prepatent period, can run gilts
through a single breeding cycle before egg shedding
begins; this progressively eradicates the source of infection.
DIOCTOPHYMA RENALE
· Distributed in southern Europe, North and South
ParasitesofOtherOrgans263
America in mink, marten, polecat, weasels, canids, cats;
occasionally reported in cattle, pigs, and humans.
· Common name: giant kidney worm.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
· Intermediate host: aquatic oligochete.
● Paratenic host: frogs and fish (e.g., bullhead, pike).
● Eggs are passed in the urine; L, develops within the
egg in approximately 1 month; oligochete ingests
egg containing L; develops to infective L, in 2-4
months.
·Definitive host. becomes infected by ingesting
infected oligochete or, more likely, through inges
tion of paratenic host; larvae penetrate stomach wall,
migrate through the liver and body cavity to the kid-
ney, molt, and mature to adults.
·Prepatent period: 3.5-6 months.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Larval migration through the stomach cause hemor
rhages, inflammation, and fibrosis; migration
through the liver causes necrotic tracks that fibrose;
if females remain in the abdominal cavity, they may
release large numbers of unfertilized eggs causing
peritonitis; infection of the kidney causes atrophy
and fibrosis;hydronephrosis may or may not. occur.
264Parasites of Other Organs
 s      
include abdominal and lumbar pain, inappetence
vomiting, hematuria, uremia, and polydipsia.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found in urine sediment.
● Eggs are barrel-shaped, with thick, yellow-brown, pit
plugs"), 71-84 × 46-52 μum.
POSTMORTEM
● Worms are red, very large—females are up to 1 m in
length and 1 cm in width; found in the abdominal
cavity or kidney.
Treatment ond Controf
● Treatment consists of surgical removal of the para-
site and affected kidney, if necessary.
· Prevent. predation and scavenging whenever possible.
PEARSONEMA PLICA; P. FELISCATI
· Probably worldwide in distribution in a variety of
carnivores and omnivores; low significance.
Life Cycle
· Indirect; known for P plica only.
Parasifes of Other Organs265
 Eggs are passed in the feces; infective L, develops in approx
imately 2 weeks and hatches after ingestion by earth-
worms; larval development beyond L, does not. occur.
·Definitive host acquires infection by ingesting
infectedearthworms.
Prepatent period is approximately 2 months.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Generally not pathogenic.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found in urine sediment or on fecal
flotation of urine-contaminated feces.
· Eggs are typical capillarid type, clear to yellow,
approximately 65 × 25 μm, with flattened bipolar
plugs on each end.
POSTMORTEM
· Adults live in the urinary bladder; adult. worms are hair-
like and are generally missed during gross necropsy;
rather, they may be found on histologic sections.
Treotment ond Contro!
pe sep g ry Ap Sy rad  og ie azepuaqua *
ivermectin at. 0.2 mg per kg once have been success
ful in dogs.
266
 Parasites of Other Organs
Cestodes
MuscufoskefetafSystem
TAENIA SPP.
●Includes Taenia saginata (beef tapeworm) and 7.
solium (pork tapeworm) of humans; low to moderate
significance to veterinary medicine, but highly sig-
nificant to public health.
● Worldwide distribution although T. solium has
become rare in Europe and North America.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
· Intermediate host: cattle (7. saginata); domestic and
wild swine,humans, occasionally dogs (7. solium).
·Metacestode: cysticercus.
● Taenia saginata: gravid proglottids are passed in feces
or migrate out of the anus; eggs are shed from
proglottid; cattle become infected by ingesting eggs
when feeding; oncospheres leave eggs, penetrate
intestinal wall, and travel to cardiac and skeletal mus-
cles via the circulatory system; cysticerci develop and
become infective in 8-16 weeks; live up to 2 years;
dead cysticerci may calcify; occasionally, may find cys
ticerci in brain, lungs, liver, and other sites; humans
acquire infection by ingesting undercooked or raw
beef; scavenging birds may disseminate eggs.
ParasitesofOtherOrgans267
●Taenia solium: similar to T. saginata; cysticerci may be
found in striated muscle, heart, liver, lung, kidney,
subcutaneous tissues, CNS; become infective in
10-12 weeks; may survive lifelong in the pig; humans
are definitive host but. can also become infected with
cysticerci by release of eggs from gravid proglottids
transferred to the stomach from the duodenum by
ticercosis or ocular cysticercosis may result.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
·Infection with both adult and metacestode stages is
usually inapparent.
·In dogs, infections with cysticerci of T. soliaum may
result in neurologic disorders and death as a result
of localizing in the brain.
·In humans, infections with cysticerci of T. solium may
interfere with vision or cause neurologic disorders
and death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
·Can differentiate gravid proglottids of T. solium from
those of T. saginata; however, it is unlikely the practi-
tioner would be asked to do so.
·Serodiagnostic tests have been developed for pre
slaughter diagnosis of infections in pigs in countries
outside the United States.
268Parasites of Other Organs
POSTMORTEM
·Cysticercus of T. saginata is white, ovoid, fluid-filled
up to l cm in diameter; invaginated scolex does not
have a rostellum or hooks; dead, calcifying cysticerci
are difficult to identify.
●Cysticercus of T. solium is white, ovoid, fluid-filled, up
to 1.8 cm in diameter; invaginated scolex has a ros
tellum and hooks; dead cysticerci can be recognized
by the presence of hooks.
Treotment ond Contro!
· Treatment of domestic animals for larval cestodes is
generally not. attempted.
· Control methods include proper hygiene to prevent
contamination of feed and water with human feces.
Trematodes
Liver
FASCIOLA HEPATICA
· Worldwide distribution in ruminants, pigs, and
horses; occasionally in humans; distribution in
North America cen ters on the Gulf Coast/southeast-
ern states, Pacific Northwest (including Montana),
and eastern Canada; highly significant to veterinary
medicine; low significance to public health.
·Common name: liver fluke.
Parasites of Other Organs 269
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
· Intermediate host: lymnaeid snails; require neutral,
poorly drained soil.
· Eggs are passed with bile to intestine and out with
the feces; miracidia develop in 10-12 days; require
water to hatch; penetrate snail, undergo asexual
development and produce cercariae in 1-2 months;
one miracidium into a snail equals several hundred
cercariae out of snail; leave and attach to vegetation
where encyst becoming metacercariae; cercariae
may also overwinter in snail.
·Definitive host. acquires infection by ingesting metacer
cariae on vegetation; fluke penetrates the small intes-
tine to abdominal cavity, migrates to and penetrates
   o s    
weeks and then enters bile ducts and matures.
● Prepatent period is 8-12 weeks; may live for several
years.
· In temperate regions, carrier animals important in
appear during late summer into fall.
· In mild regions, infected snails may overwinter;
metacercariae may appear during spring to early sum-
mer; spring occurrence depends on moisture and
snail activity the preceding fall; carrier animals also
important in maintaining pasture contamination.
270
Parasites of Other Organs
Pothogenesis and Chinicaf Signs
● Migration of immature flukes causes traumatic hep
atitis and hemorrhage; anemia may result; migratory
tracts eventually heal by fibrosis.
·Adults ingest. blood and may also cause anemia; pres
ence of adults causes extensive proliferation of the
bile duct. epithelium, cholangitis, and necrosis of the
ductal wall; fibrosis of the lamina propria of the bile
duct occurs that may eventually calcify
·Clinicaldisease occurs in four forms:
1.Acute—caused by short-term intake of massive
numbers of metacercariae that invade the liver all
at once; clinical signs include inappetence，
weight loss, abdominal pain, anemia, ascites,
depression, sudden death; course is only a few
days; occursprimarily in sheep andgoats.
2. Subacute—also caused by intake of massive num-
bers of metacercariae, but. over a longer period of
time; clinical signs include inappetence, decreased
weight gain or weight. loss, progressive hemor-
rhagic anemia, liver failure, and death; course is
48weeks.
3. Chronic—caused by intake of moderate numbers
of metacercariae over an extended period of
fime; clinical signs include decreased feed intake
and weight. gain, reduced milk yield, anemia,
emaciation, submandibular edema, ascites; catfle
tend to exhibit. chronic disease.
Parasites of Other Orgons271
4. Subclinical—caused by intake of low numbers of
metacercariae over a long period of time; moderate
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● May find eggs on fecal sedimentation during chronic and
subclinical infections, possibly subacute infections also.
● Eggs are oval, operculate, yellow, 130-150 x 65-90 μum.
POSTMORTEM
· Mature flukes may be found within the bile ducts;
flukes are leaf-shaped, greenish-brown, 2-4 × 1-1.5
cm; with conical anterior end and shoulders.
● Immature flukes (up to 7 mm in length) may be dif
ficult to find within the liver parenchyma; requires
sequential slicing of the liver and expressing flukes
from cut surfaces.
Treatment ond Controf
· See Table 43 for treatment. of cattle; albendazole at
7.5 mg per kg in sheep and 15 mg per kg in goats has
been used.
· Strategic use of anthelmintics is cornerstone of con-
trol programs; purpose is to remove parasites before
shedding that subsequently contaminates pastures;
the timing, frequency, and choice of anthelmintic
272
Parasites of Other Organs
vary based on the transmission patterns in each geo
graphic region.
● Grazing management should avoid high-risk areas
during periods of transmission; may need to fence
off areas of snail habitat; control of snails themselves
through draining of habitat. or use of molluscicides
is impractical in most. cases.
FASCIOLOIDES MAGNA
· Distributed in North America, central Europe, Mex
ico, and South Africa; cervids are the usual definitive
hosts; cattle, sheep, and goats may be accidentally
infected; low to moderate significance.
· Common name: large American liver fluke
Life Cycle
+ Indirect.
●Intermediate host: freshwater lymnaeid snails.
● In cervid definitive host, life cycle is essentially as for
E hepatica.
● Prepatent period is approximately 8 months.
● Patency is generally not achieved in cattle or sheep
(see Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs).
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Cervids: infections are inapparent; flukes are encap
sulated by a thin-walled cyst with channels to the bile
ducts; eggs leave the cysts via these channels.
Parasites of Other Orgons273
· Catfle: infections tend to be inapparent; flukes reach
the liver and are encapsulated in cysts that usually do
not communicate with the bile ducts; eggs generally
are not passed out of cysts.
· Sheep, goats: flukes tend to migrate continuously
within the liver as well as to ectopic sites such as the
lungs; traumatic hepatitis results, which is fatal
before flukes mature.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· May find eggs on fecal sedimentation of deer feces;
eggs are oval, operculate, yellow, 110-160 × ~ 75 μm.
POSTMORTEM
· Mature flukes may be found in cysts in liver of
cervids and cattle or within the liver parenchyma or
other organs of sheep and goats; flukes are leaf-
shaped with no demarcated anterior cone, thick, up
to 10 cm in length by 2.5 cm in width.
Treatment and Contro!
· Clorsulon at 20 mg per kg in both sheep and cattle
has been used.
· Prevention is best. achieved by not. grazing sheep in
endemic areas; avoid grazing catftle in high-risk areas
during transmission.
274Parasites of Other Organs
DICROCOELIUMDENDRITICUM
●Worldwide distribution, except. Australia, in cattle, sheep
and goats; sporadic occurrence, moderate significance.
Life Cycle
· Indirect.
· First intermediate host: terrestrial snails.
· Second intermediate host: ants.
· Embryonated eggs are passed with the feces and
ingested by snails; cercariae develop in 34 months, are
shed by the snail, and clump together in slime-balls;
ants eat slime-balls and metacercariae form in 26-62
days; most. develop in the hemocoel, but. some lodge in
the subesophageal ganglion; this causes tetanic spasms
of the mouthparts as temperatures decrease, which
locks the ant onto herbage overnight; ants are then
available to grazing animals the following morning
● Definitive host acquires infection by ingesting ant.
containing metacercariae; flukes enter the liver by
migrating up the bile ducts from the small intestine.
● Prepatent. period is 47-54 days; may live for 6 years
orlonger.
Pothogenesis ond Clinicaf Signs
·Pathologic changes increase in severity as infection
increases in age; advanced infections can cause
hepatic cirrhosis and proliferation of bile duct
epithelium.
Parasites of Other Organs275
· Clinical signs in young animals are usually not pres-
ent; in sheep, may cause anemia, edema, decreased
wool production, and lactation.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal sedimentation.
 Eggs are brown, operculated, oval, 36-46 × 10-20 μum,
containing miracidia; operculum may be difficult to see.
POSTMORTEM
· The flukes are flattened, leaflike, 6-10 x 1.5-2.5
mm; found in bile ducts; because of their small size,
they may be missed at necropsy.
Treotment and Contro!
· Generally do not treat domestic animals for infec
tion; if heavy infections are present, can use alben-
dazole at. 15-20 mg per kg once or 7.5 mg per kg
once and repeated 2-3 weeks later; fenbendazole at.
100-150 mg per kg has also been used.
PLATYNOSOMUMFASTOSUM
·Distributed in southern North America through
Central and South America, West. Africa, Malaysia.
and Pacific Islands in cats; usually low significance
except. inhighly endemic areas.
276
Parasites of Other Organs
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
●First. intermediate host: terrestrial snails.
● Second intermediate host: sowbugs, woodlice,
lizards.
●Paratenic host: lizards, frogs.
· Embryonated eggs are passed with the feces and
ingested by snails; sporocysts containing cercariae
are shed by snail and ingested by second intermedi-
ate host. in which metacercariae form.
● Cats acquuire infection by ingesting infected lizards (hence
the name “lizard poisoning disease"); flukes migrate
from the small intestine up the common bile duct.
· Prepatent. period is 2-3 months.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
● Infections are usually inapparent with only a short.
term inappetence occurring.
·Heavy infections can cause proliferative cholangitis
and cirrhosis.
·Clinicalsigns
s may include anorexia, icterus,
enlarged liver, diarrhea, vomiting, and death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
· Eggs may be found on fecal sedimentation; fecal
flotation may be ineffective.
ParasitesofOtherOrgans277
0 x 0-    1  
μm, containing miracidia.
POSTMORTEM
·Adults live in bile ducts, gallbladder, and pancreas;
worms are very small and generally not seen at
necropsy; rather, may find them on histologic section.
Treatment and Contro!
 Praziquantel at 20 mg per kg has been used.
· Prevent. predation and scavenging whenever possible.
Protozoa
Urogenital System
IRITRICHOMONASFOETUS
●Worldwide distribution in cattle; moderate significance
Life Cycle
· Direct.
● Transmitted by coitus; in cows, parasites first multi-
ply in secretions of the vagina (2 weeks), then the
uterus; in bulls, parasites colonize the secretions of
the epithelial lining of the penis, prepuce, and distal
ure thra; prevalence increases in bulls >4 years old.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
● Bulls: infection is inapparent; remains infected for
life.
278Parasites of Other Organs
·Cows: causes vaginitis and endometritis; clinical signs
include early embryonic death, abortion, pyometra.
fetal maceration, or infertility; infection is self-limiting
with clearance occurring within 20 weeks of primary
infection and 10 weeks of secondary infection.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEMANDPOSTMORTEM
·Examination of wet mounts and/or stained smears
of bull smegma, vaginal secretions or washings, or
aborted material for organisms; may want to culture
material to increase numbers; because nonpatho
genic trichomonads live in the intestinal tract, must
be careful not. to contaminate sample with feces.
● Organisms are pear-shaped, 10-25 × 3-15 μm, with
three anterior flagella, undulating membrane, and
trailing posterior flagellum
· A single positive test. is adequate to diagnose herd
infections but three or more negative tests are neces
sary to ensure individual bulls are not infected.
Treotment and Controf
· Generally do not treat catfle for infection.
●Control measures: replace older bulls with younger bulls
do not borrow or lease bulls; culture all newly purchased
bulls regardless of age and bulls 2 weeks after the breed.
Parasites of Other Organs 279
insemination whenever possible using semen from a facil-
ity that tests for the parasite; vaccinate cows and heifers if
the threat. of exposure is unavoidable.
Liver
HISTOMONASMELEAGRIDIS
·Worldwide distribution in gallinaceous birds; locally
significant in free-ranging birds.
· Common name: blackhead.
LifeCycle
·Direct; indirect with Heterakis gallinarum or earth-
worm paratenichost.
Trophozoites are passed in the feces or in the eggs of
H. gallinarum (nematodes ingest trophozoites that.
infect. oocytes); primary means of transmission is
ingestion of trophozoites in eggs of H. gallinarum or
in eggs of H. gallinarum in earthworms; trophozoites
die quickly (within hours) but. it is possible they can
be ingested with contaminated food or water.
·Remains in flagellated form in cecal lumen approxi-
mately l  week;  penetrates subepithelial tissues
appearing as a round form without flagellum; car
ried via circulation to liver 10-12 days postinfection.
Pothogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Chickens: nonpathogenic.
280
ParasitesofOtherOrgans
· Turkeys: causes inflammation and ulcers in the ceca;
cores of necrotic tissue, exudate, and parasites plug
ceca; in liver, causes characteristic circular, yellow-
green areas of necrosis with a depressed center;
clinical signs include depression, inappetence, sul-
fur-colored droppings, cyanosis of the head (hence
the common name),death.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
·None.
POSTMORTEM
● Examination of fresh or fixed impression smears
obtained from the edge of cecal or liver lesions for
organisms; may also be able to find organisms in his
tological sections.
Ireatment ond Contro!
· Modern, intensive management has decreased the
incidence of this parasite; separate turkeys from
chickens and poults from adults; avoid contami
nated ground and adhere to strict sanitation; reuse
treat chickens for H. meleagridis.
ParasitesofOtherOrgans281
Nervous System
SARCOCYSTIS NEURONA
· Distribution limited to Canada, North, Central and
Life Cycle
·Indirect.
·Intermediate host:unknown.
· Definitive host are opossums; horses presumed to
acquire infection by ingesting infective sporocysts;
parasite localizes in CNS; parasite apparently does
not develop to the infective stage in equids and they
are considered dead-end hosts.
· Overall, seroprevalence is approximately 50%, but.
can be as high as 80% in older animals; true inci-
dence of clinical disease is unknown, but much lower
than seroprevalence.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
· Causes a necrotizing encephalomyelitis; affects both
white and gray matter.
· Clinical signs vary depending on the location of the
organisms; may include ataxia, paresis, rapid muscle
atrophy, head tilt, muzzle deviation, dysphagia.
282
ParasitesofotherOrgans
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
● No single definitive diagnostic test exists; Western
blot assay for S. neurona antibody in CSF indicates
exposure.
POSTMORTEM
● Difficult; gross lesions (yellowish or red swollen
areas) in neural tissue may or may not be present;
may or may not be able to identify organism in his-
tologic sections.
Treotment ond Contro!
· Treatment may or may not be effective; for treat-
ment protocol, consult the current literature.
● Prevention is based on eliminating sporocyst con-
tamination of feed and water.
Glossary
Aberrant Host: Host in which parasite can develop, but the tim-
ing is prolonged or the numbers that establish are low.
Aberrant Parasite: Parasite that wanders from its usual site of
definitive host.
Abnormal Host: Host in which the parasite does not fuully
develop (e.g., Sarcocystis neurona in horses).
Acariasis: Infestation with ticks or mites.
Arrestecl Development Temporary cessation of larval development
occuwring in nematodes; may occur at the L, stage (e.g., Ancy
lostoma),the early Ly stage (e.g., Ostertagia, small strongyles), or
the immature aclult stage (e.g., Dictyocaulus).
Bot Fly: Refers to adults of the grub-like dipterous larvae that
parasitize mammals.
Commensalism: Symbiotic relationship in which one member
benefits and the other neither benefits nor is harmed.
Complex(Complete) Metamorphosis:In arthropods,develop
mental stages do not resemble the adult stage.
283
284Glossary
Definitive Host:Host inwhich the sexually mature parasite
OCcurs.
Direct Life Cycle: Cycle in which no intermediate host is
needed for transmission of the parasite from one defini-
tive host to another
Ectoparasite: Parasite that lives on the body of its host.
Endloparasite: Parasite that lives within the body of its host.
Facultative Parasite: Organisms that are normally nonparasitic
(free-living), but can become parasitic in certain hosts or
wder certain circumstances.
Indirect Life Cycle: Cycle in which one or more intermediate
or paratenic hosts are needed for transmission of the par
asitefromonedefinitivehosttoanother
Infective Stage: The developmental stage of a parasite that is
capable of establishing in the definitive host.
Intermeciate Host: Host in which preadult or asexually repro
ducing stages of the organism occur; intermediate hosts
are required for the completion of the life cycle of the par-
asite (e.g., mosquitoes for Diroflaria immitis).
Metacestodle: Refers to the developmental stages of tapeworm
within the intermediate host.
Mutualism: Symbiotic relationship in which both organisms
benefit.
Myiasis: Infestation with fly larvae; may be obligatory (animal host
is wquired for completion of the life cycle) or facultative (ani
mal host is not required for completion of the life cycle).
Obligatory Parasite: Organisms that cannot lead a totally free
living existence.
Parasitism: Symbiotic relationship in which one member, the
parasite, lives on or within the other member and derives
Glossary 285
nutntonalbeneht fromthe other member;the relaton
ship is usually considered harmful to the other member.
Paratenic Host: Host in which the parasite stage or stages can
live but in which little or no development occurs; host is
not required in order for the parasite to complete its life
cycle (e.g., mice for Toxocara mystax).
Pediculosis: Infestation with lice.
Phoresis: Symbiotic relationship in which one member is
mechanically carnied by the other member.
Prepatent Period: The time from acquisition of the infective
stage of a parasite to detection of the diagnostic stage;
vanies with, among other things, the technique used to
detect the diagnostic stage and numbers of reproductively
active parasites.
Pseurdoparasite: Objects that are present in feces that may be
mistaken for parasitic stages.
Simple (Incomplete) Metamorphosis: In arthropods,develop-
mental stages do resemble the adult stage.
Site: The tissue, organ, or part of the host where the parasite is
normally found.
Species: An interbreeding population that is reproductively iso
lated from other such populations.
Symbiosis: Any association, either temporary or permanent,
between two or more living organisms of different species.
Transovarial Transmission: Pathogen acquired by adult female
ticks infects the ovaries and passes with the eggs to the lar-
vae; important for one-host ticks.
Transstacdial Transmission: Pathogen acquired by tick remains
in it as it molts from one stage to the next; important for
two- or three-host ticks.
286Glossary
Vector: Arthropod that transmits a pathogen from one host to
another. Two types: (1) mechanical vector—transmits
infective organism to recipient without development or
multiplication of the organism; and (2) biological vec
tor—infective organisms undergo development prior to
tansmission to the next host.
Warble: A subcutaneous swelling in which the larva of certain
bot flies lives (e.g.,Hypoderma).
Zoonosis: Any disease or parasite that is transmissible from ani-
mals to humans.
References and Suggested Reading
Anderson DL, Roberson EL. Gastrointestinal and respiratory
parasitism in Georgia goats. Agri- Practice 1996;17:20-24.
Anderson RC.NematodeParasites ofVertebrates:TheirDevelopmentand
Transmissiom. Wallingford, CT: CAB International; 1992.
Arrioja-Dechert A, ed. Compendium of Veterinary Products. Sth ed.
Port Huron: North Amenican Compendiums; 1999.
Atkinson R, Harper PAW, Reichel MP, Ellis JT. Progress in the
serodiagnosis of Neospora caninum infections of cattle. Par
asitof Today 2000;16:110-114.
Barger IA. Influence of sex and reproductive status on suscep-
tibility of ruminants to nematode parasitism. Int / Parasitot
1993;23:463-469.
Barr SC, Jamrosz GF, Hombuckle WE, Bowman DD, Fayer R.
Use of paromomycin for treatment of cryptosporidiosis in
a cat. / Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;205:1742-1743.
Barriga OO. Veterinary Parasitology for Practitioners. 2nd ed.
Edina: Burgess Publishing, 1997.
287
288 References and Suggested Reading
Baudena MA, Chapman MR, French DD, Kei TR. Seasonal
development and suwrvival of equine cyathostome larvae on
pasture in south Louwisiana. Vet Parasitol 2000;88:51-60.
Bello TR, Abell JE. Are equine tapeworms an emerging disease? A
retrospective study. / Equine Vet Sci 1999;19:723-727.
Bent BG, Carter WG, Tobin T. Diagnosing equine protozoal
myeloencephalitis: complicating factors. Compm Contin
EducPract Vet1999;21:975-981.
Beyer TA, Pinckney RD, Cooley AJ. Massive Dracuncuius insignis
infection in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999;214:366-368
Bowman DD. Georgis’Parasitology for Veterinarians. 7th ed.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1999.
Brawmer Jr. WR, Dillon AR, Robertson-Plouch CK, Guerrero J
Radiographic diagnosis of feline heartworm disease and cor-
relation to other clinical cnitenia resuts of a muticenter clin-
ical case study. Vt Ther: Res Appl Vet Med 2000;1:81-87.
Bredal WP. Pneumonyssoides caninum infection—a risk factor for
gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs. Vet Res Commun
1998;22:225-231.
Bredal W, Vollset I. Use of milbemycin oxime in the treatment
of dogs with nasal mite (Pneumonyssoides caninum) infec-
tion./SmallAnimPract1998;39:126-130
Burks BS. Parasitic pneumonitis in horses. Compn Contin Educ
Pract Vt1999;20:378-383.
Buxton D. Protozoan infections (Toxoplasma gondi, Neospora
caninum and Sarcocystis spp.) in sheep and goats: recent
advances. Vet Res 1998;29:289-310.
References and Suggested Reading 289
Campbell BG. Trichuris and other thichinelloid nematodes of
dogs and cats in the United States. Compen Contin Educ
Pract Vet 1991;13:769-778.
Chartier C, Mallereau M-P, Nacini M. Prophylaxis using paro
momycin of natural cryptosponidial infection in neonatal
kids.Prewent Vet Med1996;25:357-361.
Chen C.A short-tailed demodectic mite and Demodex canis infesta-
fioninaChihuahua dog.VtDermatof1995;6:227-229
Chesney CJ. Short form of Demodex species mite in the dog:
occurrence and measurements. J Small Anim Pract
1999;40:58-61.
Clyde VS. Practical treatment and control of common ectopar-
asites in exotic pets. Vet Med 1996;91:632-637.
Clyde VS. Practical treatment and control of common
endoparasites in exotic pets. Vet Med 1996;91:638-647.
Coles GC, Pearson GR. Gasterophilus nasalis infection: preva-
lence and pathological changes in equids in south-west
England. Vet Rec 2000;146:222-223.
Coles GC, Brown SN, Trembath CM. Pyrantel-resistant large
strongyles in racehorses. Vet Rec 1999;145:408.
Conboy G.Giardia.CanVet/1997;38:245-247.
Corwin RM, Nahm J. Veterinary Parasitology Website. 1997, last
updated 1/10/00, URL:http:www.parasitology.org.
Craig TM. Coccidiosis in small ruminants. In: Weide KC, Weide
KD,eds. Small Ruminants for the Mixed Animal Practitioner.
Las Vegas: Westerm Veteninary Conference; 1998:41-45.
290Refererces and Suggested Reading
Craig TM. Ectoparasites of small ruminants. In: Weide KC,
WeideKD,eds.Small Ruminants for theMixed AnimalPracti
tiomer. Las Vegas: Western Veteninary Conference; 1998:
46-50.
Curtsinger DK, Carpenter JL, Turner JL. Gastnitis caused by
Aonchotheca putorii in a domestic cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1993;203:1153-1154.
Dangjin L. Study on a new egg count technique for Macracan-
thorhynchushirudinaceus andAscaris suum.Vet Parasitot
1996;61:113-117.
Deem SL. Infectious and parasitic diseases of raptors. Compen
ContinEducPractVet1999;21:329-338
Delucchi L, Castro E. Use of doramectin for treatment of
notoedric mange in five cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;216:
215-216.
Denegni GM. Review of oribatid mites as intermediate hosts of
tapeworms of the Anoplocephalidae. Exp Appl Acarol 1993;
17:567-580.
Desch Jr. CE, Stewart TB. Demodex gatoi: new species of hair fol-
licle mite (Acani: Demodecidae) from the domestic cat
(Carnivora: Felidae). J Med Entomol 1999;36:167-170.
Dillon R. Clinical significance of feline heartworm disease. Vet
ClinNAm:SmallAnimPract199828:1547-1564
Divers TJ, Bowman DD, de LaHunta A. Equine protozoal
myeloencephalitis: recent advances in diagnosis and treat
ment. Vet CE Advisor, Suppl Vet Med 2000:17.
Dryden MW. Biology of fleas of dogs and cats. Compen Contin
EducPract Vet 1993;15:569-578.
References and Suggested Reading 291
Dubey JP. Intestinal protozoa infections. Vt Clin N Am: Small
AnimPract1993;21:37-55
Dubey JP. Advances in the life cycle of Toxoplasma gondii. Int J
Parasitol1998;28:1019-1024.
Dubey JP. Neosporosis in cattle: biology and economic impact.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999;214:1160-1163.
Dubey JP. Recent advances in Neospora and neosporosis. Vet Par-
asito1999;84:349-367
Dubey JP. Toxoplasmosis. In: Howard JL, Smith RA, eds. Current
Veterinary Therapy 4: Food A nimal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saumders; 1999:431-433.
Dubey JP. Sarcocystosis. In: Howard JL, Smith RA, eds. Current
Veterinary Therapy 4: Food A nimal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saumders;1999:433-435.
neosporosis. Vet Parasitol 1996;67:1-59.
Dubey JP, Lindsay DS. Isolation in immunodeficient mice of
Sarcocystis neurona from opossum (Didelphis virginiana) fae
ces, and its differentiation from Sarcocystis falcatula. Int J
Parasitol1998:28:1823-1828.
Eberhard ML, Brandt FH. The role of tadpoles and frogs as
paratenic hosts in the life cycle of Dracuncuius insignis
(Nematoda: Dracunculoidea). / Parasitol 1995;81:792-793.
Eberhard ML, Ortega Y, Dial S, Schiller CA, Sears AW, Greiner
E. Ocular Onchocerca infections in two dogs in western
United States.VtParasitol2000;90:333-338.
Engelbrecht NE, Yeatts RP, Slansky F. Palpebral myiasis causing
preseptal cellulitis. Arch Ophthaimo/1998;116:684.
292 References and Suggested Reading
Eysker M. Dictyocaulosis in cattle. Compen Contin Educ Pract Vet
1994;16:669-675.
Fayer R, Ellis W. Paromomycin is effective as prophylaxis for
cryptosporidiosis in dairy calves./ Parasitol 1993;
79:771-774.
Fayer R, Speer CA, Dubey JP. The general biology of Cryp
tosporidium. In: Fayer R, ed. Cryptosporidium and Cryp
tosporidiosis. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1997:1-41.
Fenger CK, Granstrom DE, Langemeier JL, Stamper S, Don-
ahue JM, Patterson JL, Gajadhar AA, Marteniuk JV,
Xiaomin A, Dubey JP. Identification of opossums (Didelphis
virginiana) as the putative definitive host of Sarcocystis net
rona.J Parasitol1995;81:916-919.
Giovengo SL. Canine dracunculiasis. Compem Contin Educ Pract
Vt 1993;15:726-729.
Goddard J. Human infestation with rodent botfly larvae: a new
route of entry? South Med /1997;90:254-255
Goodwin J-K The serologic diagnosis of heartworm infection
in dogs and cats. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 1998;13:83-87.
1998;20:14-16
de Graaf DC, Vanopdenbosch E, Ortega-Mora LM, Abbassi H,
Peeters JE. A review of the importance of cryptosponidio
sis in farm animals. Int / Parasitol 1999;29:1269-1287.
Gunarsson LK, Moller LC, Einarsson AM, Zakrisson G, Hagman
BGJ, Christensson DA, Uggla AH, Hedhammar AA. Clinical
efficacy of milbemycin oxime in the teatment of nasal mite
infecion in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999;35:81-84.
References ond Suggested Reading 293
Harrell LW, Deardorff TL. Human nanophyetiasis: transmis
sion by handling naturally infected coho salmon
(Oncorhynchus kisutch). J Infect Dis 1990;161:146-148.
Hendnix CM. Helminthic infections of the feline small and
large intestines: diagnosis and treatment. Vet Med 1995;
90:456-472
Hendnix CM. Identifying and controlling helminths of the
feline esophagus, stomach, and liver. Vet Med 1995;
90:473-476.
Hendnix CM. Diagnostic Veterinary Parasitology. 2nd ed. St. Louis:
Mosby; 1998.
Herd RP. Cestode infections in cattle, sheep, goats, and swine.
In: Howard JL, Smith RA, eds. Current Veterinary Therapy 4:
Food Animal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1999:
560-561.
Herd RP. Trematode infections in cattle, sheep, and goats. In:
Howard JL, Smith RA, eds. Current Veterinary Therapy 4:
Food Animal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders;
1999:557-560
Herd RP, Zajac AM. Nematode infections in cattle, sheep,
goats, and swine. In: Howard JL, Smith RA, eds. Current Vet-
erinaryTherapy4:FoodAnimalPractice.Philadelphia:W.B
Saunders; 1999:545-557.
Hutchens DE, Paul AJ, DiPietro JA. Treatment and control of
gastrointestinal parasites.Vet Clin N Am: Equine Pract
1999:15:561-573
Johnson EH, Windsor U, Muirhead DE, King GJ, Al-Busaidy R.
Confirmation of the prophylactic value of paromomycin
294 References and Suggested Reading
in a natural outbreak of capnine cryptosponidiosis. Vet Res
Commun2000:24:63-67
Johnson RC. Canine spirocercosis and associated esophagea
sarcoma.CompenContinEducPractVet1992:14:577-580
Jordan ME, Courtney CH. Equine tapeworm. Equine Pract
1999;21:10-14.
Kassai T. Vterinary Heiminthology. Oxford: Butterworth-Heine
mann;1999.
Kazacos KR. Baylisascaris larva migrans. J Am Vet Med Assod
1989;195:894-903
Kemmerer DW.Heartworm disease in the domestic ferret.In
Seward RL,ed.Recent Aduances in Heartworm Disease:Sym
posium "98. Batavia, IL: American Heartworm Society;
1998:87-89.
Kennedy MJ. Prevalence of eyeworms (Nematoda: The-
lazioidea) in beef cattle grazing different range pasture
zones in Alberta, Canada. / Parasitof1993;79:866-869
Kennedy Mf. The effect of treating beef cattle on pasture with
ivermectin on the prevalence and intensity of Thelaxia spp.
(Nematoda: Thelazioidea) in the vector, Musca autumnalis
(Diptera:Muscidae)./ Parasitol1994;80:321-326
Kennedy MJ, MacKinnon JD. Site segregation of Theiazia shr
jabini and Thelaxia gulosa (Nematoda:Thelazioidea) in the
eyes of cattle. / Parasitot 1994;80:501-504.
Kennedy MJ, Phyllips FE. Efficacy of doramectin against eye
worms (Thelazia spp.) in naturally and experimentally
infected cattle. Vet Parasitol 1993;49:61-66.
References ond Suggested Reading 295
Kirkpatrick CE, Nelson GR. Ivermectin treatment of urinary
capillariasis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;191:701-702.
Kittel DR, Campero C, Van Hoosear KA, Rhyan JC, BonDurant
RH. Comparison of diagnostic methods for detection of
active infection with Tritrichomonas foetus in beef heifers. J
AmVet MedAssoc1998;213:519-522.
Knight DH, Lok JB. Seasonality of heartworm infection and
implications for chemoprophylaxis. Clin Tech Small Anim
Pract 1998;13:77-82.
Kocan AA, Breshears M, Cummings C, Panciera Rl, Ewing SA.
Barker RW. Naturally occurring hepatozoonosis in coyotes
from Oklahoma./ Wildl Dis 1999;35:86-89
Kocan AA, Cummings CA, Panciera RG, Mathew JS, Ewing SA
Barker RW. Naturally occurring and experimentally trans-
mitted Hepatozoon americanum in coyotes from Oklahoma.
J Wildl Dis 2000;36:149-153.
Kvasnicka WG, Hall MR, Hanks DR. Bovine trichomoniasis. In:
Howard JL, Smith RA, eds. Current Veterinary Therapy 4:
Food Animal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B.Saunders;
1999:420-425.
Leib MS, Zajac AM. Giardiasis in dogs and cats. Vet Med
1999;94:793-802
Lemanie SL.Canine demodicosis.Compen Contin Educ Pract Vet
1996;18:354368
Lillehoj HS, Lillehoj EP. Avian coccidiosis. A review of acquired
intestinal immunity and vaccination strategies. Avian Dis
2000;44:408-425.
296 References and Suggested Reading
Lindsay DS, Upton SJ, Owen DSS, Morgan UM, Mead JR, Blag
burn BL. Cryptosporidium andersoni n. sp. (Apicomplexa)
Cryptosporidiae) from cattle, Bos taurus. J Eukaryot Micro
biol2000;47:91-95.
Little SE. Adult tapeworms in horses: clinical significance. Com
pen ContinEducPractVet1999;21:356-360.
Lloyd JE. Flies, lice, and grubs. In: Howard JL, Smith RA, eds.
CurrentVeterinaryTherapy 4:FoodAnimalPractice.Philadel
phia: W.B. Saunders; 1999:706-713.
Love S, Murphy D, Mellor D. Pathogenicity of cyathostome
infection. Vt Parasitol 1999,85:113-122.
Lun Z-R, Gajadhar AA. A simple and rapid method for staining
Tritrichomonasfoetus and Trichomonasvaginalis.JVetDiagn
Invest1999;11:471-474.
Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Drudge JH. Historical perspective of
cyathostomes: prevalence, treatment, and control pro
grams. Vet Parasitol 1999;85:97-112.
Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Collins SS, Drudge JH, Granstrom DE.
Transmission of some species of intermal parasites in horses
born in 1993, 1994, and 1995 on the same pasture on a
farm in central Kentucky. Vet Parasitot 1997;70:225-240.
McAllister MM, Dubey JP, Lindsay DS, Jolley WT, Wills RA,
McGuire AM. Dogs are definitive hosts of Neospora can
inum. Int/ Parasitol1998;28:1473-1478.
McCall JW. Dirofilaniasis in the domestic ferret. Clin Tech Small
Anim Pract1998;13:109-112
MacKay RJ. Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis. Vet Clin N Am:
EquinePract 1997;1:79-96.
References and Suggested Reading 297
McKenna PB. Anthelmintic resistance in cattle nematodes in
New Zealand: is it increasing? N Z Vet / 1996;44:76
McKenna PB. Comparative evaluation of two emigration/sedi
mentation techniques for the recovery of dictyocaulid and
protostrongylid larvae from faeces. Vet Parasitol 1999;
80:345-351.
Madden A, Pinckney RD, Forrest LJ. Canine paragoninosis. Vet
Med1999;94:783-791.
Mansfield LS, Schad GA. Ivermectin treatment of naturally
acquired and experimentally induced Strongyioides sterco
ralis infections in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;
201:726-730.
Markovics A, Medinski B. Improved diagnosis of low intensity
Spirocerca lupi infection by the sugar flotation method. J Vet
Diagn Invest 1996;8:400-401.
Marks SL,Moore MP, Rishniw M.Pneumonyssoides caninum: the
canine nasal mite. Compen Contin Educ Pract Vet 1994;16:
577-582.
Marsh AE, Barr BC, Packham AE, Conrad PA. Descniption of a
new Neospora species (Protozoa: Apicomplexa: Sarcocysti-
dae). / Parasitol 1998;84:983-991.
Mathew JS, Ewing SA, Panciera RJ, Woods JP. Expenimental
transmission of Hepatozoon americanum Vincent-Johnson et
al., 1997 to dogs by the Gulf Coast tick, Amblyomma macula-
tum Koch.VtParasitof1998;80:1-14.
Melhorn H, Schein E. Redescription of Babesia equi Laveran,
1901 as Theileria equi Melhom, Schein 1998. Parasitol Res
1998;84:467-475.
298Refererces and Suggested Reading
Mense MG, Gardiner CH, Moeller RB, Partridge HL, Wilson S
Chronic emesis caused by a nematode-induced gastnic
noduule in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:597-598.
van Metre DC, Tyler JW, Stehman SM. Diagnosis of entenic dis-
case in small ruminants.Vet Clin N Am:Food Anim Pract
2000;16:87-115
Miller MM, Sweeney CR, Russell GE, Sheez RM, Morrow JK
Effects of blood contaminaion of cerebrospinal fluid on
Western blot analysis for detection of antibodies against Sar-
cocystis neurona and on albumin quotient and immuoglobu
lin G index in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999;215:67-71.
Miller MW.Canine heartworm disease.Clin Tech SmallAnim
Pract 1998;13:113-118.
Miller PE, Campbell BG. Subconjunctival cyst associated with
Thelazia gulosa in a calf.J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;
201:1058-1060
Miller Jr. WH, Scott DW, Wellington JR, Panic R. Clinical eff-
cacy of milbemycin oxime in the treatment of generalized
demodicosis in adult dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;
203:1426-1429.
Munoz E, Castella J, Gutierrez JF. In vivo and in vitro sensitivity
of Trichomonas gallinae to some nitroimidazole drugs. Vet
Parasitol 1998;78:239-246.
Olson ME, McAllister TA, Deselliers L, Morck DW, Cheng KJ,
Buret AG, Ceni H. Effects of giardiasis on production in a
domestic ruminant (lamb) model. Am J Vet Res
1995;56:1470-1474.
Ortega-Mora LM, Requejo-Fernandez JA, Pilar-Izquierdo M,
Pereira-Bueno J. Role of adult sheep in transmission of
References and Suggested Reading 299
infection by Cryptosporidium parvum to lambs: confirmation
of periparturient nise. Int/Parasitol1999;29:1261-1268.
Panciera RJ, Ewing SA, Mathew JS, Lehenbauer TW, Cum-
mings CA, Woods JP. Canine hepatozoonosis: companison
of lesions and parasites in skeletal muscle of dogs expeni-
mentally or naturally infected with Hepatozoon americanum.
VetParasitol1999:82:261-272
Panciera RJ, Ewing SA, Mathew JS, Cummings CA, Kocan AA,
Breshears MA, Fox JC. Observations on tissue stages of
Hepatozoon americanum in 19 naturally infected dogs. Vt
Parasitol1998;78:265-276.
Paradis M. Ivermectin in small animal dermatology Part II.
Extralabel applications. Compen Contin Edu Pract Vet
1998;20:459-469.
Parker S, CampbellJ, Ribble C, Gajadhar A. Companison of two
sampling tools for diagnosis of Tritrichomonas foetus in bulls
and clinical interpretation of culture results. J Am Vet Med
Assoc1999:215:231-235
Pernis EE. Parasitic dermatoses that cause prunitus in horses. Vt
Clin NAm:EquinePract1995:11:11-28.
Proudman CJ, Trees AJ. Tapeworms as a cause of intestinal dis-
ease in horses. Parasitol Today 1999;56:156-159.
Proudman CJ, French NP, Trees AJ. Tapeworm infection is a
significant risk factor for spasmodic colic and ileal
impaction colic in the horse. Equine Vt /1998;30:194-199.
Rae DO, Chenoweth PJ, Genho PC, Mclntosh AD, Crosby CE,
Moore SA. Prevalence of Tritrichomonas fetus in a bull pop
uation and effect on production in a large cow-calf enter-
prise.JAmVet MedAssoc1999;214:1051-1055
300 References and Suggested Reading
Rallis T, Vlemmas J. Gastroesophageal intussusception in an
adult dog. Canine Pract 1995;20:7-11.
Rausch RL. Life cycle patterns and geographic distribution of
Echinococcus species. In: Thompson RCA, Lymbery AJ, eds.
Echinococcus and Hydatid Disease.Wallingford,CT:CAB
Intermational; 1999:89-134.
Ridley RK Parasites of the respiratory system. In: Howard JL,
Smith RA, eds. Current Veterinary Therapy 4: Food Animat
Practic. Philadelphia:W.B. Saunders; 1999:460-462
Robertson-Plouch CK, Dillon AR, Brawner Jr. WR, Guerrero J
Prevalence of feline heartworm infections among cats with
respiratory and gastrointestinal signs: results of a multi-
Center study. Vet Ther: Res Appl Vet Med 2000;1:88-95.
Ruest N, Couture Y, Faubert GM, Girard C. Morphologica.
changes in the jejunum of calves naturally infected with
Giardia spp.and Cryptosporidium spp. Vet Parasitol 1997;
69:177-186.
Sanderson MW, Gay JM,Baszler TV. Neospora caninum sero
prevalence and associated risk factors in beef cattle in the
northwestern United States. Vet Parasitol 2000;90:15-24.
Schantz PM, Chai J, Craig PS, Eckert J,Jenkins DJ, Macpherson
CNL, Thakur A. Epidemiology and control of hydatid dis-
ease. In: Thompson RCA, Lymbery AJ, eds. Echinococcus
andHydatid Disease.Wallingford,CT:CABInternational;
1999:233-331.
Schwartz RD, Donoghue AR, Baggs RB, Clark T, Partington C.
Evaluation of the safety of fenbendazole in cats. Am J Vet
Res2000;61:330-333
References and Suggested Reading 301
Shorter N, Werminghaus K, Mooney D, Graham A. Furuncular
cuterebrid myiasis. / Ped Surg 1997;32:1511-1513.
Sloss MW, Kemp RL, Zajac AM. Veterinary Clinical Parasitology.
6th ed. Ames: Iowa State University Press; 1994.
Soulsby EJL. Helminths, Arthropods and Protozoa of Domesticated
Animais. 7th ed. London: Bailliere Tindall; 1982.
Speer CA. Coccidiosis. In: Howard JL, Smith RA, eds. Current
Veterinary Therapy 4: Food A nimal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders; 1999:411-420.
Thompson RCA. Biology and systematics of Echinococcus. In:
Thompson RCA, Lymbery AJ, eds. Echinococcus and Hydatid
Diseass. Wallingford, CT: CAB International; 1999:1-50.
Thompson RCA, Hopkins RM, Homan WL. Nomenclature and
genetic groupings of Giardia infecting mammals. Parasitot
Today 2000;16:210-213.
Thrumond MC,Hietala SD.Neospora caninum infection and
abortion in cattle. In: Howard JL, Smith RA, eds. Current
Veterinary Therapy 4: Food Animal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B
Saunders; 1999:425-431.
Tranas J, Heinzen RA, Weiss LM, McAllister MM. Serological
evidence of human infection with the protozoan Neospora
caninum.ClinDiagnLabImmunol1999;6:765-767
Trees AJ. Parasitic diseases. In: Jordan FTW, Pattison M, eds.
Poultry Diseases. 4th ed. London: W.B. Saunders;
1996:261-289.
Trees AJ, Davison HC, Innes EA, Wastling JM. Towards evaluat
ing the economic impact of bovine neosporosis. Int / Parα
sitol 1999;29:1195-1200.
302 Refererces and Suggested Reading
Vincent-Johnson N, Macintire DK, Baneth G. Canine hepato
zoonosis: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Com
pen Contin EducPractVet1997;19:51-65.
VincentJohnson NA, Macintire DK, Lindsay DS, Lenz SD,
Baneth G, Shkap V. A new Hepatozoon species from dogs
description of the causative agent of canine hepatozoono
sis in North America. / Parasitol 1997;83:1165-1172.
Williamson RMC, Beveridge I, Gasser RB. Coprological meth-
ods for the diagnosis of Anoplocephala perfoliata infection of
the horse. Aust Vet /1998;76:618-621.
de Wit JI. Mortality of rheas caused by a Synchamus tracheainfec
tion. Vet Quart 1995;17:39-40.
Xiao L.Giardia infection in farm animals.Parasitol Today
1994;11:436-438.
Index
Page numbers followed by “t" indicate tables; page num-
bers followed by “f'indicate figures.
A
Anaplasma marginale, 12
Abomasum,nematode species
Ancylostoma spp.
in
A.braziliense,140
ruminants, 109-118
A.caninum,140
Acanthocephalans
A.tutbaeforme,140
characteristics of, 65-66
clinical signs of, 139-140
in small intestine,165-167
description of, 137
Acanthocheilonemareconditum,
diagnosis of, 140-142, 141f
31, 57t, 239t, 251-252
life cycle of, 137-139
Adenophorea, 55
pathogenesis of, 139-140
Aedes spp., 46
transmission of, 137-138,
Aelurastrongylus abstrustus,
138t
229-231
treatment of, 142-145,143t
Alaria spp., 73t, 188-189
Anopheles spp.,46
Albendazole
Anoplocephala spp.
for Dicrocoeliumdendriticum,
A. magna,179-182
275
A.perfoliata,179-182
for Fasciola hepatica, 271
characteristics of, 68t
for nematodes, 117t
Aonchotheca spp.
for Paragonimus kellicotti,242
A.bovis,56t, 116t-117t
Allergic dermatitis, 46
124-125, 126f
Alopecia, 46
A.ptorii,56t,136-137
Amblyomma spp., 10-11, 14t
Apicomplexans
American dog tick, 11
characteristics of, 75t, 76
American primary screwworm,
in small intestine, 191-212
39-40
Arachnids,6
Amitraz, 26
Argasidae, &t See also Ticks, soft
303
304
Index
Argas spp., 9
pathogenesis of,244-245
Arthropods
treatment of, 245
classification of, 6
Balantidium coli,75t,217-218
description of, 5
Bartonella henselae,33
importance of, 6
Baruscapillaria obsignata, 57t,
morphology of, 6-7
160-161
Ascaridia spp., 161-163
Birds. See also Poultry
Ascarids
Hstomonas meleagridisin,
Boylisascaris procyonis, 152-154
279-280
Toxascarisleonina,143t-144t
lice species in, 30t
146-148, 148t, 149f
mite species in, 26-27
Toxocara spp. See Toxocara spp.
nematode species in, 64t
Ascaris suum
Trichomonas gallinae in, 75t,
clinical signs of, 8384
216-217
control of, 81t, 86
Biting gnats
description of, 82-83
control of, 46
diagnosis of, 84-86
Culicoides spp., 45-46
life cycle of, 83
description of, 44
pathogenesis of, 83-84
life cycle of, 44-45
transmission of, 83
Smulium spp., 45
treatment of, 81t, 86
treatment of, 46
Ascarops strongylina, 80-82
Biting midges, 45-46
Avermectin
Black flies, 45
for horn flies, 51
Blackhead. See Histomonas
for myiasis-producing flies, 42
meleagridis
Boophilus spp., 12, 14t
B
Bots
Babesia spp.
horse stomach, 37-38
B.bigemina,12,75t,242
sheep nasal, 3637
B.caball,75t,242
Bowel worm, large-mouthed.
B.canis, 75t,242
See Chabertia ovina
characteristics of, 242
Brown dog tick, 10
clinical signs of, 245
Buffalo gnats, 45
diagnosis of, 245
Bunastomum phlebotomum,
life cycle of, 244
116-117t, 123-124
fndex
305
c
Strongyloides stercoralis,
Calliphora spp., 41
154-157
Capillaria spp.
Strongyloides tumefaciens,
C.aerophila,56t
154-157
C.annulatus, 57t
Toxascaris leonina,
C.bohm,56t
143t-144t, 146-148
C. bovis, 56t
Toxocara spp. See Toxocara
C.contortus, 57t
spp.
C.feliscati,56t
Trchuris spp., 157-158
C.obsignata, 57t
Uncinaria stenocephala,
C.plica,56t
143t, 145-146
C. putorii, 56t
Spirometra mansonoidesin,68t
Cats
182-184
bots in, 41
Toxoplasma gondii in,203-204
Droflaria immiis in, 236,238
Cat scratch fever, 33
flea species in,33-35
Cattle.See also Ruminants
Giardiaduodenalisin,214-215
anthelmintics used in,
lice species in, 30t, 31
116t-117t
mite species in, 24-25
bots in, 42-43
nematode species in
Emeria spp. in, 193-195
Ancylostoma spp. See Ancy
Giardia duodenalisin,213,216
lostoma spp.
lice species in, 30t, 31
anthelmintics for, 143t
nematode species in
Aonchotheca putori,
abomasum, 109-118
136-137
Aonchotheca bouis,
Baylisascaris procyones,
116t-117t, 124-125,
152-154
126f
characteristics of, 62t-63t
Bunostomum phlebotomum,
description of, 62t-63t
116-117t, 123-124
esophagus, 132-137
cecum, 127-132
large intestine, 157-158
Chabertia ovina,116t-117t
Physaloptera spp., 134-136
129-130
Spirocerca lupi, 132-134
Cooperia spp., 116t-117t,
stomach, 132-137
118-119
306
Index
Cattle, cont.
in musculoskeletal system,
description of, 60t-61t
266-268
large intestine, 127-132
Pseudophyllidea,70
Nematodirus spp.,
in small intestine,167-185
116t-117t, 119-121
Chabertia ouina, 116t-117t,
Oesophagostomum spp..
129-130
116t-117t,127-129
Cheyletiella spp.,23,26
small intestine, 118-126
Chickens. SeePoultry
Srongyloides papillosus,
Chorioptes spp., 21t
116t-117t, 121-123
Ciliates
Frichuris spp, 116t-117t,
characteristics of, 75t, 76
131-132
in colon, 217-218
Neospora spp. in, 206-207
Circulatory system
obligatory myiasis-producing
nematodes in,233-240
flies, 38-39
protoz0a in,242,244-245
Ostertagia,109,110
Clorsulon, 117t, 273
ostertagiosis in, 111-112
Cnemidocoptes spp.
Sarcocystis spp. in, 200t
C galinae, 19t, 26
Trichostrongyus, 109, 110
C. jamaicensis, 19t
Tritrichomonas foetus in,75t,
Cmulans, 18t
277-279
C. pilae, 19t
Cecum, nematode species in
diagnosis of, 24
of cattle, 127-132
Cochliomyia spp.
of goats, 127-132
Chominivorax,39-40,42-43
of horses, 101-109
Cmacellaria, 41
of sheep, 127-132
Colon
Cercariae, 74
ciliates in, 217-218
Cestodes. See also specific species
nematode species in,
appearance of, 66
101-109
characteristics of, 54t
Columbicola spp., 30t
classification of, 67,68t-69t
Commensalism, 1-2
Eucestoda, 67, 70
Cooperia spp., 116t-117t,
life cycles of, 67, 70
118-119
morphology of, 66-67
Copepod, 70
fndex
307
Cows. See Cattle
D. equi, 22
Cryptasporidium spp.
D. gatoi, 22
C.anderson, 75t, 210
D. ovis, 22
C. baileyi, 209-210
D. phylloides, 22
C. meleagridis, 209-210
Dermacentor spp., 11, 14t
C.muris,209
Dermanyssus gallinae,23-24
C. parvum, 75t, 209-210
Diagnosis, 3. See also specifc
characteristics of, 208-209
parasite
clinical signs of, 209-210
Dichlorvos, 13
control of, 212
Dicrocoelium dendriticum,72t
diagnosis of, 211
274-275
life cycle of, 209
Dictyocaulus spp.
pathogenesis of, 209-210
characteristics of, 219-220
treatment of, 211-212
clinical signs of, 221-222
Cenocephalides spp.
D.arnfeldi,220,222
C.canis,33
D. flaria, 220-222
C.felis,33
D.uivparus, 220-222
Culex spp., 46
diagnosis of, 222-223
Culicoides spp., 45-46
life cycle of, 220
Cuterebra spp., 40-41, 43
pathogenesis of, 221-222
Cytauxzoonfelis,75t,246-247
treatment of, 116-117t, 223
Diethylcarbamazine, for
D
Sperocerca lupi, 134
Damalinia spp., 30t
Dioctophyma renale,262-264
Deer flies, 47-48
Dipetalonemarecondtum,57t
Demodecosis, 22
Diphyllobothrium latum,68t,
Demodex spp.
184-185
D.aurati, 22
Dipylidium caninum,31,
D.bovis,22
143t-144t, 167-168, 169f
D.caball,22
Diroflariaimmitis
D.canis,16,22
in cats, 236,238
D.caprae, 22
characteristics of,233-234,
D. cati, 22
239t
D.criceti,22
clinical signs of, 235-237
308
Index
Diroflaria immitis,cont.
Strongyloides tumefaciens,
diagnosis of, 237-238
154-157
in dogs, 235-238
Toxascaris leonina,
in ferrets, 236-238
143t-144t, 146-148
life cycle of, 234-235
Toxocara spp. See Toxocara
pathogenesis of, 235-236
spp.
Dogs
Trichuris spp., 157-158
bots in, 41
Uncinaria stenocephala,
flea species in, 33-35
143t, 145-146
Giardia duodenalisin,
Neospora spp. in, 207
214-215
Spirometra mansonoidesin,68t
heartworms. See Diroflaria
182-184
mmilis
Toxoplasma gond: in, 204
Isospora spp. in, 197-199
Doramectin, for nematodes
lice species in, 30t, 31
in cattle, 116t
mite species in, 24-25
in swine, 81t
nematode species in
Double-pored tapeworm. See
Ancylostoma spp. See Ancy
lostoma spp.
Dracuncuhus insignis, 255-257
anthelmintics for, 143t
Draschia megastoma,94-96,97t
Aonchotheca putori,
136-137
E
Baylisascaris procyonis,
Echidnophaga galinacea,
152-154
33-34
description of, 62t-63t
Echinococcus spp., 68t
Dirofilaria immitis.See Diro
clinical signs of, 175
flariaimmitis
control of, 176
esophagus, 132-137
description of, 174
large intestine, 157-158
diagnosis of, 176
Physaloptera spp., 134-136
E granulosus, 171, 174-175
Spirocerca lupi,132-134
Emulilocularis,171,174-175
stomach, 132-137
life cycle of, 174-175
Srongyloides stercoralis
pathogenesis of, 175
154-157
treatment of, 143t
fndex
309
Ectoparasites, 5
Felicola subrostratus,30t
Eimeria spp.
Fenbendazole
characteristics of, 75t,
for Aleurostrongylus abstrusus,
191-192
230
clinical signs of, 193-194
for Dicrocoelium dendriticum,
control of, 197
275
diagnosis of, 194-195
for Eucoleus aerophilus, 233
life cycle of, 192-193
for nematodes
pathogenesis of, 193-194
in cats,136,143t
treatment of, 195, 197
in cattle, 116t
Elaeophora schneideri,48
in dogs,136,143t
Eprinomectin,26,31,116t
in horses, 97t
Epsiprantel, 143t-144t
in swine, 81t
Eucestoda, 67, 70
for Paragonimus kellcotti,
Eucoleus spp.
242
E.aerophilus,56t,232-233
for Pearsonema spp., 265
E.annulatus, 57t
Ferrets,Diroflaria immitis in,
E.bohm,56t,231-232
236-238
E.contortus, 57t
Fipronil, 13
in poultry, 159-160
Flagellates
Eurytrema spp.,73t
characteristics of, 75t,76
in small intestine, 212-216
F
in upper gastrointestinal
Face flies,48-51
tract,216-217
Fasciola hepatica
Fleas
characteristics of, 72t, 268
characteristics of, 32
clinical signs of, 270-271
control of, 34-35
control of, 271-272
Qenocephalides canis,33
diagnosis of, 271
Cenocephalides felis,33
life cycle of, 269
Echidnophaga gallinacea,
pathogenesis of, 270-271
33-34
treatment of, 116t-117t, 271
on humans, 34
Fascioloides magna,72t,272-273
life cycle of, 32-33
Febantel, 143t
treatment of, 34-35
310
Index
Flies
Oesophagostomum spp..
black, 45
116t-117t, 127-129
deer, 47-48
Sarcocystis spp. in, 200t
face, 48-51
Toxoplasma gondii in,203
horn, 48-51
Gonoides spp., 30t
horse, 47-48
Guinea pigs
myiasis-producing. See Myia
lice species in, 30t
sis-producing flies
mite species in, 27
stable,48-49, 51
Gyropus ovalis, 30t
Flukes
liver. See Fasciola hepatica
H
salmon poisoning. See
Habronema spp.
Nanophyetus salmincola
H. microstoma,49,94-96,97t
H.muscae,94-96,97t
G
Haemaphysalis spp., 12, 14t
Gapeworm. See Syngamus trachea
Haematobia zrritans, 50
Gasterophilus spp.,3738
Haematopinus suis, 31
Gerbils, lice species in, 30t
Haemonchus contortus
Gardia duodenalis
description of, 109-110
characteristics of, 75t, 212
diagnosis of, 113, 115
clinical signs of, 213-214
life cycle of, 110
control of, 216
treatment of, 115-118,
diagnosis of, 214-215
116t-117t
life cycle of, 212-213
Heartworm.See Diroflaria immitis
pathogenesis of, 213-214
Hepatozoon americanum,11,75t,
species,212
247-248
treatment of, 215-216
Heterakis gallinarum, 163-164
Gliricola porcelli,30t
Histomonas meleagridis,75t
Gnats, biting. See Biting gnats
279-280
Goats. See also Ruminants
Hookworm. See Ancylostoma
Eimeria spp. in, 194-195
spp.;Bunostomum phle-
haemonchosis in, 112-113
botomum,Uncimaria
lice species in, 30t
stenocephala
Neospora spp. in, 207
Horn flies,48-51
fndex
311
Horse flies, 47-48
Sarcocyst's spp. in. See Sarcocys-
Horses
tis spp
anthelmintics for, 97t
Horse stomach bot, 37-38
Dictyocaulus spp. in, 223
Hygromycin, 81t
Eimeria spp. in, 194
Hyostrongylus rubidus
Giardia duodenalisin,213
clinical signs of, 78
lice species in, 30t,32
control of, 80, 81t
mite species in, 26
description of, 77
nematode species in
diagnosis of, 78-80
anthelmintics, 97t
life cycle of, 77-78
cecum, 101-109
pathogenesis of, 78
colon, 101-109
treatment of, 80, 81t
description of, 59t
Hypoderma spp., 38-39
Draschia megastoma,94-96,
146
Habronemamicrostoma
Identification,3
94-96, 97t
Insects, 7
Habronema muscae, 94-96,
Intestine. See Large intestine;
146
Small intestine
Oxyuris equ, 107-109
Isospora spp., 75t, 197-199
Parascaris equorum, 96-100,
Ivermectin
146
for Macracanthorhynchus hiru-
small intestine, 96,
dinaceus,167
98-101
for nematodes
small strongyles, 105-107
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus,
stomach, 49
230
Strongyloedes westeri,
in cats, 136-137
100-101
in cattle, 116t
Srongylus spp.
Dirpflaria immitis,240
S.edentatus, 101-104
in dogs, 136-137
S.equinus, 101-104
in horses, 97t
S.vulgaris,101-104
Onchocerca spp., 255
Neospora spp. in, 207
Pearsonema spp., 265
obligatory myiasis-producing
in sheep,117t
flies, 37-38
Strongyloides spp., 156
312
Index
Ivermectin, cont.
Liver fluke.See Fasciola hepatica
in swine, 81t
Lucilia spp., 41
Thelazia spp., 250
Lufemuron, 34-35
Ixodes spp., 12, 14t
Ixodidae,8t See also Ticks,
M
hard
Macracanthorhynchus hirudi
naceus,66,165-167
K
Mange
Keds
demodectic, 25-26
description of, 43
sarcoptic,26
sheep,43-44
Melarsamine dihydrochloride,
for Droflaria immitis,
L
238,240
Large intestine, nematode
Melophagus ovinus, 43-44
species in
Menopon spp., 30t
of cats,157-158
Mesocestoides spp., 69t
of dogs, 157-158
Metastrongylus spp., 225-227
of ruminants, 127-132
Metronidazole, for Frichomonas
of swine,89-94
gallinae,217
Large-mouthed bowel worm.
Milbemycin oxime, 26, 240
See Chabertia ovina
Mites
Large strongyles. See Strongyles
characteristies of, 15
Levamisole,117t
control methods for, 24-27
Lice
diagnosis of, 24, 25t
biting, 28t
life cycle of, 15-16
characteristics of, 27, 28t
nonsarcoptiform, 15
control methods, 31-32
sarcoptiform,15-16,17t-21t
diagnosis of, 31
treatment of, 24-27
in domestic animals, 30t
Moniezia spp., 69t, 176-179
importance of, 29, 31
Morantel, 117t
life cycle of, 27, 29
Mosquitoes
species of, 30t
control of, 46
sucking,28t
life cycle of, 44-45
treatment of, 31-32
species,46
Linognathus setosus, 31
treatmentof,46
fndex
313
Moxidectin
in eyes,249-250
for nematodes
in goats. See Goats
in cattle, 117t
in horses. See Horses, nema-
in horses, 97t
tode species in
for Onchocerca spp., 255
life cycle of, 55, 65
Muellerius capillaris,223-225
morphology of, 53
Musca autumnalis, 50
in musculoskeletal system,
Mutualism, 1
258-260
Myiasis-producing flies
in peritoneum and peri-
characteristics of, 35
toneal cavity, 257-258
control of, 42-43
in poultry. See Poultry, nema-
diagnosis of, 42
tode species in
facultative,35,41
reclassified types of, 56t-57t
importance of, 42
in respiratory tract, 219-233
life cycle of, 35-36
in ruminants, 60t-61t
obligatory, 35-41
See also Cattle
treatment of,42-43
in sheep. See Sheep
in skin, 251-257
N
in swine. See Swine, nerma-
Nanophyetus salmincola,186-188
tode species in
Nematodes. See also specific species
in urogenital system, 261-265
in adnexa, 249-250
Nematodirus spp., 116t-117t,
appearance of, 53
119-121
in birds, 64t
Neonatal porcine coccidiosis,
in cats. See Cats, nematode
199
species in
Neospora spp.
in cattle. See Cattle, nema-
characteristics of, 206
tode species in
clinical signs of, 206-207
characteristics of, 54t
control of, 208
in circulatory system,
diagnosis of, 207-208
233-240
life cycle of, 206
classification of,55,56t-57t
N.caninum,75t
in dogs. See Dogs, nematode
pathogenesis of, 206-207
species in
treatment of, 208
314
Index
Nodular worm. See Oesophagos
Oxibendazole,for nematodes,
tomum spp.
146
No-see-ums, 45-46
Oxyuris equ, 107-109
Notoedres cati, 18t
P
0
Paragonms kellicott,73t,240242
Oesophagostomum spp.
Paramphistomum spp.,72t
in cattle, 116t-117t, 127-129
Paranaplocephala mamillana,
in goats, 116t-117t, 127-129
179-182
in sheep, 116t-117t, 127-129
Parascars equorum
in swine,81t,89-91
clinical signs of, 98
Oestrus ouis, 3637
control of, 100
Onchocerca spp.
diagnosis of, 98-100, 99f
characteristics of, 253
life cycle of, 96
clinical signs of, 254
pathogenesis of, 98
diagnosis of, 254
transmission of, 96
life cycle of, 253-254
treatment of,97t,100
O.cervicais, 46
Parasitism, 2
O.gulterosa, 45
Paromomycin, 212
pathogenesis of, 254
Pearsonema spp
treatment of, 255
Rfelscati, 56t, 264-265
Ornithonyssus syluiarum, 23-24
P phca, 56t, 264-265
Ostertagia ostertagi
Phoenicia spp., 41
description of, 109
Phoresis, 1
life cycle of, 110
Phormia spp., 41
pathogenesis of, 111-112
Physaloptera spp.,134-136
treatment of, 115-118,
Physocephalus sexalatus, 80-82
116t-117t
Pigs. See Swine
Ostertagiosis, 111-112
Pinkeye, 51
Otobius megnini, 9-10
Pinworm. See Oxyuris equ?
Otodectes cyanotis, 21t
Piperazine, for nematodes
Otodectic acariasis,25
in cats, 144t
Oxfendazole, for nermatodes
in dogs, 143t
in cattle, 116t
in horses, 97t
in horses, 97t
in swine, 81t
fndex
315
Platynosomumfastosum,72t,
in urogenital system, 277-279
275-277
Pseudophyllidea, 70
Pneumonyssoidescaninum,23,26
Psoroptes spp.
Poultry. See also Birds
P bovis, 20t
Eimeria spp. in, 194, 197
Pcunicul, 20t, 27
nematode species in
P ovis, 20t-21t
Ascaridia spp., 161-163
Pulex irritans, 34
Baruscapillaria obsignata,
Pyrantel pamoate
160-161
for Anoplocephala, 182
cecae,163-164
for nematodes
crop,159-160
in cats, 136, 144t
description of, 64t
in dogs, 136, 143t
esophagus, 159-160
in horses, 97t
Eucoleus spp., 159-160
for Paranaplocephala mamil-
Helerakis galinarum,
ana,182
163-164
Pyrantel tartrate, for nema
small intestine, 160-163
todes
Praziquantel
in horses, 97t
for Alaria spp, 189
in swine, 81t
forDiphyllobothrium latum,185
forNanophyetus salmincola,188
R
for Paragonmus kellicotti, 242
Rabbits, mites in, 27
for Plalynosomum fastosum,277
Respiratory tract
for Spiroetra mansonoides,184
nematodes in, 219-233
Protozoa
trematodes in,240-242
apicomplexans, 75t, 76
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, 10,14t
ciliates,75t,76
Rocky Mountain wood tick, 11
in circulatory system, 242,
Ruminants. See also Cattle;
244-245
Goats; Sheep
description of, 74
Dictyocaulus spp. in, 223
flagellates, 75t, 76
Giardiaduodenaisin,213,216
in liver, 279-280
mites, 26
in nervous system, 281-282
Moniezia spp., 176-179
pathogenic types of, 74
nematode species in, 60t-61t
316
Index
S
flagellates,212-216
Salmon poisoning fluke. See
nematode species in
Nanophyetus salmincola
of cats, 137-142, 144t,
Sarcocystis spp.
145-157
clinical signs of, 201
of catle, 118-126
control of, 202
of dogs, 137-142, 143t,
description of, 199
145-157
diagnosis of, 201-202
fhorses,96,98-101
life cycle of, 199, 201
of poultry, 160-163
pathogenesis of, 201
ofruminants,118-126
S.neurona,75t,281-282
of swine, 82-89
species,200t
trematodes,186-189
treatment of, 202
Sparganosis, 183
Sarcophaga spp., 41
Spinose ear tick, 9-10
Sarcoptes scabei, 17t
Spirocerca lupi,132-134
Sarcoptic mange, 26
Sprometra mansonoides, 68t,
Secernentea,55
182-184
Selamectin, 13, 144t
Stable flies, 48-49, 51
Setaria spp., 257-258
Sephanoflaria stilesi,50,
Sheep. See also Ruminants
252-253
anthelmintics used in, 117t
Slephanurusdentatus,261-262
Eimeria spp. in, 194-195
Stomach, nematode species in
haemonchosis in, 112-113
of cats,132-137
keds in, 43-44
of dogs, 132-137
lice species in, 30t
of horses, 94-96
Neospora spp. in, 207
of swine, 77-82
Oesophagostomum spp.,
Somoxys calcitrans,49
116t-117t,127-129
Strongyles, 102-107
Sarcocystis spp. in, 200t
Srongyloides spp.
Toxoplasma gondi in, 203
S.papillsus,116t-117t,
Simulium spp., 45
121-123
Small intestine
S. ransomi, 81t, 86-89
acanthocephalans, 165-167
S stercoralis, 154-157
apicomplexans,191-212
Stumefaciens,154-157
cestodes,167-185
S. zwester, 100-101
fndex
317
Strongylus spp.
diagnosis of, 172-174, 173f,
S. edentatus, 101-104
267-268
Sequinus,101-104
life cycle of, 170, 171t,
S. vulgaris, 101-104
266-267
Sulfadimethoxine, for Isospora
in musculoskeletal system,
spp.,199
266-268
Swine
pathogenesis of, 170,172, 267
Eimeria spp. in, 194
T hydatigena, 171t, 172
Isospora spp. in, 197-199
T mulliceps, 171t,172
lice species in, 30t,32
T. ovus, 171t, 172
Macracanthorhynchus hirudi
T. pisiformis, 171t, 172
naceus,167
T. saginata, 266
mite species in, 26
T. serialis,172
nematode species in
T. solum, 267
Ascaris suum, 8286
T taeniaeformis, 171t, 172
Ascarops strongylina, 80-82
treatment of, 143t-144t,
description of, 58t
268
Hyostrongylus rubidus,77-80
Teladorsagia
Metastrongylus spp.in,
diagnosis of, 113,115
225-227
life cycle of, 111
Oesophagostomum spp., 8991
treatment of, 115-118,
Srongyloides ransomi, 86-89
116t-117t
Trichuris suis, 91-94
Texas cattle fever, 12
Sarcocystis spp. in, 200t
Theileria spp.
Toxoplasma gondi in, 204
clinical signs of, 245
Symbiosis, 1
diagnosis of, 245
Syngamus trachea,227-229
life cycle of, 244
pathogenesis of, 245
T
T. equ, 75t, 245
Taenia spp.
treatment of, 245
characteristics of, 68t, 266
Thelazia spp., 51, 249-250
clinical signs of, 170, 172, 267
Thiabendazole
control of, 174, 268
for Srongyloides spp., 156
description of, 170
for Syngamus trachea, 229
318
Index
Thiacetarsamide, for Diroflaria
characteristics of, 54t
mmiis,238,240
classification of, 71,72t-73t
Thorny-headed worms, 65-66
description of, 70-71
Threadworm.See Strongyloides
digenetic,70-71
spp.
life cycle of, 71, 74
Thysanosoma actinioides spp., 69t
in liver, 268-277
Ticks. See also specifc species
monogenetic,70
control methods,13
morphology of, 71
diagnosis of, 13, 14t
in musculoskeletal system,
hard, 8t, 9-12, 14t
268-277
life cycle of, 7
in respiratory tract, 240-242
soft, 8t, 9-10
in small intestine, 186-189
treatment of, 13
Trichinella spiralis,55,258-260
Taxascarisleonina,143t144t
Trichodectes canis,30t
146-148, 148t, 149f
Trichomonas gallinae, 75t,
Toxocara spp.
216-217
clinical signs of, 151
Frichostrongylus spp.
diagnosis of, 152
clinical signs of, 111-113
life cycle of, 148, 150
diagnosis of, 113, 115
pathogenesis of, 151
life cycle of, 111
T. canis, 148t, 149f, 243f
pathogenesis of, 111-113
T. cati, 57t
treatment of, 115-118,
T.mystax,57t,148t
116t-117t
transmission of, 150-151
Trichuris
treatment of, 143t-144t, 152
Tcampanula,157-158
Toxoplasma gondi?
T discolor, 116t-117t,
characteristics of, 75t, 202
131-132
clinical signs of, 203-204
T ovs, 116t-117t, 131-132
control of, 205
T serrata, 157-158
diagnosis of, 204-205
T.skrjabin,116t-117t
life cycle of, 202-203
131-132
pathogenesis of, 203-204
T. suis, 81t, 91-94
treatment of, 205
T.vulpis,157-158,243f
Trematodes.See also specific species
Tritrichomonas foetus, 75t
appearance of,71
277-279
fndex 319
Trixacarus caviae,18t,27
X
Trophozoites, 213,215
Xenopsylla cheopis,34
U
Y
Uhcinaria stenocephala,143t,
Yersinia pestis, 34
145-146