Darryl L.Millis
David Levine
CanineRehabilitation
andPhysical Therapy
SECOND FHTION
Canine Rehabilitation
and Physical Therapy
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
SECOND EDITION
Canine Rehabilitation
and Physical Therapy
DARRYL MILLIS, MS, DVM, DACVS
CCRP, DACVSMR
Professor of Orthopedic Surgery
Director, CARES Center for Veterinary Sports Medicine
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, Tennessee
DAVID LEVINE, PT, PhD, DPT, DABPTS
(Orthopaedics), CCRP, Cert. DN
Professor and Cline Chair of Excellence
in Physical Therapy
Department of Physical Therapy
The University of Tennessee at Chattanooga
Chattanooga, Tennessee
ELSEVIER
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
CANINE REHABILITATION AND PHYSICAL THERAPY
ISBN: 978-1-4377-0309-2
Copyright @ 2014, 2004 by Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier Inc.
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
system,without permission in writing from the publisher.Permissionsmay be sought directly from Elsevier's
Health Sciences Rights Department in Philadelphia, PA, USA: phone: (+1) 215 239 3804, fax: (+1) 215 239
3805, e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier
homepage (http://www.e]sevier.com), by selecting 'Customer Support’ and then *Obtaining Permissions.'
Notice
 Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience
broaden our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment and drug therapy may become necessary or
featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose
or formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the 
practitioner, relying on their own experience and knowledge of the patient, to make diagnoses, to
precautions. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the Editor assumes any liability for
[ aui jo asn ue oi peah jo jo no suse Aadod jo suosiad oi sp joue Aun ue
 contained in this book.
The Publisher
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Canine rehabilitation & physical therapy.
Canine rehabilitation and physical therapy / [edited by] Darry] Millis, David Levine.—Second edition.
p. ; cm.
Preceded by: Canine rehabilitation & physical therapy / [edited by] Darryl L. Millis, David Levine,
Robert A. Taylor. c2004.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISB N 978-1-4377-0309-2 (hardback : alk. paper)
Darryl L., editor. ll. Levine, David (Veterinary physical therapist), editor.  Ill. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Dog Diseasestherapy. 2. Physical Therapy Modalitiesveterinary. SF 991]
SF991.C2442014
636.7'089582—dc23
2013024902
Vice President and Pubtisher: Linda Duncan
Content Strategy Director: Penny Rudolph
Content Manager: Shelly Stringer
Pubtishing Services Manager: Gayle May and Hemamalini Rajendrababu
Senior Project Manager: Antony Prince
Design Direction: Karen Pauls
Cover Art: @ Grant Hindsley/AP/Corbis (cover center top row)
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
Printed in China
www.elsevirt.com | www.bookaid.otg I www.sabte.otg
ELSEVIER
BOOK AID
Sabre Foundation
Last digit is the print number:98765 4321
Contributors
Caroline P. Adamson Adrian, PT, PhD, CCRP
Linda Blythe, DVM, DACVSMR
VCA Antech, Inc. and vCA Veterinary Specialists of 
Professor
Northern Colorado
College of Veterinary Medicine
Loveland, Colorado
 Oregon State University
Conceptual Overview of Physical Therapy, Veterinary Medicine,
Corvallis, Oregon
and Canine Physical Rehabilitation
History of Canine Physical Rehabilitation
Julie AIbright, MA, DVM, DACVB
Barbara Bockstahler, DVM, CCRP
Assistant Professor of Veterinary Behavior
Section for Physical Therapy and Acupuncture and Movement
 Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Science Group Vienna
 University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine
Clinical Department for Small Animals and Horses
Knox ville, Tennessee
 Clinic of Surgery and Ophthalmology
Canine Behavior
Vienna, Austria
Electrical Stimulation
T. Craig Angle, PhD, ME.d, ATC, CSCS
Associate Director of the Veterinary Sports Medicine Program
Sherman O. Canapp Jr, MS, DVM, CCRT, DACVS,
Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine
DAVCSMR
Auburn University
Owner and Chief of Staff
Auburn, Alabama
Veterinary Orthopedic and Sports Medicine Group
Canine Locomotion Analysis
Ellicott City, Maryland
Common Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation of the
Joe Bartges, DVM, DACVIM, DACVN
Athtetic Patient
Professor, Medicine & Nutrition
The Acree Chair of Small Animal Research
R. Barry Dale, PT, PhD, ATC, SCS, OCS, CSCS
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Associate Professor
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Physical Therapy
 The Umiversity of Tennessee
University of Tennessee at Chattanooga
Knox ville, Tennessee
Chattanooga, Tennessee
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition
Basics of Exercise Physiology
in Rehabilitation
Jacqueline R. Davidson, MS, DVM, DACVS, CVA,
Anna Bergh, PT, DVM, PhD
CVSMT, CCRP, CERP, CCRT, CVPP
Postdoctoral Research Fellow
Clinical Professor
 Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry
 Department of Veterinary Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Senior Lecturer
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Anatomy and Physiology Section
Texas A&M University
Swedish Umiversity of Agricultural Sciences
College Station, Tex as
Uppsala, Sweden
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Their Physicat
Conceptual Overview of Physical Therapy, Veterinary Medicine,
Rehabilitation
and Canine Physical Rehabilitation
vi
Contributors
Robin Downing, DVM, CVA, CCRP, DAAPM
Robert Gillette, DVM, MSE, DACVSMR
Affiliate Faculty
Veterinary Specialty Center
Clinical Sciences
Buffalo Grove, Illinois
 Colorado State University College of Veterinary Medicine
Basics of Exercise Physiology
Fort Collins, Colorado
Canine Locomotion Analysis
Hospital Director
The Downing Center for Animal Pain Management, LLC
Sallye Gregg, DVM
Windsor, Coloardo
Hospital Director
Rehabilitating the PainfulPatient:Pain Management in
Regional Institute for Veterinary Emergencies & Referrals
Physical Rehabilitation
Chattanooga, Tennessee
Physicat Therapy for Wound Care
Ludovica Dragone, DVM, CCRP
Ambulatorio Veterinario Dog Fitness
June Elaine Hanks, PT, PhD, DPT, CWS, CLT
 Dog Fitness
Associate Professor
Reggio Emilia, Italy
 Department of Physical Therapy
Superficial Thermal Modalities
Bellarmine University
Louisville, Kentucky
Marti Drum, DVM, PhD, CCRP, CERP, DACVSMR
Physicat Therapy for Wound Care
 Clinical Assistant Professor
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Kristinn I. Heinrichs, PhD, PT, ATC
 College of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Orthopedics and Rehabilitation
The University of Tennessee
US Army Garrison
Knox ville, Tennessee
Vicenza Health Center
ThePhysical Rehabilitation Evatuation
Vicenza, Italy;
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
Owner
Therapeutic Exercises: Early Limb Use Exercises
 Peak Sports Performance International
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion,Strengthening,Endurance,
Tempe, Arizona
and Speed Exercises
Superficial Thermal Modalities
April Durant, DVM, DACVS
Andrea L. Henderson, DVM, CCRT, CCRP
Assistant Professort, Soft Tissue Surgery
 Resident, Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Kansas State University
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Manhattan, Kansas
 University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine
Applications of Extracorporeal Shock Wave in Small
Knoxville, Tennessee
Animal Practice
Tissue Healing: Tendons, Ligaments, Bone, Musctes,
and Cartilage
Cassy Englert, PT, MS, OCS, CCRP
Orthopedic Therapist
Sharon Kerwin, MS, DVM, DACVS, CCRP
Chattanooga Canine Rehabilitation and Wellness
Professor
Chattanooga, Tennessee
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
The PhysicalRehabilitation Evaluation
Texas A&M University
College Station, Tex as
Jeffrey Flocker, MPT, CCRP
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Their Physicat
 Canine Physical Rehabilitation of the SouthWest, LLC
Rehabilitation
Gilbert, Arizona
Aquatic Therapy
Steven M. Fox, MS, DVM, MBA, PhD
President Securos Inc.
Clive, Iowa
Rehabilitating thePainfutPatient:PainManagement in
Physical Rehabilitation
Contributors
vii
David Levine, PT, PhD, DPT, DABPTS (Orthopedics),
 Joseph M. Mankin, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)
CCRP, Cert. DN
 Clinical Assistant Professor
 Professor and Cline Chair for Excellence in Physical Therapy
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
 Department of Physical Therapy
Texas A&M University
The University of Tennessee at Chattanooga
College Station, Texas
Chattanooga, Tennes see
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
Regulatory and Practice Issues for the Veterinary and Physicat
Therapy Professions
Lin McGonagle, MSPT, LVT
Conceptual Overview of Physical Therapy, Veterinary Medicine,
 Director of Rehabilitation Services
and Canine Physical Rehabilitation
Colonial Veterinary Hospital
The Physical Rehabilitation Evatuation
Ithaca, New York;
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
Owner
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
Animal Performance and Therapy Center
Superficial Thermal Modalities
Genoa, New York
Therapeutic Ultrasound
History of Canine PhysicalRehabilitation
Electrical Stimulation
Other Modalities in Veterinary Rehabilitation
Lauren Elizabeth MacGuire, PT, DPT, GCS
Range-of-Motion and Stretching Exercises
Spine and Sport
Joint Mobilization
Knoxville, Tennessee
Exercises for Proprioception, Balance, and Joint Position.
AquaticTherapy
Awareness
Therapeutic Exercises: Early Limb Use Exercises
Karen McLucas, LVT, LVMT
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion,Strengthening,Endurance,
 Neurology and Neurosurgery Technician
and Speed Exercises
Veterinary Medical Center
Aquatic Therapy
University of Tennessee
Physical Rehabilitation for Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
Knoxville, Tennessee
Nursing Care of theRehabilitation Patient
Denis J. Marcellin-Little, DVM, DACVS, DEDV, CCRP,
DACVSMR
Ralph Millard, MS, DACVS, DVM
 Professor of Orthopedics 
Clinical Assistant Professor, Small Animal Surgery
 College of Veterinary Medicine
 Purdue University
North Carolina State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Raleigh, North Carolina
West Lafayette, Indiana
The Physical Rehabilitation Evaluation
Exercise Physiology of the Canine Athtete
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
Physical Rehabilitation for Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
 Anne Marie Manning, DVM, DACVECC
Chief of Staff
Angell Memorial Animal Hospital
 Boston, Massachusetts 
Physical Rehabilitationfor the CriticallyInjured
Veterinary Patient
viij
Contributors
Darryl Millis, MS, DVM, DACVS, CCRP, DACVSMR
Deborah Gross Saunders, DPT, MSPT, OCS, CCRP
 Professor of Orthopedic Surgery
Owner
 Director, CARES Center for Veterinary Sports Medicine
Wizard of Paws Physical Rehabilitation for Animals, LLC
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Colchester, Conneticut
College of Veterinary Medicine
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
University of Tennessee
Joint Mobilization
Knox ville, Tennessee 
Common Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation of the
Regulatory and Practice Issues for the Veterinary and Physical
Athletic Patient
Therapy Professions
Development of a Rehabilitation Facility for Small Animals and
Canine Anatomy
Business Considerations
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and
Remobilization
Lisi Sharon, DVM, CCRP
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
The Israeli Rehabilitation Center for Animals
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
doar Na Izreel, Israel
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
Neurologic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation of the
Superficial Thermal Modalities
Neurologic Patient
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
Other Modalities in Veterinary Rehabilitation
Amanda Sutton, MSc Vet Phy, MCSP
Applications of Extracorporeal ShockWave inSmall Animal
MSc Veterinary Physiotherapy
Practice
Royal Veterinary College
Biomechanics ofPhysical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of
London, United Kingdom
Exercise
 Amanda Sutton's Animal Physiotherapy
Range-of-Motion and Stretching Exercises
 Littleton, Winchester Hants, United Kingdom
Exercises for Proprioception, Balance,and Joint Position
Massage
Awareness
Therapeutic Exercises: Early Limb Use Exercises
William Thomas, DACVIM (Neurology), DVM
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion,Strengthening,Endurance,
Professor
and Speed Exercises
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Aquatic Therapy
The University of Tennessee
Physical Rehabilitation for Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
College of Veterinary Medicine
Knoxville, Tennessee
Jim Minick
Neurologic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation of the
Executive Director
Neurologic Patient
 All Pets Wellness Center
Lockport, Illinois
Tyler Tucker, DPT
Development of a Rehabilitation Facility for Small Animats and
OnMark Physical Therapy
Business Considerations
Hunstville, AL
Superficial Thermal Modalities
Donna M. Raditic, DVM, CVA, DACVN
Adjunct Associate Clinician
Zoran Vrbanac, DVM, PhD
 Integrative Medicine Service
 Department of Radiology, Ultrasound Diagnostics and
University of Tennessee
Physical Therapy
 Knox ville, Tennessee
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
The Role of Chondroprotectants,Nutraceuticats,and Nutrition
University of Zagreb
in Rehabilitation
Zagreb, Croatia
Physicat Rehabilitation for the Critically Injured
Cheryl Riegger-Krugh, PT, MS, ScD
Veterinary Patient
Clinical Professor
Physical Therapy Program
J. Randy Walker, PT, PhD, DPT
Walsh University
Acting Dean, Graduate School
 North Canton, Ohio
The University of Tennessee at Chattanooga
Canine Anatomy
Chattanooga, Tennessee
Joint Mobilization
Contributors
ix
Tim Watson, PhD, BSc(Hons), MCSP, DipTP
Bobbie Werbe, LVMT, BS, CCRP, CERP
Professor of Physiotherapy
 Indianapolis, Indiana 
University of Hertfordshire
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
 Hatfeld, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom 
Therapeutic Ultrasound
Dana Whitlock, PT, DVM, MS, PT, CCRP
Veteriarian, Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Joseph P. Weigel, DVM, DACVS
Holistic Veterinary Care
Associate Professor of Surgery
Oakland, California
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Massage
College of Veterinary Medicine
The Umiversity of Tennessee
Knox ville, Tennessee
Canine Anatomy
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics
of Exercise
Preface
resulted in the need for close collaboration between veteri-
have witnessed remarkable progress in their ability to diag-
narians, physical therapists, and veterinary technicians to
nose and treat problems that, in the recent past, would have
 provide optimal evaluation and treatment of animal
been untreatable. Total hip replacement in the dog, laparo-
patients. Currently, these collaborative efforts and relation-
scopic procedures, arthroscopic surgery and the wide-
ships are being used to create treatment protocols for many
spread use of sophisticated imaging modalities such as
types of cutaneous, neurologic and musculoskeletal inju-
MRI, CT, and real-time ultrasonic imaging are daily occur-
ries in animals. In this book, we hope to amalgamate the
 rences in veterinary medicine. With the availability of these
knowledge that physical therapists, veterinarians, and vet-
sophisticated diagnostic techniques, the expectations for
erinary technicians possess to facilitate a faster and more
enhanced functional results have grown.
complete recovery from debilitating conditions.
Human physical therapy is an intermationally recog-
It is with these goals in mind that this edition was con-
nized discipline, and the positive efforts of post-surgical
ceived and written. We have seen a tremendous interest,
and post-injury rehabilitation have been documented and
and growth, in veterinary rehabilitation since the first
recognized in human health care. Relatively little attention
edition of this book was published in 2004. Canine reha-
has been given to veterinary patients afflicted with similar
bilitation has grown from a small area of interest to a
conditions. There is profound interest on the part of veteri-
recognized discipline during this time, and all animal
 nary caregivers to learn about and provide rehabilitation
patients, their owners, and veterinary caregivers are real-
and therapy following surgery, illness, or injury. Tech-
izing the benefits of this progression. This book has
niques used in human physical therapy are being adapted
expanded greatly from the first edition as knowledge within
for use in small animal patients.
this field has rapidly grown. Many chapters have been
The purpose of this textbook is to provide a solid under-
added to disseminate this new knowledge, and all of the
standing of physical therapy techniques and interventions
chapters have been updated to refect advances in the
for dogs. Most professional programs in veterinary medi-
respective topics. We hope this book is useful as both an
cine do not provide training in physical therapy. Educa-
in-depth study of the field, and as a quick reference on
tional programs in physical therapy do not include
topics such as protocols for specifc conditions that are
evaluation and treatment of animals. These factors have
seen clinically.
xi
Acknowledgments
I am truly amazed at the continued interest and progress
Many thanks are owed when a book five plus years in the
made in veterinary rehabilitation during the ten years since
making is finally completed. So many people have gener-
the first edition of this textbook was published. When
ously given their time and thoughts to help me, and all
writing a textbook in an area that incorporates two separate
cannot be listed; however, a few special people need to be
professions, there are many challenges to overcome and
thanked by name for their support and encouragement.
 people to thank. I would like to especially thank Dave for
Thanks first to my co-editor and friend, Darryl, who is not
his humor, expertise, and continual encouragement to keep 
only an exceptional surgeon but also an ex ceptional person.
things on track. Thanks are also in order to the many physi-
To the many contributors who have helped to keep this
cal therapists, veterinarians, veterinary technicians, owners,
work spirited and always enjoyable. My colleagues, stu-
and patients who have helped move the field forward and
dents, and patients, I continue to learn every day from all
provided kind words and encouraged our efforts. The staff
of you. Old friends, like Kevin, Ivan, Denis, and Randy
at Elsevier, especially Penny and Shelly, have done a tre-
who have kept me laughing for the last 25 plus years, let's
mendous job in keeping things on track and giving us
keep the good times coming! To many family members
nudges, pushes and shoves when needed. I would be remiss
across this country who remind me of what family means,
if I did not thank my colleagues at the University of Ten-
and to the memory of my father, Jacob Levine (1913-
nessee for providing help and support in the clinics and
 2011). To my mother Marie, to whom I owe much more
laboratory, especially Drs. Joe Weigel, Marti Drum, Dave
 than I can ever repay. To my children Lauren Allyn, Sarah
Hicks, and Jason Headrick. I would especially like to thank
Marie, Hadley Christian, and Ava Katherine Ann who
my family for continuing to support and encourage me; my
brighten every moment of every day. To my wife Allison-
wife Linda who has always encouraged and supported
who somehow understands me completely and supports
my efforts, and put up with the hectic work and travel
me wholly. And to the One who was with me before I was
schedule; Chris and Nick, who are not only my sons, but
bom.
my best friends, who always keep life interesting; and my
mother Adeline and late father, George, who made my
David Levine
dream of becoming a veterinarian come true by encourag-
ing and supporting me from the very beginning. Finally, I
would like to thank my patients, past and present, for their 
wisdom in teaching me about rehabilitation.
All things bright and beautiful,
All creatures great and small,
All things wise and wonderful:
The Lord God made them all.
Cecil Frances Alexander, 1848
DarrylMillis
xili
SECTION I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
History of Canine Physical
Rehabilitation
Lin McGonagle, Linda Blythe, and David Levine
History of Canine Physical Rehabilitation
 symposium as well as others during the past 25 years.-19
Many veterinarians and physical therapists have lectured
The idea of applying rehabilitation principles and tech-
and presented continuing education and research findings
niques to animals, although not new, has grown apprecia-
 at regional, national, and intermational human and veteri-
bly since the mid 1990s. More than 110 facilities providing
nary conferences.
 Many veterinarians have felt a need to improve postop-
the United States and this number is growing rapidly
as
erative patient care, because traditionally preoperative man-
veterinarians and physical therapists realize the need and
agement, diagnostic procedures, and surgical treatment
market for these services. Although many of the treatment
have been emphasized. The results seen with humans under-
protocols for humans were developed and continue to be
going intensive postoperative rehabilitation have caused
developed using animal models,1-7 a growing number of
many veterinarians to rethink patient management strate-
research studies are being conducted in universities and
gies, so that postoperative rehabilitation, once overlooked,
private practices that look specifically at the benefits of
is now becoming more common in veterinary practice.
different methods of rehabilitation in animals, especially
The APTA position statement and the AVMA "Guide-
dogs. Higher owner expectations combined with increased
lines for Altermative and Complementary Veterinary Medi-
sophistication and technical abilities of veterinary clini-
cine" have provided some initial guidelines for the feld of
animal physical therapy. Each professional organization
and rehabilitation.
 has recognized the other and has published guidelines for
 Interest in the practice of canine rehabilitation in the
collaborative working relationships. The APTA House of
United States first gained momentum in the late 1980s and
Delegates adopted a position statement in June 1993
throughout the 1990s as a result of the infuence of classic
regarding animal physical therapy, which states that the
texts; sporadic joumal articles; national presentations at
A ssidr [oishd pr uisd an ssa, 
the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA),
establish collaborative, collegial relationships with veteri-
 American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA), and
narians for the purposes of providing physical therapy ser-
the American College of Veterinary Surgeons (ACVS)
vices or consultation."20 The "Guidelines for Altermative
meetings; and the formation of the Animal Physical Thera-
and Complementary Veterinary Medicine" were adopted in
pist Special Interest Group within the APTA. The Interma-
July 1996 by the AVMA House of Delegates.?l The docu-
tional Racing Greyhound Symposium in conjunction with
ment, which defined veterinary physical therapy as "the
the Easterm States Veterinary Conference (currently the
use of noninvasive techniques, excluding veterinary chiro-
North  American  Veterinary  Conference) in  Orlando,
practic, for the rehabilitation of injuries in non-human
Florida, was frst started in 1986 and was expanded and
animals,’ established the following guidelines:
renamed the Intermational Canine Sports Medicine Sym-
Veterinary physical therapy should be performed by a
posium to include all sporting dogs. Rehabilitation was a
licensed veterinarian or, where in accordance with state
frequent topic at these annual meetings and numerous
practice acts, by (l) a licensed, certifed, or registered
articles have been printed in the proceedings of this
veterinary or animal health technician educated in veteri-
nary physical therapy or (2) a licensed physical therapist
The authors would liketo acknowledge Robert Taylorfor his work on the previous edition
 educated in non-human animal anatomy and physiology.
1
2
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
Veterinary physical therapy performed by a non-veterinar-
has strengthened the ties between veterinarians and physi-
ian should be performed under the supervision of, or refer-
cal therapists and increased support for the efficacy of
ral by, a licensed veterinarian who is providing concurrent
rehabilitation approaches in animal care.
care. Veterinary physical therapy performed by non-veter-
Initially, several books helped shape the field of animal
inarians should be limited to the use of stretching; massage;
physical rehabilitation. Physical Therapy for Animals:
stimulation by use of low-level lasers, electrical sources,
Selected Technigues, by Downer,7l infuenced profession-
magnetic fields, and ultrasound; rehabilitative exercises;
als as early as 1978. Canine Sports Medicine and Surgery??
hydrotherapy; and applications of heat and cold.
added to the growing field of sports medicine and dis-
New guidelines were adopted by the AVMA House of
cussed the role of physical rehabilitation in treating injuries
Delegates in 2001.22 They evaluated several medical
of dogs. Originally published in 1994 as Care of the Racing
approaches described by the terms complementary, alter-
Greyhound?4 and revised in 200773 Care of the Racing and
native, and integrative and collectively described them
Retired Greyhound outlines rehabilitation guidelines for
as complementary and alternative veterinary medicine
(CAVM). Examples of CAVM include aromatherapy; Bach
that are applicable to any athletic dog.74 The revised version
fower remedy therapy; energy therapy; low-energy photon
was expanded to include retired greyhounds. Three recent
therapy; magnetic field therapy; orthomolecular therapy;
texts written through the cooperation of veterinarians and
veterinary acupuncture, acutherapy, and acupressure; vet-
physical therapists include Canine Rehabilitation and
   a  
 Physical Therapy (2004) by Millis, Levine, and Taylor?s;
therapy (similar to osteopathy, chiropractic, or physical
Essential Facts of Physiotherapy (2004) by Bockstahler,
 Sn    a
Levine, and Millis?6; and Animal Physiotherapy—Assess-
and veterinary phytotherapy.
ment, Treatment and Rehabilitation of Animals (2007) by
The basic concept behind these new guidelines was to
McGowan, Goff, and Stubbs.77 All of these recent texts 
emphasize that CAVM should be held to the same stan-
provide details of examination procedures, intervention,
dards as traditional veterinary medicine, including valida-
and applications for specifc conditions. Multiple articles
tion of safety and efficacy by the scientific method. In
describe the use of physical therapeutic modalities and
addition, the guidelines state, “The AVMA believes veteri-
orthotics.78-97
narians should ensure that they have the requisite skills and
 Physical rehabilitation is gaining greater acceptance in
knowledge for any treatment modality they may consider
veterinary medicine and there are more options for train-
using." Finally, another pertinent point is, "The quality of
ing. Currently, rehabilitation rotations, electives, and
studies and reports pertaining to CAVM varies; therefore,
instruction are available at a number of veterinary colleges,
it is incumbent on a veterinarian to critically evaluate the
and rehabilitation lectures and even courses exist as a part
literature and other sources of information. Veterinarians
of the professional curriculum. A university-based certifi-
and organizations providing or promoting CAVM are
cate program at the University of Tennessee has over 850
encouraged to join with the AVMA in advocating sound
graduates worldwide as of 2012 (www.canineequinerehab
research necessary to establish proof of safety and effi-
.com). Graduates receive the Certifed Canine Rehabilita-
tion Practitioner designation. Other continuing education
already indicated its benefit in treating a wide number of
 programs are available at conferences and meetings.
conditions.23-34 In addition, other studies have evaluated
In August 1999 the First Intermational Symposium for
therapeutic modalities and the responses of tissues to reha-
Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation in Veterinary Medi-
cine was sponsored by and held at Oregon State University.
Joumals and books have provided information on
More than 300 participants from 21 countries met during 4
animal physical rehabilitation for more than 30 years.
 days to present clinical and research findings and to share
However, an article titled "Postsurgical Physical Therapy:
ideas. This meeting focused entirely on animal physical
The Missing Link" by Taylor,23 was one of the first to
rehabilitation and brought the professions of veterinary
capture the interest of the veterinary community. Through-
medicine and physical therapy together to exchange infor-
out the remainder of the 1990s and continuing to date, the
mation and share ideas. Subsequently, there have been
number of publications increased. Topics included cranial
additional symposia in the United States in Knox ville, Ten-
-radosd teupua pe aimn u an
nessee, in 2002; in Raleigh, North Carolina, in 2004; and in
tive management of spinal surgery or spinal cord diseases
Minneapolis, Minnesota, in 2008. The fourth symposium
was held in Amhem, the Netherlands, in 2006 to expand
 and integrate rehabilitation knowledge, methods, and prac-
Collaboration of veterinarians and physical therapists has
tices of other countries. In 2010, the sixth symposium was
increased, resulting in publications regarding physical
held at Auburm University in Alabama and the Seventh
rehabilitation for the critically ill patient6466 and pain
Symposium was in Vienna, Austria. Plans for a meeting in
relief.67-70 It is clear that the dissemination of information
the United States in the summer of 2014 are ongoing.
Chapter 1
History of Canine Physical Rehabilitation
Worldwide Animal Rehabilitation and
provides a brief history of these organizations and contact
Physical Therapy Associations
information.
With the robust interest in the area of canine physical
Veterinarians and physical therapists in many countries
rehabilitation at local, national, and intermational meetings,
have been sharing information and working together for
there are now several formal veterinary associations. The
three decades. Physiotherapists have professional organi-
Intermational Association of Veterinary Rehabilitation and
zations for animal physical rehabilitation in at least 11
 Physical Therapy (www.iavrpt.org) became an official
countries: Australia, Canada, Finland, Genmany, the Neth-
association in July 2008. This diverse group of veterinar-
erlands, New Zealand, South Africa, Sweden, the United
ians, physical therapists, and other interested professionals
 Kingdom, and the United States. In many of these coun-
 grew out of the original symposium attendees and assists
tries, the groups are formally recognized by their respec-
in guiding the organization of the biannual symposium.
tive  national  physical  therapy  associations.  Box   1-1
Their mission is to provide a forum for the presentation of
Box 1-1
Animal Physical Rehabilitation Organizations (Official Names)
International Associations
First organized in 1988. Gained offcial recognition in 1998
 International Association of Veterinary Rehabilitation and
 by the South African Society of Physiotherapy.
Physical Therapy
Website: ww w.animalphysiogroup.co.za
 Incorporated in 2008 for numerous professions working in
Sweden
 animal rehabi litation
 The Association of Registered Physiotherapists of Veterinary
Website: www.iavrpt.org
Veterinary European Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation
Medicine
Association
 Founded in 1995. Became a section member of the Swedish
 Association of Registered Physiotherapists in 1996.
First meeting held in 2010 for professions working in
Website: Isvet.se
 animal rehabilitation in Europe.
Website: www. vepra.eu
United Kingdom
 International Association of Physical Therapists in Animal Practice
Association of Chartered Physiotherapists in Animal Therapy
Recognized in 2011 by the World Confederation for
(ACPAT)
Physical Therapy
Recognized in 1988 by the Chartered Society of
Website: ww w. WCPT.org
 Phy siother api sts
Website: www.acpat.org
Australia
Animal Physiotherapy Group
Ireland
Recognized by the Australian Physiotherapy Association.
 Chartered Physiotherapists in Veterinary Practice
Website: ww w.ph ysiotherapy.asn.au
Recognized by the Irish Society of Chartered Physiotherapists
Website: iscp.ie
Canada
Animal Rehab Division, formerly known as Canadian Horse
Switzerland
and Animal Physiotherapy Association (CHAP)
Schweizerischer verband fur tierphysiotherapie
First organized in 1994. Recognized in 2004 by the
Established in 2007
Canadian Physiotherapy Association (ww w.phy siotherapy.ca/)
Website: svtpt.ch, tierphysiotherapie.com
Website: www.physiotherapy.ca/Division/Animal-Rehabilitation
United States
Finland
 Animal Physical Therapist Special Interest Group
Finnish Association of Animal Physiotherapists
 Recognized in 1998 by the American Physical Therapy
Founded in 1997. Recognized as a subgroup of the Finnish
Association
Association of Physiotherapists
Website: ww w.orthopt.org/sig_apt.php
Website: ww w.fysioterapia.net
 American Association of Rehabilitation Veterinarians
The Netherlands
Founded in 2008 for veterinarians.
Website: ww w.rehabyets.org
 Nederlandsee Verening voor Fysiotherapie bij Dieren (N VFD;
American Association of Rehabilitation Veterinary Technicians
 Dutch Animal Physical Therapy Association)
Created for veterinary technicians who provide assistance in
Founded in 1989. Recognized by the Dutch Ministry of
 physical rehabilitation.
Agriculture since 1992.
http://rehabvets. org/aarvt.lasso
Address: Hindelaan 56, 1216 CW Hilversum, Netherlands
 American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine and
South Africa
 Rehabi litation.
Animal Physiotherapy Group of South Africa, formerly known
Provisional approval in 2010 by the American Veterinary
as the South African Association of Physiotherapists in Animal
 Medical Association
Therapy (SAAPAT)
Website: VSMR.org
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
clinical and research information and discussion of topics
REFERENCES
related to animal rehabilitation, to further scientific inves-
 1. Daily L et al: The effects of microwave diathermy on the eye
tigation, and to promote the continued development of this
of the rabbit, Am J Ophthaimol 35:1001-1017, 1952.
2. Douglas WW, Malcolm JL: The effect of localized cooling
specialty area to provide improved quality of care based
on sound evidence. Another new association, the Veteri-
on conduction of cat nerves, J Physiot 130:53-71, 1955.
3. Lehman JF et al: Ultrasonic effects as demonstrated in live
nary European Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Asso-
pigs with surgical metal implants, Arch Phys Med Rehabitl
ciation, held its first meeting in 2010 in Zagreb, Croatia.
40:483-488, 1959.
Another organization for veterinarians interested in reha-
4. Nadasdi M: Inhibition of experimental arthritis by athermic
bilitation in the United States is the American Association
pulsing shortwave in rats, Am J Orthop 2:105-107, 1960.
of Rehabilitation Veterinarians (ww w.rehabvets.org). This
 5. Ely TS et al: Heating characteristics of laboratory animals
group has a goal of making veterinarians in the United
exposed to ten centimeter microwaves, Biot Eng 11:123-137,
States more aware of the benefits of rehabilitation and
1964.
addressing practice concerms. A similar organization exists
 6. Jezdinsky J et al: Effects of cold and heat therapy on trau-
for veterinary technicians, the American Association of
matic oedema of rat hind paw, Acta Univ Palacki Olomuc
Rehabilitation Veterinary Technicians.  Another formal
Fac Med 66:185-201, 1973.
association became established in April 20ll within the
7. Michalski WJ, Sequin J: The effect of muscle cooling and
World Confederation of Physical Therapy (WCPT.org).
stretch on muscle spindle secondary endings in the cat,
J Physiol 253:341-356, 1975.
The Intermational Association of Physical Therapists in
8. Van Dy ke J: Canine rehabilitation—therapeutic protocols for
 Animal Practice was created to foster collaboration among
specific sports injuries,Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Inter-
physical therapists worldwide and to share information
nationat Canine Sports Medicine Symposium, Jan 17-18,
relating to research, education, and practice.
Orlando, Fla, 2009.
9. Dee JF: It's just a sprain, Proceedings of the Fourteenth
Future Trends
International Canine Sports Medicine Symposium, Jan
10-11, Orlando, Fla, 28, 1998.
Physical rehabilitation in small animal practice has bec ome
10. Taylor RA: First aid and bandage/splint techniques for sport-
increasingly common and will continue to become more
ing dogs,Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Canine
accepted as the scientific literature continues to evolve. In
Sports Medicine Symposium, Jan 14-15, Orlando, Fla, 38,
1997.
many orthopedic and neurologic conditions, physical reha-
11. Taylor RA: Rehabilitation of injuries, Proceedings of the
bilitation is becoming commonplace as a means to enhance
Thirteenth International Canine Sports Medicine Sympo-
recovery, as it is in human medicine and surgery. Wellness
sium, Jan 11-12, Orlando, Fla, 45, 1997.
and preventive medicine, such as physical rehabilitation for
12. Taylor RA: Basic principles of physical therapy for sporting
weight reduction and for maintenance of muscle strength
dogs, Proceedings of the Eleventh Intermational Canine
and cardiorespiratory fitness, is also emerging as a trend
Sports Medicine Symposium, Jan 14-15, Orlando, Fla, 43,
among pet owners. In 2008, a national committee of vet-
1995.
erinarians in the United States proposed that veterinary
13. Dumbleton CD: Electro therapy and the racing greyhound,
rehabilitation become a board-certified specialty under the
Proceedings of the Tenth International Racing Greyhound
American Veterinary Medical Association and the Ameri-
Symposium, Jan 15-16, Orlando, Fla, 1994.
can Board of Veterinary Specialties (ABVS). This newly
14. deHaan J et al: Double blind clinical study of PSGAG's
e n u eiseidsp d go n no (unb)
formed American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine
dogs, Proceedings of the Ninth Annuat Internationat
 and Rehabilitation has been given provisional approval by
Racing Greyhound Symposium, Jan 16-17, Orlando, Fla, 18,
the AVMA to establish and maintain credentialing and
1993.
certification standards  for veterinary practitioners who
15. Sweeney PA: Application of physiotherapy in the racing
excel in sports medicine and rehabilitation. The organiza-
greyhound, Proceedings of the Ninth International Racing
tion formed with a group of charter diplomats and admin-
Greyhound Symposium, Jan 16-17, Orlando, Fla, 37, 1993.
istered its first certifying examination in 2012. With both
16. Taylor RA: Practical bandaging and splinting, Proceedings
academic and nonacademic pathways to certification, a
of the Ninth International Racing Greyhound Symposium,
veterinarian can become board certified in either canine or
Jan 16-17, Orlando, Fla, 39, 1993.
equine specialties under this college.
17. Taylor RA: Management of digit injuries, Proceedings of the
Eighth Intermational Racing Greyhound Symposium Pro-
It is certain the field of animal rehabilitation will expand
ceedings, Jan 11-12, Orlando, Fla, 17, 1992.
in future years both in the United States and worldwide.
18. Starbuck MA: Physical therapy for racing greyhounds, Pro-
Our hope is that veterinary and physical therapy profes-
Ceedings of the Seventh Intermational Racing Greyhound
sionals will continue to collaborate to define practice
Symposium, Jan 12-13, Orlando, Fla, 46, 1991.
models and establish effective clinical protocols, as well
19. Taylor RA: Bandaging techniques for common racing inju
 as provide education and training for the benefit of our
Ties, Proceedings of the Seventh Internationat Racing Grey-
animal clients and owners.
hound Symposium, Jan 12-13, Orlando, Fla, 51, 1991.
Chapter 1
History of Canine Physical Rehabilitation
5
 20. Position on physical therapists in collaborative relationships 
35. Sikes R: Postoperative management of the neurosurgical
with veterinarians, American Physical Therapy Association.
patient, Prob Vet Med 3:467-477, 1989.
House of Delegates 06-93-20-36(Program 32), 1993.
 36. Olby N: Treatment of acute spinal cord injuries, Proceedings 
21. Guidelines for alternative and complementary veterinary
of theThird International Symposium on Rehabilitation and
medicine. In AVMA directory, Schaumburg, Il, 2000, Ameri-
Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 7-1l, NC
can Veterinary Medical Association.
State, NC, 145, 2004.
22. Guidelines for complementary and alternative veterinary
37. Olby N: Treatment of lumboscacral disease and other
medicine. In AVMA policy statements and guidetines,
chronic spinal problems, Proceedings of the Third Interma-
Schaumberg, Ill, 2001, American Veterinary Medical
tional Symposium on Rehabilitation andPhysical Therapy
Associati on.
in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 7-1l, NC State, NC, 149,
23. Taylor RA: Postsurgical physical therapy: the missing link,
2004.
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 14:1583-1594, 1992.
 38. Sherman J: Physical rehabilitation for neurological patients:
As  so go o e n  osur 
general approach and techniques, Proceedings of the Third
treated cranial cruciate ligament-deficient stifes by use of
International Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physicat
electrical stimulation of muscles, Am J Vet Res 58:1473-
Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 7-11, NC State, NC,
1477, 1997.
153,2004.
25. Millis DL et al: A preliminary study of early physical therapy
 39. McCauley L: Disc disease and paral ysis, Proceedings of the
following surgery for cranial cruciate ligament rupture in
Second International Symposium on Rehabilitation and
dogs, Vet Surg 26:434, 1997.
Physicat Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knox-
26. Marcellin-Little DJ: Cranial cruciate ligament injuries-
ville, Tenn, 217, 2002.
treatment decisions, Proceedings of the Third Intermational
 40. McGonagle L: Peripheral nerve injuries, Proceedings of the
Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physicat Therapy in Vet-
Second Internationat Symposium on Rehabilitation and
erinary Medicine, Aug 7-11,NC State,NC,133,2004.
PhysicatTherapy inVeterinary Medicine,Aug 10-14,Knox-
 27. Millis DL: Cranial cruciate ligament injuries—rehabilitation,
ville, Tenn, 263, 2002.
Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Reha-
41. Bockstahler B et al: Benefits of physical therapy for dogs
bilitationandPhysicalTherapyinVeterinaryMedicine,Aug
undergoing decompressive spinal cord surgery, Proceedings
7-11, NC State, NC, 137, 2004.
of the Second International Symposium on Rehabilitation
 28. Adamson CP: Cranial cruciate ligament surgery, Proceed-
and Physicat Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14,
ings of the Second Intermnational Symposium on Rehabilita-
Knoxville, Tenn, 193, 2002.
tion and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine,Aug
42. Looney A: Rehabilitation considerations in critically injured,
10-14, Knox ville, Tenn, 215, 2002.
paralyzed, and immobilized patients, Proceedings of the
29. Adamson CP, Taylor RA: General outcomes twelve weeks
Second International Symposium on Rehabilitation and
post tibial plateau leveling osteotomy in dogs with cranial
PhysicalTherapy inVeterinary Medicine,Aug 10-14,Knox-
Cruciate ligament injury, Proceedings of the Second Interna-
ville, Tenn, 167, 2002.
tionatSymposium onRehabilitationand PhysicalTherapy in
 43. Sharon, L: Physical therapy in a case of polyradiculoneuritis,
Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knox ville, Tenn, 205, 2002.
Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on
30. Francis DA et al: Bone and muscle loss from disuse follow-
RehabilitationandPhysicalTherapy inVeterinaryMedicine,
ing cranial cruciate ligament transection and stifle stabiliza-
Aug 10-14, Knoxville, Tenn, 121, 2002.
tion surgery, Proceedings of the Second International
44. Roth R: Rehabilitation of the canine with intervertebral disc
Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Vet-
disease,Proceedings ofthe Second International Symposium
erinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knoxville, Tenn, 203, 2002.
on Rehabilitation and Physicat Therapy in Veterinary Medi-
31. Bockstahler B et al: The effect of physical therapy on post-
cine, Aug 10-14, Knoxville, Tenn, 117, 2002.
operative rehabilitation of dogs after cranial cruciate liga-
45. Thomas WB: Canine neurological conditions, Proceedings
ment repair, Proceedings of the Second International
of the Second International Symposium on Rehabilitation
Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Vet-
and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14,
erinary Medicine,Aug 10-14, Knoxville, Tenn, 201, 2002.
Knoxville, Tenn, 87, 2002.
32. Taylor RA et al: Stife surgery and rehabilitation, Proceed-
46. Bockstahler B et al: Benefits of physical therapy for dogs
ings of theSecond International Symposium on Rehabilita-
undergoing decompressive spinal cord surgery, Proceedings
tion and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug
of the Second International Symposium on Rehabilitation
10-14, Knox ville, Tenn, 143, 2002.
and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14,
33. Evans CS: A rehabilitation protocol following tibial plateau
Knoxville, Tenn, 193, 2002.
leveling osteotomy of the canine stife: a single subject case
47. Albrecht WL: Combination of veterinary medicine, physical
report, Proceedings of the Second Internationat Symposium
therapy and orthotics in a brachial plexus nerve degeneration:
on Rehabilitation and Physicat Therapy inVeterinary Medi-
case study, Proceedings of The First International Sympo-
cine, Aug 10-14, Knox ville, Tenn, 135, 2002.
sium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Veterinary
34. Millis DL: Changes in muscle mass following transection of
Medicine, Aug 7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 145, 1999.
the cranial cruciate ligament and immediate stife stabiliza-
48. Alexander CS: Rehabilitation of the paretic patient, Proceed-
tion,Proceedings of the First International Symposium on
ings of the Second Intermational Symposium on Rehabilita-
Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy inVeterinary Medicine,
tion and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, August
Aug 7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 155, 1999.
10-14, Knoxville, Tenn, 119, 2002.
6
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
49. Nwadike BS: Rehabilitation of fracture patients, Proceedings
63. Steiss JE: Physical therapy/rehabilitation of injuries in
of the Third International Symposium on Rehabilitation and
sporting dogs, Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Sports
Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 7-1l, NC
Medicine Program Symposium, Jan 30, Auburn, Ala, 59,
State, NC, 141, 2004.
1999.
50. Millis DL: Managing chronic osteoarthritis using physical
 64. Manning AM et al: Physical therapy for critically ill veteri-
rehabilitation,Proceedings of the Third International Sym
nary patients. I Chest physical therapy, Compend Cont Educ
posium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Veterinary
Pract Vet 19:675-689, 1997.
Medicine, Aug 7-11, NC State, NC, 127, 2004.
65. Manning AM et al: Physical therapy for critically ill veteri-
51. Taylor RA: Canine hip dysplasia—Treatment and rehabilita-
nary patients. I1. The musculoskeletal system, Compend Cont
tion, Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on
Educ Pract Vet 19:803-807, 1997.
Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy inVeterinary Medicine,
66. Clark GN: Traumatic injury patterns in canine athletes, Pro-
Aug 7-11, NC State, NC, 131, 2004.
Ceedings of theFirst International Symposium on Rehabilita-
52. Marcellin-Little DJ: The postoperative hip, Proceedings of
tion and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 7-11,
the Second International Symposium on Rehabilitation and
Corvallis, Ore, 143, 1999.
Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, August 10-14,
67. Hansen B: Comprehensive management of acute pain, Pro-
Knoxville, Tenn, 233, 2002.
Ceedings of theThird InternationatSymposium on Rehabili-
53. Adamson CP, Taylor RA: Preliminary functional outcomes
tation and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine,Aug
of extracorporeal shockwave therapy on ten dogs with
7-11, NC State, NC, 73, 2004.
various orthopedic conditions, Proceedings of the Second
68. Lascelles DX: Comprehensive 1
management of chronic
InternationatSymposium onRehabilitation and Physicat
animal pain—the rationale for multimodal  therapy  for 
Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knoxville,
chronic pain,Proceedings of theThird InternationatSympo-
Tenn, 195, 2002.
sium onRehabilitation and Physical Therapy inVeterinary
54. Finster ST, Marcellin-Little DJ: Risk analysis of goniometric
Medicine, Aug 7-11, NC State, NC, 79, 2004.
changes present in Labrador retrievers with developmental
69. Roth R: Animal palliative and hospice care rehab in reverse,
orthopedic diseases, Proceedings of the Second International
Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on
Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in
RehabilitationandPhysicalTherapy inVeterinaryMedicine,
Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knoxville, Tenn, 185,
Aug 10-14, Knoxville, Tenn, 131, 2002.
2002.
70. Frick AL: Pain management without the pill, Proceedings of
55. Marcellin-Little DJ: Rehabilitation of fractures, Proceedings
the Second Intermational Symposium on Rehabilitation and
of the Second Internationat Symposium on Rehabilitation
PhysicatlTherapy inVeterinary Medicine,Aug 10-14,Knox-
and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14,
ville, Tenn, 129, 2002.
Knoxville, Tenn, 154, 2002.
71. Downer AH: Physical therapy for animals: selected tech-
 56. Hamilton SA: Rehabilitation of osteoarthritis in a dog, Pro-
niques, Springfeld, Ill, 1978, Charles C Thomas.
ceedings of the Second International Symposium on Reha-
72. Bloomberg MS et al: Canine sports medicine and surgery,
bilitation and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine,Aug
Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
10-14, Knox ville, Tenn, 127, 2002.
73. Blythe LL et al: Care of the racing and retired greyhound,
 57. Roth R: Rehabilitation of the canine with intervertebral disc
Abilene, Kan, 2007, American Greyhound Council.
disease,Proceedings of the Second Internationat Symposium
74. Blythe LL et al: Care of the racing greyhound, Abilene, Kan,
on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medi-
1994, American Greyhound Council.
cine, Aug 10-14, Knox ville, Tenn, 117, 2002.
75. Millis DL, Levine D, Taylor RA: Canine rehabilitation and
 58. Johnston KD et al: The effects of TENS on osteoarthritic pain
physicat therapy, St Louis, 2004, WB Saunders.
in the stifle of dogs, Proceedings of the Second Intermational
76. Bockstahler B et al: Essentiat facts of physiotherapy in dogs
Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in
and cats: rehabilitation and pain management, Germany,
Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knoxville, Tenn, 199,
2004, BE Vet Verlag.
2002.
77. McGowan C et al: Animat physiotherapy: assessment, treatment
59. Millis DL, Levine D: Arthritis management, Proceedings of
and rehabilitation of animats, Oxford, 2007, Blackwell.
theSecond International Symposium on Rehabilitationand
78. Marcellin-Little DJ: Assistive ambulation devices, Proceed-
Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knox-
ings of theThirdIntermationalSymposium on Rehabilitation
ville, Tenn, 135, 2002.
and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 7-11, NC
60. Alexander C: Experiences with physical therapy in various
State, NC, 277, 2004.
orthopaedic disorders, Proceedings of the First Intermationat
79. Hamilton S: Orthotics, slings, and carts, Proceedings of the
Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Vet-
Second International Symposium on Rehabilitation and
erinary Medicine, Aug 7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 171, 1999.
Physicat Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knox-
 61. Dee JF: Medical management of osteoarthritis in senior dogs,
ville, Tenn, 241, 2002.
Proceedings of the First InternationalSymposium on Reha-
 80. Hamilton S: Aquatic exercise for the small animal patient,
bilitation and Physicat Therapy inVeterinary Medicine,Aug
Proceedings of the Second Intermational Symposium on
7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 83, 1999.
Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy inVeterinary Medicine,
 62. Payne JT: General management considerations for the trauma
Aug 10-14, Knoxville, Tenn, 163, 2002.
patient, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 25:1015-1029,
 81. Penick T: Aquatics in canine rehabilitation, Proceedings of
1995.
the Second Intermational Symposium on Rehabilitation and
Chapter 1
History of Canine Physical Rehabilitation 
Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knox-
and Physicat Therapy in Veterinary Medicine,Aug 7-11,
ville, Tenn, 159, 2002.
Corvallis, Ore, 109, 1999.
82.Saunders DG: Electrical stimulation, Proceedings of the
 90. Clark GN: Orthotics, prosthetics, and ambulatory carts: use
Second Intermational Symposium on Rehabilitation and
of supportive devices in canine patients, Proceedings of the
Physicat Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knox-
FirstInternationalSymposiumonRehabilitationandPhysi-
ville, Tenn, 55, 2002.
cal Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 7-1l, Corvallis,
 83. Steiss JE: Therapeutic ultrasound, Proceedings of the Second
Ore, 141, 1999.
InternationatSymposium on Rehabilitation and Physicat
 91. Glennerster M: Hydrotherapy and the racing greyhound, Pro-
Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 10-14, Knoxville,
Ceedings of theFirst International Symposium on Rehabilita-
Tenn, 49, 2002.
tion and Physicat Therapy in Veterinary Medicine,Aug 7-11,
 84. Steiss JE: Therapeutic ultrasound: theory and application
Corvallis, Ore, 147, 1999.
principles, Proceedings of the First Internationat Symposium
92. le Jeune R: The Winks Greene machinee-stim for animals,
onRehabilitation and PhysicalTherapy in Veterinary Medi-
Proceedings of the First International Symposium on Reha-
cine, Aug 7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 43, 1999.
bilitationandPhysicalTherapy inVeterinaryMedicine,Aug
85. Steiss JE: Magnetic feld therapy: theory and application
7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 153, 1999.
principles, Proceedings of the First Internationat Symposium
93. Levine D et al: Thermal effects of 3 MHz ultrasound treat-
on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy inVeterinary Medi-
ments in dogs, Proceedings of the First International Sym-
cine, Aug 7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 51, 1999.
posium on Rehabilitation andPhysicalTherapy inVeterinary
 86. Levine D, Millis DL: Electrical stimulation, Proceedings of
Medicine, Aug 7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 161, 1999.
the First International Symposium on Rehabilitation and
94. Millis DL et al: Variables affecting thigh circumference mea-
Physical Therapy inVeterinary Medicine,Aug7-11,Corval-
surements in dogs. Proceedings of the First International
lis, Ore, 55, 1999.
Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Vet-
 87. Dyson M: Low intensity laser therapy: theory and application
erinary Medicine, Aug 7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 157, 1999.
principles, Proceedings of the First International Symposium
 95. Steiss JE, Adams CC: Effect of coat on rate of temperature
on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medi-
increase in muscle during ultrasound treatment of dogs, Am
cine, Aug 7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 61, 1999.
J Vet Res 60:76-80, 1999.
88. Schoen AM: Veterinary acupuncture: theory and principles of
 96. Levine D et al: Effects of 3.3 MHz ultrasound on caudal
application in rehabilitation, Proceedings of the First Interna-
thigh muscle temperature in dogs, Vet Surg 30:170-174,
tionalSymposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in
2001.
Veterinary Medicine, Aug 7-11, Corvallis, Ore, 65, 1999.
 97. Millis DL, Levine D: The role of exercise and physical
89. Dumbleton CD: Electrotherapy and the greyhound, Proceed-
 modalities in the treatment of osteoarthritis, Vet Clin North.
ings of theFirst International Symposium onRehabilitation
Am Small Animal Pract 27:913-930, 1997.
Regulatory and Practice Issues
for the Veterinary and Physical
Therapy Professions
David Levine and Darryl Millis
Definition of Physical Therapy
ili. use of complementary, altermative, and integrative
therapies, or
The American Physical Therapy Association (APTA) has
iv. use of any procedure for reproductive management,
developed a model definition of physical therapy. In this
including but not limited to the diagnosis or treat-
model definition, physical therapy includes ex amining and
ment of pregnancy, fertility, sterility, or infertility, or
- ng s ra sd sunna
v. determination of the health, fitness, or soundness of
tions, disability, and other health-related conditions to
an animal, or
 determine a diagnosis, prognosis, and intervention. Some
vi. rendering of advice or recommendation by any
examples of areas that may be examined include aerobic
means including telephonic and other electronic
capacity, arousal, cognition, assistive and supportive
communications with regard to any of the above.
 devices, barriers, ergonomics, gait, balance, pain, posture,
b. To represent, directly or indirectly, publicly or privately,
 prosthetic requirements, and range of motion.
an ability and willingness to do an act described in
subsection 16(a).
Physical therapists also alleviate impairments and func-
tional limitations by designing, implementing, and modify-
c. To use any title, words, abbreviation, or letters in a
ing therapeutic interventions. Some examples of these
manner or under circumstances that induce the belief
activities include therapeutic exercise, functional training.
that the person using them is qualifed to do any act
manual therapy techniques, electrotherapeutic modalities,
described in subsection 16(a).
and patient-related instruction. Physical therapists are also
This updated Model Veterinary Practice Act includes
involved with helping to prevent injury, impairments, func-
the use of complementary, altermative, and integrative ther-
tional limitations, and disability, and with the promotion
apies. Until 2001 these had been listed under Guidelines
for Altermative and Complementary Veterinary Medicine,
and maintenance of fitness, health, and quality of life in all
age populations. Physical therapists accomplish these tasks
which is now referred to as "Complementary, Altermative,
in a variety of situations, including patient consultation,
and Integrative Therapies." These guidelines describe the
potential use and application of these therapies for veteri-
education, and research.
nary patients. The Model Veterinary Practice Act has
Definition of Veterinary Medicine
included these forms of treatment to help protect the public,
by placing the definitions under the Practice of Veterinary
The practice of veterinary medicine is described in the
Medicine. Approximately 20 states have followed the
AVMA Model Practice Act and included complementary
directory of the American Veterinary Medical Association
and altemative medicine in their state practice act defini-
(AVMA) in a section titled The Model Practice Act (Act).?
The Act has been periodically updated and revised, and in
tion of veterinary medicine, while another 20 have enacted
exemptions for certain therapies, generally requiring vet-
the current version (2012, Section 2.16), the practice of
veterinary medicine means:
erinary supervision or referral.
a. To diagnose, prognose, treat, correct, change, alleviate,
or prevent animal disease, illness, pain, deformity,
Complementary, Alternative, and
 defect, injury, or other physical, dental, or mental condi-
Integrative Therapies
tions by any method or mode; including the:
 i. performance of any medical or surgical procedure, or
The AVMA Guidelines for Complementary and Altema
ii. prescription, dispensing, administration, or application
tive Veterinary Medicine address topics such as veterinary
of any drug, medicine, biologic, apparatus, anesthetic,
 acupuncture and acutherapy, and acupressure; low-energy
Or other therapeutic or diagnostic substance, or
photon therapy; magnetic field therapy; veterinary chiro-
 practic; veterinary physical medicine and rehabilitation;
The authors would like to acknowledge Nancy Murphy for her work on this chapter in
veterinary homeopathy; and nutraceutical medicine.? The
the previous edition.
 guidelines state:
Chapter 2
Regulatory and Practice Issues for the Veterinary and Physical Therapy Professions
9
The AVMA believes that all veterinary medicine,
required to obtain premarketing approval by the FDA for
including CAVM, should be held to the same standards.
assurance of safety or efficacy. Data establishing the eff-
Claims for safety and effectiveness ultimately should
cacy and safety of such products and devices should ulti-
be proven by the scientific method. Circumstances com-
mately be demonstrated. To assure the safety of the food
supply, veterinarians should be judicious in the use of
monly require that veterinarians extrapolate information
when formulating a course of therapy. Veterinarians should
products or devices for the treatment of food-producing
animal s.
exercise caution in such circumstances. Practices and
philosophies that are ineffective or unsafe should be
If a human health hazard is anticipated in the course of a
disc arded.
disease or as a result of therapy, it should be made known
Furthermore,
to the client."
"The AVMA believes veterinarians should ensure that
Veterinary Physical Rehabilitation
   a  shs  n  
ment modality they may consider using.
Veterinary physical rehabilitation is the use of noninvasive
Recommendations for patient care state that:
techniques, excluding veterinary chiropractic, for the reha-
bilitation of injuries in nonhuman animals. Veterinary
"The foremost objective in veterinary medicine is patient
physical  rehabilitation  performed  by  nonveterinarians
welfare. Ideally, sound veterinary medicine is effective,
should be limited to the use of stretching; massage therapy;
safe, proven, and holistic in that it considers all aspects of
stimulation by use of low-level lasers, electrical sources,
the animal patient in the context of its environment.
magnetic fields, and ultrasound; rehabilitative exercises;
Diagnosis should be based on sound, accepted principles
hydrotherapy; and applications of heat and cold. Veterinary
of veterinary medicine. Proven treatment methods should
physical rehabilitation should be performed by a licensed
be discussed with the owner or authorized agent when
veterinarian or, where in accordance with state practice
presenting the treatment options available. Owner consent
acts, by a licensed, certifed, or registered veterinary or
should be obtained prior to initiating any treatment, includ-
ing CAVM. Clients usually choose a medical course of
rehabilitation or a licensed physical therapist educated in
action on the advice of their veterinarian. Recommenda-
nonhuman animal anatomy and physiology. Veterinary
tions for effective and safe care should be based on avail-
physical  rehabilitation performed by  a nonveterinarian
able scientifc knowledge and the medical judgment of the
should be performed under the supervision of, or referral
veterinarian."
by, a licensed veterinarian who is providing concurrent
The veterinarian also undertakes responsibilities, includ-
care.
ing:
Massage Therapy
"These guidelines  support the requisite  interaction
 Massage therapy is a technique in which the therapist uses
described in the definition of the veterinarian-client-patient
 only his or her hands and body to massage soft tissues.
relationship. Accordingly, a veterinarian should ex amine
Massage therapy on nonhuman animals should be per-
fonmed by  a licensed  veterinarian  with education  in
 treatment is initiated.
massage therapy or, where in accordance with state veteri-
 The quality of studies and reports pertaining to CAVM
nary practice acts, by a graduate of an accredited massage
varies; therefore, it is incumbent on a veterinarian to
school who has been educated in nonhuman animal
massage therapy. When performed by a nonveterinarian,
mation. Veterinarians and organizations providing or pro-
massage therapy should be performed under the supervi-
moting CAVM are encouraged to join with the AVMA in
sion of, or referral by, a licensed veterinarian who is pro-
advocating sound research necessary to establish proof of
viding concurrent care.3
safety and efficacy.
The development of the AVMA Guidelines for Comple-
Medical records should meet statutory requirements.
mentary and Altermative Veterinary Medicine is a recogni-
Information should be clear and complete. Records should
tion by the veterinary profession that other health care
contain documentation  of client communications and
 professionals have information and knowledge that may
owner consent.
tate to seek the help, advice, and expertise of others to
In general, veterinarians should not use treatments that
improve the care and management of their patients. When
confict with state or federal regulations. Veterinarians
should be aware that animal nutritional supplements and
this expertise, assistance, and advice is sought, however,
botanicals typically are not subject to premarketing evalu-
the responsibility for the care, diagnosis, treatment, and
ation by the FDA for purity, safety, or effcacy and may
management of the patient remains with the attending vet-
contain active pharmacologic agents or unknown sub-
erinarian, and a veterinarian-client-patient relationship
stances. Manufacturers of veterinary devices may not be
(VCPR) will be established.
10
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
veterinarian should continue to provide care, as needed,
The Veterinarian-Client-Patient
during the transition.
Relationship
The Principles state that clients may terminate the
VCPR at any time.4
The concept of the VCPR was introduced by the AVMA
to clearly describe the relationship of the veterinarian
Guidelines for Referrals
to clients (the owners) and patients served by the
profession. This VCPR is the basis for professional inter-
The expansion and growth of knowledge, the emergence
actions and has become part of a variety of official
 of specialization, and the use of the services and expertise
AVMA documents, including the Principles of Veterinary
of other health care professionals have necessitated the
Medical Ethics, the Model Practice Act, and the Guidelines
increased use of referrals in veterinary medicine. Referrals
for Veterinary Prescription Drugs. The Guidelines for
are to be encouraged among veterinarians, and the Guide-
Complementary and Altermative Veterinary Medicine also
lines for Referrals? approved by the AVMA in 1990 and
refer to the VCPR, and, because these modalities are
revised in 2009 should be followed when referrals are used.
considered to be part of the practice of veterinary medi-
These referral guidelines are summarized and paraphrased
cine, they should be offered only in the context of a
as follows:
valid VCPR.
Definitions
As stated in the Principles of Veterinary Medical Ethics,4
the VCPR is the basis for interaction among veterinarians,
 The referring veterinarian is the veterinarian who was in
owners, and patients. A VCPR exists when all of the fol-
charge of the patient at the time of the referral. The receiv-
lowing conditions have been met:
ing veterinarian or the referral veterinarian is the veterinar-
1. The veterinarian has assumed responsibility for making
  S  r  s     
clinical judgments regarding the health of the animal
consultation. A consultation is a deliberation between two
Or animals and the need for medical treatment,
or more veterinarians concerming the diagnosis of a disease
and the client has agreed to follow the veterinarian's
and the proper management of the case. A referral is the
instructions.
transfer of responsibility of diagnosis, care, and treatment
2. The veterinarian has sufficient knowledge of the animals
from the referring veterinarian to the receiving veterinar-
to initiate at least a general or preliminary diagnosis of
ian, and a new VCPR is established with the receiving
the medical condition of the animals. This means that 
veterinarian.
the veterinarian has recently seen and is personally
 In these descriptions and definitions, the assumption is
acquainted with the keeping and care of the animals
made that referrals and consultations may occur only
by virtue of an examination, or by medically appropri-
between veterinarians. The Guidelines for Referrals do not
ate and timely visits to the premises where the animals
address a situation in which the individual who is referring
are kept.
Or receiving the patient is not a veterinarian. If these Guide-
 3. The veterinarian is readily available, or has arranged
lines for Referrals apply only to veterinarians, then other
for emergency coverage, for follow-up evaluation in
 health care professionals may not actually accept or recom-
the event of adverse reactions or the failure of the treat-
mend referrals without the involvement of a veterinarian
ment regimen.
and the establishment of a valid VCPR. However, when a
The Principles additionally state that when a VCPR
 treatment modality such as physical therapy is required, a
exists, veterinarians must maintain medical records, which
referral directly to a therapist may be appropriate. In that
should contain information on the diagnosis, care, and
instance, specific written instructions and orders must
treatment of patients.4
accompany the referral. Because of the necessity of a valid
The Principles also discuss the termination of the
VCPR, other health care professionals who might be
VCPR, which applies when professional services are no
involved in the diagnosis, care, and treatment of veterinary
longer assumed by the veterinarian or no longer needed
patients must work closely with veterinarians so a valid
by the client. Veterinarians may terminate a VCPR under
VCPR will be established and maintained.
certain conditions, and they have an ethical obligation to
Method of Referral
use courtesy and tact in discharging this responsibility.
Guidelines for terminating the VCPR are as follows:
When a referral is being considered, communication
1. If there is no ongoing medical condition, veterinarians
 among veterinarians and other health care professionals is
may terminate a VCPR by notifying the client that they
essential. Communications may occur by letter, telephone,
no longer wish to serve that patient and client.
direct contact, or other means, and the most appropriate
 2. If there is an ongoing medical or surgical condition, the 
method of communication should be determined by the
patient should be referred to another veterinarian for
individuals involved. The referring veterinarian should
diagnosis, care, and treatment. The fonmer attending
 provide the receiving veterinarian with all the appropriate
Chapter 2
Regulatory and Practice Issues for the Veterinary and Physical Therapy Professions
11
information pertinent to the case before or at the time of
and regulations of the respective state practice acts could
the first contact with the patient or the owner. When the
 be practicing both veterinary medicine and physical therapy
referred patient has been examined and a diagnosis has
without a license and might be subject to investigation,
been established, the referring veterinarian should be
warming, disciplinary action, or criminal prosecution. A
 promptly infonmed of those findings. Information provided
useful resource is this list entitled "State-by-State Assess-
should include diagnosis, proposed care, treatment plans,
 ment of Physical Therapy and Veterinary Practice Acts:"
and other recommendations. If the patient undergoes a
http://www.orthopt.org
prolonged treatment or hospitalization, then immediately
This resource also lists people in the state to contact.
 on discharge of the patient, the referring veterinarian
should receive a detailed and complete report, preferably
Veterinary Medicine
written, and should be advised as to continuing care of the
The veterinary practice acts are often vague when referring
patient or termination of the case. Each veterinarian
to the practice of veterinary physical rehabilitation. One
involved in the case is entitled to collect fees for service,
exception is the Idaho Veterinary Practice Act, which states
care, and treatments for professional services; fee splitting
that *The requirement to have a license to practice veteri-
is not allowed.4
nary medicine does not prohibit an allied health profes-
All licensed veterinarians may receive referrals, and
sional actively licensed and in good standing in any state
referring veterinarians may refer to whomever they believe
from participating in a medical procedure involving an
appropriate for the situation. Referrals should occur in a
animal, provided that such participation is in his licensed
timely manner, and veterinarians who solicit or encourage
field of medicine and under the indirect supervision of an
referrals should abide by the AVMA Principles of Veteri-
nary Medical Ethics. The receiving veterinarian should
sional' means a person holding a current active license, in
provide only services or treatments relative to the referred
good standing, in any state to practice one of the healing
 condition and should consult the referring veterinarian if
arts including, but not limited to, medicine, dentistry, oste-
 Other services or treatments are needed.
opathy, chiropractic, acupuncture and podiatry:" Indirect
When referrals are made to other health care providers
who may not be licensed veterinarians, the same standards
the premises but is available for immediate contact by
 and guidelines must apply. Other health care professionals
telephone, radio or other means, has given either written
(nonveterinarians) who are involved with the care and
Or oral instructions for treatment of the animal patient, the
treatment of veterinary patients cannot assume a valid
animal has been examined by the supervising veterinarian
VCPR, and therefore the ultimate responsibility for diag-
as acceptable veterinary medical practice requires, and the
nosis, care, and treatment of the patient remains with the
animal, if previously anesthetized, has recovered to the
referring veterinarian, as a VCPR must be in effect at
point of being conscious and stermal:'7 The supervising
all times.
veterinarian shall "Have ex amined the animal patient prior
to the delegation of any animal health care task to a certi-
fied veterinary technician, temporary certification holder,
State Practice Acts: Veterinary Medicine
or assistant. The ex amination of the animal patient shall be
and Physical Rehabilitation
conducted at such times as acceptable veterinary medical
practice dictates, consistent with the particular delegated
Although interest in and support for the unique practice of
animal health care task.'
In the state of Pennsylvania, both the State Board of
each state individually regulates the standards for both
Veterinary Medicine and the State Board of Physical
veterinary medicine and physical therapy through the
Therapy are regulated by the same administration.? This
respective practice acts for each profession. Both the APTA
arrangement allows for a clear understanding of the regula-
and the AVMA have adopted positions and policies that
tory issues affecting both veterinarians and physical thera-
support animal physical rehabilitation.36
 pists when members of either profession are interested in
These organizations are not the regulatory bodies for
veterinary physical rehabilitation. However, individuals
the disciplines of physical therapy or veterinary medicine.
practicing their respective professions in that state must be
The practice of veterinary medicine and that of physical
licensed by the regulatory board of their respective profes-
therapy are regulated by respective practice acts for
sion. The State Board of Veterinary Medicine states that
each state, and it is the responsibility of individuals who
"Veterinarians may seek, through consultation, the assis-
practice veterinary physical therapy to understand the legal
tance of other licensed professionals, including chiroprac-
issues related to both the veterinary and physical therapy
tors, dentists, dental hygienists and physical therapists,
practice acts of their respective states before pursuing this
when it appears that chiropractic, dental, dental hygiene or
specialized discipline. Individuals practicing veterinary
physical therapy procedures will enhance the quality of
physical rehabilitation who fail to comply with the rules
veterinary care. Chiropractic, dental, dental hygiene and
12
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
physical therapy procedures shall only be performed upon
Or credits for courses in animal rehabilitation may also be
animals by chiropractors, dentists, dental hygienists and
problematic if the state physical therapy board does not
physical therapists in conjunction with the practice of vet-
accept this area of practice as legal. Direct access to physi-
erinary medicine and under the direct supervision of a
cal therapy by human patients is an intriguing issue, in that
veterinarian, subject to a limitation provided by law or
most states permit direct access to either "'physical therapy
regulation."
without a physician referral. In the states that allow direct
Physical Therapy
access of human patients to physical therapy, a physical
The physical therapy practice acts of many states include
therapist does not have to act with a physician to initiate
variable wording for authorizing and sanctioning the appli-
physical therapy modalities; however, such direct access is
cation of physical therapy techniques and procedures to
not allowed for veterinary patients because of the defini-
animals and to the direct access of owners to physical
tions of veterinary practice and the necessity for a valid
therapy services. Currently, many states use the words
i a si ad as  rd au 
human or human being, some states use the word person,
available online.?
and others use the word individual in their physical therapy
Because of the growing interest in animal rehabilitation
practice acts (Box 2-1). This wording may be a problem
and physical therapy, the Animal Physical Therapist
for physical therapists who wish to practice veterinary
Special Interest Group (APTSIG) within the Orthopedic
physical therapy in those states, because the state practice
Section of the APTA has collected information regarding
acts may actually prohibit physical therapists from provid-
the state practice acts and animal physical therapy. This
ing care to animals. Obtaining continuing education units
information is intended to identify which state practice acts
discuss animal rehabilitation and physical therapy, and
which state practice acts include the words humans, people,
Box 2-1
Physical Therapy State Practice Acts
Or persons, which might limit the practice of animal reha-
bilitation and physical therapy in those states. The APTSIG
Human or Human
Nevada
is also collecting information regarding the veterinary
Beings
 North Carolina
 practice acts in all states.
Alabama
Ohio
d p a isd s a ss A u
Alaska
Pennsylvania
Texas*
therapist are "protected terms,”’ and therefore only licensed
Arkansas
Vermont
Au suonpsnf aso u derau lisud jo sauonnd
Colorado
Washington
lawfully represent themselves as physical therapists or
Florida
Georgia
West Virginia
state that they provide physical therapy services. Veterinar-
Hawaii
Patients
ians or veterinary technicians practicing physical therapy
Idaho
Louisiana
on animals in these jurisdictions should state that they
Iowa
 Massachusetts
 provide physical rehabilitation, or rehabilitation, to avoid
Maine
New Mexico
potential conficts, unless they employ a physical therapist
Missouri
South Dakota
 Or physical therapist assistant (PTA) in their practice.
 Montana
The physical therapy state practice act of New Mexico
New York
Individuals
 is a physical therapy practice act that specifically addresses
Oregon
Kansas
Kentucky
veterinary physical therapy, and in that act a doctor of
Rhode Island
South Carolina
 Maryland
Utah
Michigant
Washington, DC
Oklahoma
practice act pertaining to direct care (access) requirements
Wyoming
Tennessee
for physical therapists. In this practice act a "primary
Persons
Virginia
health care provider"’ is defined as
No Specification
Arizona
California
 Indiana
a health care professional who is licensed in the U.S. and
Mississippi
provides the first level of basic or general health care for
Connecticut
 New Hampshire
individual's health needs including diagnostic and treat-
Delaware
New Jersey
ment services and includes but is not limited to a physician
Illinois
North Dakota
(M.D, D.O., D.PM.), doctor of veterinary medicine
 Minnesota
Wisconsin
(D.V.M.), doctor of chiropractic (D.C.), doctor of dental
Nebraska
surgery (D.D.S.), doctor of oriental medicine (D.O.M.),
*Part C states, "treatment, consultative, educational, or advisory services to
certified nurse practitioner (C.N.P), certified nurse-
ea io ue ageua ai ued o Aep po aa  auau au ana
midwife (C.N.M.), licensed midwife (L.M.), and physician
ull ip jo se pue sls apuadau au wad  uosiad e
assistant (P.A.) practicing under the auspices of one of the
+Defines individual as "natural person."
providers listed herein.
Chapter 2
Regulatory and Practice Issues for the Veterinary and Physical Therapy Professions
13
The state physical therapy practice act of New Mexico
Collaborative Relationships between
further defines direct care requirements as follows:
the Professions
A physical therapist shall not accept a patient for treatment
without an existing medical diagnosis for the specific
In 1993 the APTA House of Delegates approved and
medical or physical problem made by a licensed primary
adopted a position statement concerming collaborative rela-
tionships between physical therapists and veterinarians.
special education programs ... and for acute care within
This position statement reads as follows:
the scope of the practice of physical therapy.
The act continues to define direct care requirements
The American Physical Therapy Association endorses the
with the following statement:
position that physical therapists may establish collabora-
tive, collegial relationships with veterinarians for purposes
When physical therapy services are commenced under the
of providing physical therapy services or consultation.
same diagnosis, such diagnosis and plan of treatment must
Phy sical therapists are the provider of choice for the provi-
be communicated to the patient's primary health-care pro-
sion of physical services regardless of the client. A colle-
vider at intervals of at least once every sixty (60) days,
 gial relationship is advantageous to the client.?
unless otherwise indicated by the primary care provider.
Such communication will be deemed complete as noted in
On the national level, collegial relationships have been
the patient's medical record by the physical therapist.10
established between physical therapists and veterinarians
Fundamentally, the New Mexico state physical therapy
for several years with a national liaison between the AVMA
practice act allows a physical therapist to obtain referrals
 and the APTA. Intermational meetings, such as the Interma-
from a veterinarian and to have direct access to veterinary
 tional Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy
physical therapy patients who are in need of acute care
in Veterinary Medicine, which has been held every 2
physical therapy, as long as communication occurs between
years since 1999, is another example of the growing
the veterinarian and the physical therapist within 60 days
collaboration between the two professions. The Interma-
of initiating treatment and regularly every 60 days thereaf-
tional Association of Veterinary Rehabilitation and Physi-
ter. Interestingly, the New Mexico veterinary practice act
cal Therapy (ww w.iavrpt.org) sponsors this meeting. Other
also states that because a physical therapist must work
intermational collaborative organizations have been formed
under direct supervision of a veterinarian, the fee for physi-
to foster the growth and document the status of veterinary
cal therapy services must be paid to the licensed veterinar-
physical rehabilitation in other nations. In some countries
ian or licensed veterinary facility.
such as the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, physical
This is an example in which the practice acts for veteri-
therapists have been performing veterinary physical
 nary medicine and physical therapy are apparently in con-
therapy in collaboration with veterinarians for many years,
flict. Although some state physical therapy acts allow the
and the experiences of practitioners in these countries are
treatment of animals by physical therapists, the veterinary
being shared and exchanged.
 practice acts in those states may not allow the same degree
There are many ways for physical therapists and vet-
of freedom; therefore, it is important for the physical thera-
erinarians to work together. Veterinary colleges could
pist and the veterinarian to understand both the physical
employ physical therapists to provide appropriate care and
therapy and the veterinary practice acts in the states where
therapy to patients requiring rehabilitation. Faculty from
they are working. Although the veterinary practice acts in
universities with colleges of veterinary medicine and physi-
 most states do not address the subjects of who may perform
cal therapy departments could work together to provide
veterinary physical rehabilitation and direct access to
clinical service, teaching, and research activities that would
patients by physical therapists, the veterinary profession
 benefit students and faculty members from both disciplines.
has been careful to monitor who may practice veterinary
Veterinary hospitals and clinics could employ physical
medicine. State veterinary boards have been active in
therapists with either full-time or part-time appointments,
restraining the practice of veterinary medicine without a
or these hospitals could consult with physical therapists
license, and the AVMA, through various councils and com-
as needed. In jurisdictions where permitted such as in
mittees, has promoted the importance of the VCPR. These
Colorado, physical therapists could establish veterinary
activities ensure that a veterinarian is the primary health
rehabilitation therapy practices and solicit referrals from
care provider who manages the diagnosis, care, and treat-
veterinarians in accordance with the state practice acts.
 ment of the veterinary patients. In addition, the association
Other venues where physical therapists might work include
with other professions to enhance and improve the quality
zoos; wildlife rehabilitation centers and parks; and canine
of veterinary care has been encouraged by the veterinary
and equine performance centers, exhibitions, and rodeos.
profession, and these relationships allow for a role of other
When collaborative relationships are initiated between
 health care professionals such as physical therapists in the
veterinarians and physical therapists, the veterinarian
improvement of such care.
must first establish a VCPR and then develop a care and
14
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
treatment plan after a diagnosis is confirmed. This informa-
Box 2-2
Guidelines for Physical Therapists
tion must be communicated to the physical therapist, pref-
 on Practicing Veterinary Physical
erably in writing, before the physical rehabilitation is
Rehabilitation
initiated. Such communications are analogous to writing
"doctor's orders" in a medical record. The physical thera-
1. If the physical therapy practice act includes language that
limits the practice to humans by using terminology such as
confirm a course of treatment in conjunction with the vet-
humans, people, or persons, then practicing on animals may
erinarian. If opinions differ on the appropriate diagnosis
be in violation of that specific practice act. If the term
and course of treatment, these differences should be nego-
patient is used, the language of that practice act may be
tiated in a professional manner. After the treatment plan is
permissive, and the physical therapist should check with the
state licensing board about the exact wording and the
initiated, contacts and communications should continue
current interpretation (see Box 2-1).
between the physical therapist and the veterinarian regard-
 2. After reviewing the state physical therapy practice act, if the
ing the progress and response of the patient throughout
wording is still unclear, the physical therapy practitioner
the course of therapy. As in human medicine, in which
should contact the state licensing board for written
the physician is ultimately responsible for the patient, the
clarification or consult with an attorney for a legal opinion.
veterinarian must be ultimately responsible for the care
3. If the activities of interest are clarified in the state practice
and treatment of the patient, because a VCPR must be
act (and are within the scope of physical therapy practice as 
maintained.
defined by the APTA), one should be able to obtain 
professional liability insurance for these activities. If
Risk Management for Physical Therapy
activities are specifically excluded in the state practice act, it
and Veterinary Professionals
is unlikely that professional liability insurance will provide
coverage or protection for potential litigation
4. PTAs who are providing veterinary physical rehabilitation
As physical therapists are finding new opportunities 
also need to be aware of their state practice act regarding
for professional services, including veterinary medicine,
isud psuo e go uoisanedns sun epun uonoid r
poqe suonsanb mau suado suemis asau ui uogedioed
therapist. This does not necessarily mean on-site
conduct and professional practice. There is no doubt that
supervision; however, it does mean that the physical
physical therapists have knowledge and skills that can
therapist has seen the patient and decided on a plan of care
benefit veterinary patients, but the legal and ethical issues
before the PTA initiates treatment. If they are performing
regarding these collaborative relationships sometimes are
animal rehabilitation under the supervision of a veterinarian
unclear. Both the AVMA and the APTA have been sup-
(but without supervision of aPT), but not calling it physical
portive of these collaborative relationships; however, many
therapy, this may be permitted based on the veterinary
states do not recognize these activities as falling within the
practice act in that individual state.
scope of physical therapy. For this reason, physical thera-
 5. If a state precludes either physical therapists or PTAs from
practicing veterinary physical therapy based on the state's
practice act, the physical therapists or PTAs still may be
sional capacity should be certain that they are acting in
able to work under the direct supervision of a veterinarian,
compliance  with  the physical  therapy  and  veterinary
but should not call their practice physical therapy; rather
medical practice acts in the states where they are working.
they should term it physical rehabilitation, animal
As stated earlier, the APTSIG has established a liaison
rehabilitation, canine or equine rehabiitation, or something
 program to assist members with an interest in rehabilitation
similar. The choice to do this would still have the potential
for animals. The goal of this program is to obtain copies
to be in violation of the state practice act and would need to
 of the various state veterinary medical and physical therapy
be examined on an individual basis.
practice acts and to produce a resource directory of indi-
viduals interested in veterinary rehabilitation. A national
liaison coordinator for this program has been identified.
While this liaison program is helpful, interested individu-
als should contact appropriate licensing boards for clarif-
therapist who is involved with an animal patient work
cation of questions.
closely with the veterinarian who has established the
See Box 2-2 for guidelines that are recommended when
VCPR with that owner and patient. Otherwise, a physical
physical therapy practitioners are interested in practicing
therapist practicing on that animal could be in violation of
veterinary rehabilitation
a state veterinary practice act. When a VCPR has been
Veterinary practice acts in most jurisdictions are quite
established and followed, any potential legal issues should
clear on the issues of the definition of veterinary practice,
be minimized.
access to veterinary patients, and who may practice veteri-
 See Box 2-3 for guidelines that are recommended when
nary medicine. In all cases, the establishment of a VCPR
 d   a  
is mandatory, and this rule necessitates that a physical
nary physical rehabilitation.
Chapter 2
Regulatory and Practice Issues for the Veterinary and Physical Therapy Professions
15
The physical therapist is entitled to a reasonable fee for
Box 2-3
Guidelines for Veterinary
services rendered. If a veterinarian refers a patient to
Practitioners on Practicing
another veterinarian, physical therapist, or health care pro-
Veterinary Physical Rehabilitation
vider, the original veterinarian is not allowed to accept part
1. If the term physical therapy or physical therapist is a
of the professional fee for the referral of the patient and
protected term in that state, the term physical rehabilitation,
owner. Such an arrangement is called fee splitting or a
rehabilitation, or a similar term should be used.
kickback; it is unethical and is in violation of the Principles
 2. If a veterinary technician, physical therapist, or PTA is to
 of Veterinary Medical Ethics.4
provide the veterinary physical rehabilitation, supervision by
In conclusion, the affiliations and collaboration between
a veterinarian may be defined differently state by state, and
physical  therapists  and  veterinarians  will  continue  to
the veterinarian should review this, especially if the
 grow with benefts for patients, owners, veterinarians, and
individual is providing care off-site, such as in home visits.
 physical therapists. With evolution and additional collab-
orative experiences in the discipline of animal physical
rehabilitation, the specifc roles of physical therapists and
Reimbursement and Remuneration
veterinarians will be clarified as well. Communication and
for Services
cooperation between the professions of veterinary medi-
 cine and physical therapy, the APTA and AVMA, and the
The reimbursement for professional services is another
respective licensing boards of each state are necessary to
issue that must be resolved when there are collaborative
successfully integrate physical therapy into the practice of
relationships between veterinarians and physical thera-
veterinary medicine.
pists. Both health care professionals are entitled to an
 appropriate fee, which should be based on the services
rendered with consideration for education and training
REFERENCES
of the health care provider. If the physical therapist is
1. Guide to physical therapy practice, ed 2, Phys Ther 81:21-22,
an employee of a veterinarian, the fee for the animal reha-
2001.
bilitation may be included in the total charges for veteri-
2. Model Practice Act, Schaumburg, Ill, 2012, American Vet-
nary services. Because the physical therapist is an
erinary Medical Association.
employee, that individual would be paid directly by the
3. AVMA Guidelines for Complementary and Alternative Vet-
veterinary clinic where employment occurs and services
erinary Medicine. https://w w w.avma. org/KB/Policies/Pages/
AVMA-Guidelines-for-Complementary-and-Alternative-
Veterinary-Medicine.aspx.
If the physical therapist is self-employed or an indepen-
4. The Veterinarian-Client-Patient Relationship. https://www
dent contractor, a veterinarian can arrange a referral or
. avma. org/KB/Policies/Pages/Principles-of- Veterinary-
consultation directly with a physical therapist; however,
Medical-Ethics-of-the-AVMA.aspx.
a VCPR must originate and be maintained with the
5. Attending, Consulting, and Referring. https://ww w.avma. org/
attending veterinarian. In that instance, a separate or direct
KB/Policies/Pages/Principles-of- Veterinary-Medical-Ethics-
billing arrangement for veterinary physical rehabilitation
of-the-AVMA.aspx.
 services could be appropriate if all involved parties are in
6. Position on physical therapists in collaborative relationships
agreement.
with veterinarians, American Physicat Therapy Association
If the physical therapist is an employee of another
House of Delegates 06-93-20-36 (Program 32), 1993.
health care provider, then that provider could charge the
7. ldaho Veterinary Practice Act, Boise, Idaho, 2013, Idaho
veterinarian or the owner directly, depending on the finan-
Board of Veterinary Medicine, Idaho Code 54-2103 (3),
54-2104 (2p) and Board Rules IDAPA 46.01.01.103.02.f
cial arrangements negotiated at the onset of the treatment
8. State Board of Veterinary Medicine and State Board of Physi-
plan. The attending veterinarian is ultimately responsible
cal Therapy Professional and Vocational Standards, Har-
for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of the patient and
risburg, PA, 2013, Department of State, Pennsylvania Code.
must write instructions or orders to the health care provider
9. ww w.utcaninerehab.com/practice-acts.asp.
and physical therapist affliated with that provider. The
10. State of New Mexico Physical Therapy Board, Regulation
physical therapist is an employee of the health care pro-
and Licensing Department: Statutes and Regulations, 1997,
vider and is paid by that entity.
Title 16, Chapter 20, Part 10.
Conceptual Overview of Physical
Therapy, Veterinary Medicine, and
Canine Physical Rehabilitation
David Levine, Caroline P. Adamson, and Anna Bergh
he purpose of this chapter is to provide a conceptual
World War II. This was a period of major growth in physi-
framework outlining the general practice of canine
 cal therapy, and because of the shortage of physical thera-
 physical rehabilitation and physical therapy. Back-
pists, many more had to be trained during this time. From
ground information regarding the professions of physical
the 1940s to the present, physical therapy has gradually
therapy and veterinary medicine is included to assist pro-
become a more autonomous and scientifically based pro-
fessionals from each discipline to understand the history.
fession. Physical therapy is an accepted medical interven-
educational requirements, and current practice of each pro-
tion, and approximately 750,000 people are treated by
fession. Methods to effectively bridge the gap between the
 physical therapists in the United States each day.
physical therapy and veterinary professions are addressed,
The American Physical Therapy Association
with models for collaborative practice outlined.
The APTA is a national professional organization repre-
Physical Therapy as a Profession
senting more than 71,000 physical therapists, physical
therapist assistants, and students in the United States.?
Membership in the APTA is not mandatory for physical
History of the Physical Therapy Profession in
therapists practicing in the United States, and currently
the United States
more than 172,000 physical therapists are licensed in the
Physical therapy began in the United States in the early
United States.
1900s and focused on treatment of acute anterior poliomy-
Major responsibilities of the APTA are monitoring and
elitis, which reached its peak during the first 2 decades of
improving physical therapy education, practice, and
the twentieth century. At this time physical therapy was not
research and educating the general public about the role of
a true occupation; however, the foundations for the profes-
physical therapy in health care. The APTA political action
sion were developed. Some of these early applications of
committee (PAC) is one of the largest health care PACs in
physical therapy included exercise, massage, and certain
the nation. It was formed to empower the physical therapist
physical agent modalities. The need for physical rehabilita-
 profession to be more involved in the determination of
tion during and immediately following World War I served
federal laws and policies.
to further enhance the emerging field of physical therapy.
 Physical therapists practice in many settings, including
 From its origins, physical therapy has focused on restoring
hospitals, school systems, private practices, extended care
max imal function to individuals with disabilities.
facilities and nursing homes, home health agencies, aca-
Formal training in physical therapy began around 1918
 demic institutions, research centers, and govermment agen-
and was developed by cooperative efforts between the
cies. The APTA has 19 specialty sections, which represent
office of the Surgeon General and personnel in civilian
various areas in physical therapy. These include acute care
institutions. Individuals who completed these training
aquatic physical therapy, cardiovascular and pulmonary.
courses were given the title of reconstruction aides, the
clinical electrophysiology and wound management, educa-
earliest title of physical therapists.' Many of these indi-
tion, federal physical therapy, geriatrics, hand rehabilita-
viduals worked in the military during this time. The first
tion, health policy and administration, home health,
national organization was the American Women's Physical
neurology, oncology, orthopedics, pediatrics, private prac-
Therapeutic Association, which was founded in 1921. In
tice, research, sports physical therapy, and women's health.
1922 this name was changed to the American Physiother-
A physical therapist may become board certified by the
apy Association, and in 1947 to the American Physical
American Board of Physical Therapy Specialties (Diplo-
Therapy Association (APTA). Throughout the 1940s
 mate, ABPTS) in one of seven areas (cardiopulmonary.
physical therapy continued to evolve and focused on treat-
clinical electrophysiology, geriatrics, neurology, orthope-
ing patients who had contracted polio or those injured in
dics, pediatrics, and sports physical therapy).
16
Chapter 3
Overview of PT, Vet Med, and PR
17
The orthopedic section of the APTA houses the animal
small-animal and equine practice as the predominant
physical therapist special interest group, which was fonmed
emphasis in veterinary medicine. Furthenmore, the explo-
in 1998 and has quickly grown to more than 400 members.
 sion of knowledge in small-animal medicine and surgery.
The goals of this group are to:
combined with the era of specialization, has resulted in
·Promote physical therapy
improved health care for pets. One area that has been
·Share information
neglected until recently is the rehabilitation of animals
· Collaborate with other health professionals
with chronic ailments and following surgery. The goals of
· Develop educational programs
 this new area are to increase function, improve the ultimate
· Foster research
outcome of patients following major surgery, and enhance
· Create guidelines for practice
the quality of life.
· Encourage appropriate legislative changes
The American Veterinary
 Establish a national network
· Protect professional practice
Medical Association
The national professional organization that represents the
Physical Therapist and Physical Therapist
 approximately 84,000 veterinarians in the United States is
Assistant Education
the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA).4
The current entry-level physical therapy degree is a mas-
 The AVMA is responsible for evaluating and credentialing
ter's or doctoral degree. In the past, the entry-level degree
veterinary medical education, administering the national
was a bachelor's degree. The APTA supports changing the
board examination for veterinarians, and overseeing the
entry-level degree to the doctoral level by the year 2020.
various specialty colleges (currently there are 2l). The
There are approximately 200 APTA-accredited physical
American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine and
therapy educational programs in the United States, which
Rehabilitation, American College of Veterinary Surgeons;
graduate roughly 5700 physical therapists each year. Every
American College of Veterinary Intermal Medicine, neurol-
physical therapist must pass a national licensing examina-
ogy subspecialty; American College of Veterinary Emer-
tion. Additional requirements for practice vary from state
gency and Critical Care; American Board of Veterinary
to state.
Practitioners; American College of Veterinary Behavior-
Physical therapist assistants complete a 2-year associ-
 ists; and American College of Veterinary Nutrition are spe-
ate's degree from an APTA-accredited program. This train-
cialty colleges or boards whose members are likely to treat
ing prepares them to provide therapeutic interventions that
patients that may benefit from rehabilitation. Examples of
have been delegated by their supervising physical thera-
other related organizations include the American Academy
pist, but assistants cannot evaluate or prescribe treatment.
of Veterinary Acupuncture and the American Veterinary
Requirements for licensure vary from state to state, as do
Chiropractic Association.
the continuing education requirements.
Veterinarians undergo broad training that includes
Educational backgrounds of both physical therapists
studying diseases of large, small, and exotic animals. Vet-
and physical therapist assistants do not include any formal
erinarians undergo training in making medical diagnoses,
training in the rehabilitation of animals. Animal anatomy
with the aim to identify the pathophysiologic nature of
may be studied during undergraduate education, but most
the condition and its subsequent treatment. Currently, the
likely this will be anatomy of the cat. Application of physi-
American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine and
cal therapy to animals is not included in standard curricula;
 Rehabilitation has received approval by the American
 however, a few physical therapy programs now offer elec-
Board of Veterinary of Specialties, which oversees special-
tive coursework in this area.
ties of the AVMA. Training in this area is relatively limited,
although a number of colleges now offer courses or lec-
tures in physical rehabilitation.
Veterinary Medicine as a Profession
Veterinary and Veterinary
History of the Veterinary Profession
Technician Education
The first college of veterinary medicine was established at
Veterinarians usually have an average of 4 years of under-
Lyon, France. The first college of veterinary medicine in
graduate education, followed by 4 years of professional
the United States was established at Iowa State University
curriculum at an AVMA-approved college. Currently there
in the 1800s. The initial emphasis in veterinary medicine
are 33 approved colleges of veterinary medicine in the
was on agricultural production and livestock. Gradually the
United States and Canada graduating approximately 2100
emphasis on the treatment of individual animals shifted to
veterinarians yearly. In addition, there are now 13 non-
 herd management. The emergence of companion animals 
 Canadian foreign colleges of veterinary medicine that are
as members of the family, combined with the shift in agri-
approved by the AVMA. Veterinarians are required to
cultural demand, has resulted in the development of
 pass national and, in some cases, state board examinations
18
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
to practice. Some graduate veterinarians pursue additional
professional meeting. Research has been identified as criti-
training in the form of general intermships and residen-
cal to bridge the gap between professions and to establish
 cies in specialties. Specialty certification requires an interm-
the efficacy and credibility of physical therapy protocols
ship or equivalent training, completion of a formal 2- to
and treatment. There are educational programs in the
3-year residency program, publication and research
 United States, the Netherlands, Japan, mainland Europe,
requirements, and successful completion of a certifying
Australia, and the United Kingdom.
examination. There are currently 21 specialties recognized
Physical Therapy Evaluation and Intervention
by the AVMA.
Veterinary technicians complete at least 2 years at an
AVMA-accredited program and receive at least an associ-
humans, including evaluation, intervention, assessment,
 ate's degree. There are currently nine distance learming
consultation, education, and research.? Evaluation includes
 programs in veterinary technology accredited or in the
taking a history; evaluating body systems to be certain that
 process of accreditation by the AVMA Committee on Vet-
 physical therapy is the appropriate medical intervention;
erinary Technician Education and Activities. In approxi-
and administering a variety of tests and measurements to
mately 40 states and provinces, veterinary technicians are
determine a diagnosis, prognosis, and intervention. Physi-
certified, registered, or licensed. Candidates are tested for
 aa n d  sss sisie 
competency through an ex amination that may include oral,
motion and integrity; muscle strength; arousal and cogni-
written, and practical portions. A state board of veterinary
tion; need for assistive and adaptive devices;, cranial nerve
examiners or the appropriate state agency regulates this
integrity; environmental barriers; body mechanics; gait;
 process. A national examination is available; however,
locomotion; balance; skin integrity; motor function; neu-
requirements vary by individual states. Veterinary techni-
romotor development and sensory integration; orthotic,
protective, and prosthetic devices; pain; posture; refexes;
American Veterinary Technician Association include the
circulation; and edema.2
Academy of Veterinary Emergency Critical Care Techni-
 The physical therapy diagnosis is both a process and
cians, Academy of Veterinary Technician Anesthetists,
label in which physical therapists perform an evaluation to
Academy of Veterinary Surgical Technicians, Academy of
provide a diagnose that identifes the effect a condition has
Veterinary Dental Technicians, Academy of Intermal Medi-
on function.27 Physical therapists proceed from the func-
cine for Veterinary Technicians, Academy of Equine Vet-
tional limitations that the animal presents and investigate
erinary Nursing Technicians, Academy of Veterinary
the structures responsible for the impaired function. Based
Nutrition Technicians, and the Academy of Veterinary
on the diagnosis, the physical therapist is able to specif-
Behavior Technicians.6
cally design individual treatment plans and evaluate their
Veterinary and veterinary technician programs do not
interventions
typically include any course work in physical rehabilita-
 Physical therapists alleviate impairment and functional
tion. Although most veterinarians and veterinary techni-
limitation by designing, implementing, and modifying
cians have a basic understanding of the rehabilitation
therapeutic interventions that include the following?:
 process, they generally do not receive any formal training
Therapeutic exercise (range of motion [ROM], aerobic
in this area. Application of physical rehabilitation to
conditioning, gait training, aquatic therapy, muscle
 animals is not included in the standard curricula; however,
strengthening, balance, coordination, posture, motor
a few veterinary programs now offer lectures or even elec-
control)
tive courses in this area.
 Manual therapy techniques (joint mobilization and
manipulation, massage, remodeling scar tissue)
Continuing Education
Wound management (dressings, topical agents, debride-
Continuing education is essential to gain the knowledge in
ment, modalities, ox ygen therapy)
the reciprocal field that practitioners need to effectively
Airway clearance techniques (postural drainage, per-
perform canine rehabilitation and physical therapy. Some
cussion, vibration, shaking)
ways of accomplishing this are attending continuing edu-
 Orthotic and prosthetic intervention 
cation courses; self-guided study; attending meetings of
中
 Electrotherapeutic  modalities  (electrical  stimulation,
the other profession; volunteering with members of the
laser)
other profession; and attending related courses such as
 Thermal modalities (superficial heat and cold, and deep
animal training, handling, and behavior.
heat including ultrasound and diathermy)
A number of courses are offered in this area throughout
Some of the common goals of physical therapy treat-
the world. The First Intermational Symposium on Rehabili-
ment are to decrease pain, improve muscle strength, retard
tation and Physical Therapy, which was held at Oregon
atrophy, decrease swelling. 
decrease muscle spasm,
State University in 1999, helped to bring the professions
increase the rate of tissue healing, remodel scar tissue, and
of physical therapy and veterinary medicine together in a
improve function and independence in activities of daily
Chapter 3
Overview of PT, Vet Med, and PR
19
living. Prevention of injury, impairment, functional limita-
Box 3-1
 List of Individuals Contributing to
tion, and disability is also part of physical therapy. This
 includes promoting and maintaining fitness, health, and
Animal Rehabilitation
quality of life in all age populations.
Referring veterinarian
Veterinary specialist (surgeon, neurologist, internist,
emergency and critical care veterinarian)
Bridging the Gap between Physical Therapy and
Rehabilitation veterinarian
Veterinary Medicine
Physical therapist on staff or as a consultant
Traditional Physical Therapy and Veterinary Models
Animal behaviorist
of Practice
Veterinary nutri tionist
Veterinary anesthesiologist
Physical therapists commonly practice by referral from a
Veterinary acupuncturist
physician, although more than 30 states currently allow
Veterinary chiropractor
direct access to a physical therapist, meaning that a physi-
Veterinary technician
cal therapist practicing in these states may see a patient
 Physical therapist assistant
without physician referral. Additionally, some states allow
 Support staff
direct access for evaluation only, meaning that after the
Orthotist/Prosthetist
evaluation is complete, the patient must still see a physi-
 Biomedical engineer
cian to allow treatment to begin. In this model, the physical
Owner
therapist typically relates the findings to the physician to
expedite the initiation of treatment. As discussed in Chapter
2, the veterinary practice acts in most states require the
physical therapist to work under the direct supervision of
ex ample, a veterinarian, physical therapist, and veterinary
a veterinarian (although there are some exceptions), thus
technician—is identifed as the initial team. The initial
precluding a physical therapist from direct access in the
team documents their findings, meets, and decides together
care of veterinary patients.
the most effective plan for intervention. The core group
Veterinarians in general practice see a variety of patients
may request additional evaluations by other experts on the
with various conditions. In some cases, a referral to a spe-
team on an individual case basis. The appropriate clini-
 cialist is made for treatment requiring advanced procedures
cians are chosen to initiate the intervention plan. The team
and equipment. In most cases the referred patient is
reviews the progress of the client periodically. One member
returmed to the referring veterinarian for follow-up care and
 Of the team is responsible for follow-up after discharge.
 any general patient concems. Veterinary technicians assist
This team approach allows for a variety of perspectives
with the diagnostic and treatment procedures under the
on health care issues. The team offers the client a detailed
direction of the veterinarian.
interdisciplinary assessment as well as the most cost-
efficient method of providing services to resolve or treat
Team Approach to Rehabilitation
the problem.
The individuals listed in Box 3-1 may be involved in a
Collaborative Model for Practice
practice offering animal rehabilitation. The attending vet-
erinarian is often the primary person responsible for the
 A proposed model for canine physical rehabilitation is
medical diagnosis and decisions regarding appropriate
outlined in Figure 3-1 and is based on a similar model for
rehabilitative care. Depending on the injury and repair,
hum ans.
 specific recommendations are given to the person respon-
Documentation
sible for the rehabilitation. Precautions to therapy, espe-
cially exercises, must be clearly communicated. When
Documentation  should  provide  clear  communication
veterinarians initiate physical rehabilitation in their prac-
between all of the parties involved in the animal's care,
tices, the initial sessions should be performed with all team
including the veterinarian, the referring veterinarian (if
members present, as differences in terminology may cause
applicable), the person responsible for the physical reha-
confusion and possibly result in injury. For example, per-
bilitation, and in some cases the owner. Because documen-
forming ROM exercises may have different meaning to
tation is a critical form of communication, all patient files
veterinarians, owners, and physical therapists. Communi-
should be updated and documented at each physical reha-
cation and documentation between the team members are
bilitation treatment. Notes should be written in a clearly
critical, and forms such as those illustrated later in this
understandable, legible manner. An important characteris-
chapter provide an easy way to facilitate this.
tic of documentation is that the information should be
The team approach involves a group evaluation or an
easily obtained in a short period. A physical rehabilitation
assessment of the same patient by two or more clinicians
chart should give easy access to pertinent information such
within a short period. A core group of clinicians—for
as functional status, ROM, treatment given, and patient
20
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
Patient injury
Evaluation by veterinarian t
Referral to
specialist
 Conservative or surgical management t
Physical therapy evaluation
Factors to consider
Preinjury health
Tissue healing
Figure 3-1 Proposed model for canine physical
Muscle strength
rehabilitation.
Joint ROM
Feedback
 Other medical problems 
 Nutrition and weight control
Owner involvement
Demands needed for full return to function 
Goals for return to function
 Endurance (cardiorespiratory)
Physical therapy treatment plan (developed in collaboration with veterinarian)
 Physical therapy assessment of treatment plan
 progress. Because terminology differs between profes-
determined so that alterations can be made to the treatment
sions, a glossary is included at the end of this book. An
protocol to further enhance recovery. Careful documenta-
example of one difference is the directional term anterior-
tion and record keeping using objective assessment tools
posterior used in human medicine versus cranial-caudal
and standardized charts also provide a valid base for
research. Conducting periodic chart audits can assist patient
is written as gd in the human field, but sid in the veterinary
 care in a variety of ways, including ensuring that all perti-
 profession (although qd is also used in veterinary medi-
nent and necessary information is included, and that the
cine). Terms such as closed kinetic chain exercises (when
 treatment protocol is appropriate for the diagnosis.
the limb is in a weight-bearing position, such as in the
 The physical therapy chart should include the following
weight-bearing or stance phase of walking) are not typi-
key pieces of information:
cally discussed in the veterinary field.
 1. A relevant medical history
 Documentation is also important from a legal perspec-
 2. The history of the present illness, including the attend-
tive, as a record of the animal's condition and a clear docu-
ing veterinarian's referral information containing any
mentation of the procedures performed. For example,
precautions or contraindications for therapy, and treat-
consider an animal that has just completed a therapy
ment to be given
session in which it demonstrated weight bearing on the
 3. Any objective information such as ROM, function, limb
 affected extremity 75% of the time at a slow walk, and had
girth measurements, and lameness scores
a stife ROM of 50 degrees fexion and 150 degrees exten-
 4. Primary problems to be addressed and goals for the
sion, which was documented in the medical record. If this
treatment
animal presents with non-weight-bearing lameness at the
5.
 The treatment itself in as much detail as possible
next treatment with a ROM of 60 degrees fexion and 130
6. The response to treatment
degrees extension, that lends support to the idea that the
Examples of documentation forms in this chapter
animal had been injured not during therapy, but rather at
include the following:
home, in its cage, during a walk, or by some other means.
1. Client information form (Figure 3-2)
 Regardless of the mechanism of injury, the documentation
2. Referral form (Figure 3-3)
may protect the therapist from accusations of fault, and
 3. Physical rehabilitation evaluation form (Figure 3-4)
also alert the therapist to contact the veterinarian. When an
4. Orthopedic evaluation form (Figure 3-5)
animal's status has changed, an evaluation by the veterinar-
5. Neurologic evaluation form (Figure 3-6)
 ian is necessary before therapy continues.
6. Daily fowsheet form (Figure 3-7)
Another purpose of documentation is to verify the ben-
7. Referral letter (Figure 3-8)
efits of the treatment. The progress of the animal may be
Text continued on p.30
Chapter 3
Overview of PT, Vet Med, and PR
21
NEW CLIENT INFORMATION
 Owner's name
Address
Home phone 
Work phone
Veterinarian/surgeon
 Date of surgery/injury
PATIENT INFORMATION:
 Name
Breed
Age
Sex
Color
Spayed/neutered
PATIENT HISTORY:
 Rabies vaccination
 Past medical history
 Previous surgery
Allergies
 Special diet/medication 
 Previous activity level
History of present illness
Treatment since injury/surgery
 Owner's goals
Figure 3-2   Client information form.
22
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
CANINE REHABILITATION CLINIC
Referral Form
Client
Patient
Date_
Breed_
Sex
Age_
Weight
 Referring veterinarian/clinic:
Clinical condition:
Onset/Sx date:
Special instructions/precautions_
Frequency and duration:
Times per day for
days
Board until
Drop off:  MwF  Other_
Plan:
 Evaluate and treat
Hot pack
Gait training
 Cryotherapy
Massage
 Ultrasound
Joint mobilizations 
 Electrical stirmulation 
Weight-bearing/weight shifts
 Therapeutic exercise
 Passive range of motion
Hydrotherapy
 Neuromuscular reeducation 
 OTHER:
DVMSignature
Figure 3-3  Referral form.
Chapter 3
Overview of PT, Vet Med, and PR
23
PHYSICAL THERAPY INITIAL EVALUATION
Patient's name:
Date:
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION:
 Skin/incisions:
Color/temp:
 Heart rate:
Respirations:
POSTURE/GAIT:
 General observation:
 Preop/injury lameness:
Walk:
Trot:
Postop/injury lameness:
Walk:
 Standing limb position: 
Sitting limb position:
Circumference
70% femur
80% humerus
Joint line
Other
(cm):
Affected:
Unaffected:
Other:
RANGE OF MOTION:
Joint(s): Aff/Unaff
Flexion
Extension
AB/adduction
Varus/Valgus
Other
Hip:
Stifle:
Hock:
 Shoulder:
Elbow:
Carpus:
 Other:
PALPATION:
 Forelimb
Hind limb
 Spine
 Other
SPECIAL TESTS:
Neurologic:
Orthopedic:
Functional:
Other:
Figure 3-4  Physical rehabilitation evaluation form.
Continued
24
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
TREATMENT:
 Modalities:
Manual:
Therex:
Interferential
Massage
Gait training
 current
Neuro-
 Joint mobilization 
Aquatic
muscular
Passive range
Functional
electrical
stimulation
of motion
Swiss ball
 Other stim
Foam roll
Ultrasound
Other:
Owner education
Ice
 Protocol review
Heat
Other:
Other
ASSESSMENT/GOALS:
 Decrease pain
 Decrease edema
 Increase weight-bearing
 Independent home exercise program
 Return to previous function
Other
PLAN:
 Return visit
Call for follow-up
 Call DVM 
 Other
 DVM Signature
Figure 3-4, cont'd
Chapter 3
Overview of PT, Vet Med, and PR
25
CANINE ORTHOPEDIC REHABILITATION
EVALUATION FORM
Patient
Client
Date
Breed_
Age
Sex
Date of Sx/onset
Referring vet/clinic:
Diagnosis_
History:
Medications:
Client's goals_
Functional mobility
OBJECTIVE
Involved limb: RF LF RR LR
Range of motion:
Forelimb
R
Rear limb
Shoulder
Hip
1. Flexion
1. Flexion
2.Extension
2. Extension
Ebow
Stifle
1.Flexion
1. Flexion
2.Extension
2.Extension
Carpus
Hock
1. Flexion
1. Flexion
2. Extension
2.Extension
Other
Visual inspection/paipation:
Pain
 0 = No pain on palpation of joint 
score:
1 = Mild pain; palpation completed
 2 = Moderate pain; palpation completed
with obvious discomfort noted
3 = Severe pain; palpation not completed
 4 = Pain too severe; restraint/sedation
needed to palpate
Limb circumference:
Musclemass:
Jointeffusion:
Affected_
Unaffected
Affected_
Unaffected
Femurlength
cm
cm
Patellar tendon
cm
cm
70%of length
cm
cm
2"above
cm
2"below
cm
Girth
cm
cm
cm
cm
Figure 3-5  Orthopedic evaluation form.
Continued
26
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
Gait analysis:
Degree of lameness (stance)
Degree of larmeness (walk)
 Degree of larmeness (trot)
Orthopedic
lameness
0=Normal stance
 0 = No lameness/weight-bearing
 0 = No lameness/weight-bearing
on all strides cbserved 
on all strides cbserved 
1 = Slightly abnormal stance 
1 = Mild subtle lameness with
1 = Mild subtle lameness with
(partial weight-bearing)
partial weight-bearing 
partial weight-bearing
 2 = Moderately abnormal stance
 2 = Obvicus lameness with
 2 = Obvicus lameness with
(toe-touch weight-bearing)
partial weight-bearing
 partial weight-bearing
3 = Severely abnormal stance
3 = Obvicus lameness with
3 = Obvious lameness with
(holds limb off the floor)
intermittent weight-bearing
intermittent weight-bearing
4 = Unable to stand 
 4 = Full non-weight-bearing lame
4 = Full non-weight-bearing lame
 Degree of limb use (stance)
Degree of limb use (walk)
Degree of limb use (trot)
Post-
cperative
limb use
 0 = Normal stance
0 = No lameness
0 = No lameness
 1 = Slightly abnormal stance 
 1 = Lame but weight-bearing on
1 = Lame but weight-bearing on
(partial weight-bearing)
>95% of strides
>95% of strides
 2 = Moderately abnormal stance
 2 = Lame but weight-bearing on
 2 = Lame but weight-bearing on
(toe-touch weight-bearing)
>50% and <95% of strides
>50% and <95% of strides
3=
 Severely abnormal stance
 3 = Lame but weight-bearing on
 3 = Lame but weight-bearing on
(holds limb off the floor)
>5% and <50% of strides
>5% and <50% of strides
4 = Unable to stand 
 4 = Non-weight-bearing lame cr 
 4 = Non-weight-bearing lame cr
weight-bearing on <5% of
weight-bearing on <5% of
strides
strides
Gait deviations:
ASSESSMENT
PLAN OF CARE
Therapist Signature
Figure 3-5, cont'd
Chapter 3
Overview of PT, Vet Med, and PR
27
CANINE NEUROLOGIC/SPINAL REHABILITATION
 EVALUATION FORM
Client_
Patient
Date_
Breed_
Age.
Sex
Date of Sx/Onset
Referring vet/clinic:
Diagnosis,
History:
Prior surgeries:
Follow-up visit:
Medications:
Client's goals:
OBJECTIVE
Involved area(s): RF LF RR LR Spine_
Mental status:
Alert
Depressed
Stuporous
Comatose
Aggressive
Fearful
 Disoriented
Paipation/postures:
Active movements:
KEY:
Affected Body Segrment
Left
Flex
Right
XTender
O Center of pain
三Spasm
*Reflex contraction
ROM
RL
RR
Ext
Rotation
Rotation
left
right
Limb circumference:
Muscle mass:
Affected_
Unaffected
Fermur length_
cm
cm
70% of length.
cm
cm
Girth
Cm
Cm
Figure 3-6  Neurologic evaluation form.
Continued
28
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
Gait analysis:
Involved limb(s):
Degree of deficit (stance)
Degree of deficit (walk)
Degree of deficit (trot)
 5 = Normal strength and coordination
4 = Can stand to support: 
minimal paraparesis and ataxia
 3 = Can stand to support but frequently stumbles and falls;
mild paraparesis and ataxia
 2 = Unable to stand to support; when assisted, moves
limbs readily but stumbles and falls frequently:
moderate paraparesis and ataxia
1 = Unable to stand to support; slight moverment; when
supported
 severe paraparesis
 0 = Absence of purposeful moverment; paraplegia cr tetraplegia 
Deviations:
Propricception: (+ intact; - absent)
RFLFRRLR
Spinal reflexes:
Forelimb
RF
RR
LR
Key:
Q= Absent
Flexor reflex
+1 = Depressed
+2 = Normal
Biceps (C6-C8)
+3 = Exaggerated
Triceps (C7-T2)
+4=Clonus
Ext carpi rad (C7-T1)
NE = Not examined
Deep pain
Hin dlimb
Crossed extensor:
Forelirmb
Flexor reflex
+ Present
Hindlimb
Patella (L4-L6)
-Absent
Cranial tibial (L6-L7)
Gastrocnermius (L7-S1)
Sciatic (L6-S1)
Perineal (S1-S3)
Deep pain 
Cutanecus trunci
ASSESSMENT
PLAN OF CARE
Therapist Signature_
Figure 3-6, cont'd
Chapter 3
Overview of PT, Vet Med, and PR
29
CANINE ORTHOPEDIC REHABILITATION
FLOWSHEET
PATIENT NAME:
CLINICAL CONDITION:
SX DATE:
CLIENT NAME:
TIME
Date
Date
Date
Date
Date
Reassessment: Date
ROMShoulder
R
Hip
R
Weight-bearing status:
L
Gait analysis:
Elbow
R
Stifle
R
L
L
Proprioception:
sndieo
R
Hock
R
RF
LF
RRLR
PLAN:
Limb circumference
Reflexes:
Affected limb
L
Unaffected limb
Forelimb flexor
Rear limb flexor
Patellar
Therapist Signature.
Figure 3-7  Daily flowsheet form.
30
Section I
Introduction to Physical Rehabilitation
CANINE REHABILITATION CLINIC
[Date}
[Address]
Dear Dr. { },
Hospital. Star has been treated for 3 days with ultrasound to help resolve the contracture of the digits
 of the right forelimb and the underwater treadmill to help regain full function of the left hindlimb. We 
are encouraging Star to use the leg in a buoyant environment to avoid exacerbating the contracture:
second, the thermal effects of the water will help with improving joint mobility, and finally, the resistant 
property of the water will help to strengthen the muscles of the limb. I have also reiterated to her 
owner, Diane, to take Star for short walks (no more than 10 to 15 minutes at a time) no more than
 2 to 3 times per day (on the off days from physical therapy).
Dr. Smith has left a message outlining the rehabilitation process and changes in medications to avoid 
further Gl upset for Star. So far, we have seen no adverse reactions to the medications.
Again, thank you for this referral. We will continue physical therapy for 2 days this week and will
provide the owner with a home care program to continue strengthening activities for Star. We expect
that she will have progressive improvement.
Please do not hesitate to call if you have any questions or concerns: {Phone number).
Sincerely,
Figure 3-8
Referral letter.
REFERENCES
5. North American Veterinary Technician Association: A regu-
1. Healing the generations: a history of physicat therapy and the
lated profession. http://www.navta.net, 2001.
American Physicat Therapy Association, Lyme, Conn, 1995,
6. Veterinary   Technician   Specialties. http://www.avma.org/
Greenwich Publishing Group.
animal_health/brochures/careers/technology_brochure 
2. The guide to physical therapist practice, ed 2, Phys Ther
.asp#special ties.
81:21-22, 2001
7. A normative modet of physicat therapist professional educa-
3. Physical Therapy Workforce Data. https://www.apta.org/
tion: version 2004, Alex andria, VA, 2004, American Physical
WorkforceData/, 2013.
Therapy Association.
4. About the American Veterinary Medical Association. Who we
are.https://www.avma.org/about/Who WeAre/Pages/default.aspx,
2013.
SECTION II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Canine Behavior
Julie Albright
ptimal  benefits  of  physical   rehabilitation  are
that allow all the teeth to be visible (see Figure 4-2, dogs
achieved with a willing and relaxed patient. An
8 and 9). More subtle behaviors such as panting, lip licking,
animal that has enjoyable experiences and trusts
and yawning can also indicate stress in a dog. During or
the handler is more inclined to comply with rehabilitation
between procedures, one may notice the dog sitting or
procedures, which may result in greater success. For
lying very still with eyes closed. This is another sign
example, muscle contraction that occurs in a tense animal
of stress or confict that may be mistaken for a state of
is contraindicated during passive range-of-motion exer-
sleepiness or relaxation. While performing potentially
cises.' Similarly, a patient's avoidance of aversive handling
painful or threatening procedures, handlers should not only
could interfere with the detection of pain, an indicator of
watch for overt body postures, such as lip lifting (snarling),
but also less perceptible signals such as an immobilization
cular electrical stimulation sessions.? A physical rehabilita-
of the body or a pause in panting. Both of these behaviors
tion session can subject an animal to potentially painful or
may indicate the dog has just become more aroused and
frightening procedures that may result in aggressive behav-
 aggression may follow.
ior. Therefore making physical rehabilitation a pleasant 
Two actions often misinterpreted are the tail wag and
experience for the animal can also decrease the risk of
piloerection (or “raising hackles"). Although the tail wag
injury to the therapist and pet. Pet owners are more inclined
can indicate a friendly dog and piloerection can indicate
to continue rehabilitation if their animals do not appear
 an aggressive dog, this is an oversimplification. A dog with
distressed or hesitant about the facility or personnel. Inter-
a loose body posture and low, loose wagging tail may
preting body postures and vocalizations in our patients is
indeed be friendly, but a dog with a stiff body and a rapidly
essential in recognizing fear and stress. Therefore this
wagging tail, especially if isolated to the tail tip, is prob
chapter begins with a basic review of canine and feline
communication. Humane handling and behavior modifica-
response and signifies a reactive animal that may be fearful
tion techniques to decrease fear and ensure a willing patient
 or imminently aggressive. Some contend that hair raised
are also discussed.
across the entire dorsum may be indicative of the latter and
piloerection concentrated on just the dorsal hips or shoul-
Canine Communication
 ders is a more fear-motivated response.
Vocalizations are also helpful indicators of a dog's
Body posture and facial expressions are usually the frst
mood. In general, harsh, low-frequency sounds are an
clue to a dog's emotional state. Overt postures such as stiff,
attempt to make the receiver back away, and high-pitched
forward body position with erect ears and tail signal alert-
tonal vocalizations are more friendly or appeasing in
ness and offensive aggression (Figure 4-1, dog 6). An
nature.° Barking in dogs can convey a wide range of emo-
offensively aggressive dog's jaw is squared and only front
tions such as alarm, attention-seeking, distress, threat, or
teeth are exposed (Figure 4-2, dog 3). Conversely, a dog
waming. A dog distressed by isolation will give a high-
that is trembling. in a crouching position, or on its side
pitched bark, whereas alarm or aggressive barks are lower
with its ears and tail tucked is easily recognized as a fearful
in frequency and harsher sounding.7 Aggressive barks are
dog (see Figure 4-1, dogs 4, 5, and 9; Figure 4-3). A fearful
usually given in short, rapid sequence.? Growling occurs
or defensively aggressive dog is also lower to the ground 
in aggressive and nonaggressive contexts among dogs, but
compared with assertive dogs (see Figure 4-1, dog 8), often
when targeted to humans, growling is typically a low-level
approaches and retreats, and has looser facial expressions
threat that can be indicative of defensive or offensive
31
32
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Play-Soliciting
Aggression
Arousa
Figure 4-1  General body postures of dogs.
Dog 1 shows a relaxed dog. Dog 2 is alert.
Dog 3 shows playful behavior. Dogs 4 and 5
show increasing fear and submission. Dog 6
displays offensive aggression. Dog 7 shows
mixed motivations of offensive and defensive
aggression. Dog 8 shows defensive aggres-
sion. Dogs 9 and 10 show fear and/or submis-
sion. (From Overall KL: Clinical behavioral
medicine for small animais, St Louis, 1997.
Fear
Mosby.)
Submission
10
aggression.? A whine has cyclic frequencies and, in adult 
Dogs have an amazing sense of smell; thus urine and
dogs, is typically made when the dog is in pain or frus.
 Other olfactory stimuli are probably the most salient fonm
trated. Adult dog yelps are barklike and signify similar 
of communication to the canine sensory system. In con-
motivations as whines when directed at humans. Yelps are
trast, they may be the least recognized by humans in inter-
often heard during situations of greeting, submission, and
species communication with dogs. In the rehabilitation
play solicitation."' Howling is more common in nondomes-
facility, a dog that urinates, defecates, or expresses anal
tic canids species such as wolves and coyotes and occurs
sacs, especially while displaying fearful body postures, is
as a long-distance call among pack members as a group
very distressed or excited. As a territorial behavior, some
vocalization to warm an approaching stranger, or possibly
 dogs may feel the need to urine mark, especially vertical
to promote pack affinity.? In domestic dogs, howling may
surfaces previously urinated on by other dogs. In the clinic
be a response to a sound similar to a howl (e.g., siren or
setting, stress may also be a contributing factor.
 singing owner) and may represent a group vocalization.1.12
 In a physical rehabilitation facility, barks or howls may
Feline Communication
occur as a distress behavior when the dog is isolated in a
cage or run. Barks are most commonly excited or aggres-
As with dogs, a cat's vocalizations may help us to recog-
sive displays in response to the presence of people or other
animals. The motivation to vocalize should be reduced to
vocalization is the meow and is given to seek attention or
decrease distress in the dogs and also the damage to human
greet a social partner. A soft, rhythmical murmur is also
 and patient hearing.
given during greeting and social interactions. Purring is a
Chapter 4
Canine Behavior
33
IncreasingFea
Aqgr
Figure 4-2 Facial postures of dogs. Figures from left to right show increasing fear. Figures from top to bottom show increasing aggressive
motivation. Dog 1 is an alert dog. Dog 3 is offensively aggressive. Dog 7 is fearful and/or submissive. Dog 9 is defensively aggressive. All others 
are intermediate in fear and/or aggression. (From Overall KL: Clinical behavioral medicine for smalf animais, St Louis, 1997, Mosby.)
unique felid sound that is made by rapid contractions of
the laryngeal muscles, innervated by a free-running neural 
oscillator that contracts and releases every 30-40 millisec-
 Onds 14.15 People often assume a purring cat is a content cat,
but this behavior can also occur in an anxious, painful, or
sick cat. A cat purring during these stressful times is
perhaps trying to solicit attention just as the purr from a
very young kitten solicits attention from its queen. Aggres-
sive cats may produce loud, harsh howls and growls, as
well as hisses and spits. The growl is lower in frequency
and longer in duration than the howl. The hiss is an open-
mouthed sound invariably displayed in a defensively
aggressive cat. During a painful event, a cat may give a
loud, quick, high-pitched shriek, probably intended to
 startle the attacker into release.16
Emotions can also be visually communicated through
gng poaia ue yim eo y 9rors'samgsod eiey pue Apoq
Figure 4-3 Fearful dog crouching, furrowing brows, and averting
gaze. (Photo used by permission from Yin S: Low stress handling.
curved tail, head up, and relaxed ear position is displaying
restraint and behavior modification of dogs and cats, Davis, Calif.
a friendly greeting. Conversely, a cat with a vertically
2009, Cattle Dog Publishing.)
raised, piloerected tail with an arched back, and ears swiv-
eled down or fattened against the head is defensively
aggressive. As a cat becomes more frightened, its tail
moves into a concave position or is tucked between the
34
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
legs. An offensively aggressive cat's tail is lowered, but
how consequences infuence behavior and is broadly cat-
stiff and lashing. The body appears to be slanting down
egorized as nonassociative Or associative.2 Nonassocia-
from tail to head and erect ears rotated back so the inside
tive leaming can be further categorized into habituation or
of the pinna is visible. An offensively aggressive cat's
sensitization. Operant conditioning and classical condi-
pupils are constricted but become more dilated with a
tioning are the two types of associative learming.
feeling of fear and defense.
 Habituation occurs when an animal learms not to respond
to an inconsequential stimulus on repeated exposures.
Patient Fear and Aggression
Flooding is a term often used to describe exposing an
during Rehabilitation
animal to a high-intensity stimulus in the hope that the
animal will stop reacting. Instead of habituation, sensitiza-
In a physical rehabilitation or veterinary setting, fear is the
tion, or an increase in the animal's reaction to a stimulus,
 predominant motivation for aggression. Most animals show
may result. The nature of the stimulus (e.g., loud noise)
clear signs of fear and defense, but some may appear offen-
 and the level of stress the pet is experiencing are important
sively aggressive. It is tempting to ascribe "dominance"' to
factors in determining whether the result will be habitua-
these animals, but on closer observation one usually sees
tion or sensitization. Furthermore, an animal that is suffer-
the subtle and often feeting signs of defensive aggression
ing from prolonged distress may experience dishabituation
such as altermation of approach and retreat, gaze aversion,
 of stimuli and react fearfully toward objects or people to
and ears shifting back. The dog motivated by fear often
which it previously seemed indifferent.?1
adopts more assertive postures when confronted with fear-
An example of nonassociative leaming is a nervous
dog that may be hesitant when urged to enter an underwa-
drove away the stimulus during previous encounters.
 ter treadmill. The human handler detects nothing frighten-
Dominance is a description of a relationship between
ing about the apparatus so gently forces the dog into
individuals in which agonistic encounters (aggression and
the treadmill with the expectation it will "just get over it"
submission) establish who has priority to valued items,
(i.e., fooding in an attempt to habituate). However, the
such as food or mates.1718 Using dominance as a static
stress the dog is experiencing may cause sensitization to
attribute of an individual's personality is incorrect. Domi-
the treadmill, handler, or even generalize to the entire facil-
nance and territorial aggression are highly unlikely to be
ity, resulting in a dog that balks more vehemently and
motivators for pets in a therapy facility. This is because
potentially becomes aggressive each time it is near the
they do not have an extended social relationship with per-
treadmill.
sonnel, nor have they likely spent enough time in the facil-
In this example, the dog has associated the surrounding
ity to become territorial. However, frustration and arousal
stimuli such as the staff or room containing the treadmill
caused by confinement can trigger cage or kennel aggres-
with unpleasant physiologic effects of fear previously
sion in an animal distressed by the sights, sounds, and
experienced in the treadmill. In this classical condition-
smells of a facility. This is often misidentified as territorial
ing (or Pavlovian learning), a neutral stimulus is paired
 aggression. Fear is the most reasonable impetus for aggres-
with a stimulus that naturally triggers a physiologic
sion considering the circumstances.
response (such as fear, pleasure, or excitement). After
Irrespective of an animal's emotional state, forceful or
repeated pairings, the neutral stimulus alone involuntarily
 pain-inducing handling of animals is never warranted and
evokes the same response. Conversely, operant condition-
ing, also termed instrumental learning. is the voluntary
can escalate a fear response to fear aggression, causing
performance of a behavior based on previous conse-
injury to the pet and handler. Once a pet has a fearful or
quences. For example, an animal will try to repeat a behav-
 aggressive response in the facility, subsequent visits will
ior that results in a reward (reinforcement) and avoid those
result in an even more extreme reaction, thus preventing
that cause unpleasant sensations such as pain or fear
the therapist from accurately assessing and performing
(punishment). Most animal training is based on this type
treatments or exercises. Furthermore, owners will be less
 of conditioning.
willing to bring the animal to the clinic for future treatments 
 Reinforcement or punishment can be further qualified
because of the animal's behavior and welfare. Clients will
    s   
be more likely to endure the inconvenience of bringing a
was applied or removed, not the emotion of the animal or
pet to rehabilitation if they feel the pet is being handled
trainer. In other words, a positively reinforced behavior is
humanely and the pet seems to enjoy trips to the clinic.
one repeated because the animal previously received some-
thing desirable immediately after performing that action.
Learning and Behavior Modification
A behavior may also recur because the animal has learmed
 that action will cause something aversive to be removed.
Management of patient behavior begins with an under-
This is negative reinforcement. A head halter is often used
standing of how an animal leams. Learming is basically
to decrease pulling on a leash (see Humane Control and
Chapter 4
Canine Behavior
35
Safety Devices later in this chapter for more detailed
pets for certain behaviors often limit the use of food in the
description). Walking close to the handler is negatively
clinic. Anything the pet finds pleasurable (toy, presence of
reinforced because the pressure on the nose loop is released
owner, an activity like "fetch'") can be used as a reward,
when the dog stops pulling and he learns that remaining
and thus given as a reinforcer or removed as a punisher. In
near the human handler prevents the nose pressure. This is
reality, however, food is an intrinsic need and the most 
often confused with positive punishment, or decreasing the
effective, consistent motivator for our patients. Clients can
likelihood of a behavior by inflicting something aversive
be instructed to consult with a reputable behaviorist or
on the animal after it has performed an undesirable behav-
 trainer?3 regarding the importance of setting behavior cri-
jor. In the same example, the pulling behavior decreases as
teria and reward schedules to avoid "bribing" for good
the walk proceeds because the dog leams jerking ahead of
behavior. But this is of little concerm in the clinic because
the handler exacts pressure on the nose. Pulling is posi-
maintaining a relaxed emotional state in an environment
tively punished, and remaining near the human is nega-
fraught with novel and potentially frightening experiences
tively reinforced. A behavior can also become less likely
requires a large “pay check" for the pet. If obesity is a
through negative punishment, or removal of something the
concerm, the owner can adjust the diet at home to ensure
animal considers rewarding when it performs an unwanted
the appropriate caloric intake. Unless a patient cannot be
behavior. Most dogs consider their owners’ affections
fasted, the owner should be instructed to feed the animal a
enjoyable so removing this stimulus when the dog is
maximum of half the morming meal; very small treats are 
barking or jumping for attention decreases this pestering
provided during the sessions so the pet remains motivated
behavior. The best result comes from well-timed positive
to take the food. A variety of very small treats should be
reinforcement (giving attention) when the dog is behaving
kept on hand in each therapy room. Common favorite
 appropriately (sitting) in addition to the immediate nega-
foods are real meat or fish, semimoist treats, or sticky foods
tive punishment (removal of attention) of the unruly behav.
like peanut butter, meat-favored baby food, or favored
ior (jumping).
 pastes in nozzle cans.*
Success of behavior modification depends on the timing
The food can be used to countercondition or change the
and relevancy of the behavior with the punisher or rein-
animal's emotional response to the target that elicits fear.
forcer. The stimulus must be applied within just a second
As a form of associative leaming, counterconditioning can
or two of the animal's action and be applied consistently
be classical or operant in nature. Classical countercondi-
for the animal to be able to predict which behaviors elicited
tioning involves simply providing the dog with rewards in
the pleasant or unpleasant consequences. Inappropriately
the presence of the fear-producing target with the expecta-
applied rewards can result in problems such as rewarding
tions of replacing the fear response with a pleasant emotion.
the incorrect behaviors and potentially increasing anxiety.
Often the outcome is more successful if the dog is asked
However, poorly applied punishment does not just result
to perform a previously trained command that is incompat-
in poor efficacy, but also becomes a welfare concerm. The
 ible with the fear response while in the presence of the
inability of an animal to predict and control when it will
stimulus (operant counterconditioning). Again using the
receive something that induces fear or pain quickly creates
 underwater treadmill as an example, a dog that is trembling
a distressed animal. Animals that perceive an aversive
Or attempting to flee as the water fills the chamber could
 event as unavoidable may become apathetic and not attempt
be rewarded for moving forward as the water fow begins
by targeting this skill that has been previously mastered
indifference could be mistaken for relaxation, but short-
outside the apparatus (see Handling of the Physical Reha-
and long-term activation of the stress neuroendocrine
bilitation Patient later in this chapter). In both classical and
-m g p a s mn pa  ss
 operant counterconditioning protocols, the emotional state 
being in therapy patients.
 is being changed. Frequently the target produces such a
 Positive punishment is often the technique first employed
level of stress that getting the animal focused on a command
to try to change an animal's unwanted behavior. However,
Or a reward may be very difficult. Thus most behaviorists
advocate a systematic desensitization protocol in which the
priate in a clinic or therapy setting. Subjecting an animal
animal is habituated to a very low stimulus level (e.g.
to discomfort or verbal reprimand that induces an unpleas-
expose the dog to the treadmill at great distance), and then
ant emotional state may suppress behavior (operant condi-
the intensity level is gradually increased (the dog is brought
tioning), but also classically conditions fear of the facility
 closer to treadmill) with the goal of never triggering fear.
and staff. The use of positive reinforcement, negative pun-
Typically a dog is asked to perform commands for treats
ishment, and environmental management (e.g., quiet facil-
as the distance is decreased. This is called a desensitization/
ity and training of staff to correctly read subtle animal body
counterconditioning protocol and is the crux of most
postures) is strongly recommended in a clinic to prevent
behavior modification.
fear and escape behaviors. The inconvenience, dietary
restrictions of some patients, and bias against "bribing"’ our
*Kong Easy Treat, Kong Company, Golden, Colorado.
36
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Setting the Stage
may also feel more secure if a partial visual barrier is
provided.
Preventing anxiety rather than trying to calm a highly
 First impressions with staff are important in gaining the
distressed dog is a more successful strategy in maintaining
patient's trust. Quickly approaching, leaning over, and
a compliant patient. This begins long before the dog enters
reaching out are considered threating actions to a dog
the treatment room. A dog that has car distress or motion
(Figure 4-5, A). Instead, the staff member should provide
sickness on the way to the clinic is more likely to be
enough time and space for the dog to acclimate to its new
stressed during the session. The dog's regular veterinarian
surroundings (Figure 4-5, B). A crouching or sitting human
should be consulted regarding antiemetic medications if
who is avoiding eye contact is much less threatening.
nausea or vomiting during the car ride is a consistent
Treats can be gently rolled to the dog from a distance as
problem. Other strategies to decrease car distress include
desensitization to the car itself and then the motion of
riding in the car." Visual restriction (e.g., Calming Cap*
as shown in Figure 4-4), stabilization via a crate or seatbelt,
as well as pheromone therapy24.2s and lavender aroma-
therapy?6 can have a calming effect on dogs showing excit-
able or stress behaviors in the car.
The reception area and therapy rooms should be
 designed to minimize stimuli that can cause excitement.
 The waiting room can be made less stressful by instructing
staff to move slowly and minimize noise. Arranging seating
and providing solid structures in the sitting area so fearful
or reactive amimals can be visually isolated can be very
helpful. Visual sequestration is also recommended for the
cage and kennel area as well. Cats should always be pro-
vided with hiding places and dogs in cages and larger runs
Figure 4-4 A Calming Cap can decrease visual stimulation and
stress during car rides. (Photo courtesy of Thunderworks, Durham,
*Calming Cap, Premier Pet Products, Midlothian, Virginia.
North Carolina.)
B
Figure 4-5  A, Incorrect greeting: the staf member leans and reaches over the dog. The dog perceives this action as a threat and reacts with
fearful body postures and avoidance of the approaching person. (Photo used by permission from Yin S: low stress handfing, restraint and behavior
modification of dogs and cats, Davis, Calif, 2009, Cattle Dog Publishing.) B, Correct greeting: approach dog backwards or from side in a kneeling
position and offer treat by slowly extending forearm out to the dog. Allow the dog to approach instead of cornering it. (Photo used by permis-
sion from Yin S: Low stress handling, restraint and behavior modification of dogs and cats, Davis, Calif, 2009, Cattle Dog Publishing.)
Chapter 4
Canine Behavior
37
the staff member greets and gets a history from the owner.
restraint, and become an uncooperative participant. Thick
The dog is less fearful if encouraged with treats and praise
rubber mats afford both stable footing and cushioning of
to voluntarily approach the unfamiliar person. The dog
pressure points that may become uncomfortable during
may feel trapped and defensive if the unfamiliar person
recumbent procedures. Small dogs and cats should be
invades its personal space. After the animal is in the therapy
placed on a soft but secure towel on the examination table.
area, staff members can continue to make the visit enjoy-
 able by speaking to the dog in an upbeat voice and luring
Humane Control and Safety Devices
it around the facility with small food treats.
Animal facilities have an abundance of smooth, clean-
Appropriate control over the dog helps to prevent unruly
able surfaces that can amplify sound waves. Barking in
 behavior, such as pulling, jumping, or aggressive lunging.
 dogs can easily reach the 90-decibel limit of the Occupa-
Head halters are an excellent tool and are underused in the
tional Safety and Health Act.27 Human ears can be pro-
clinic setting. There are several styles and brands of head
tected with safety devices, but the welfare of our patients
halters with slightly different designs, but all have two
is still compromised if noise is not reduced. An architect
loops—one behind the ears and one around the nose. With
familiar with noise-reducing design and building materials
most designs the leash attaches under the jaw. This pro-
should be consulted for new facility construction.28
vides better control because the dog's pulling away from
Although retrofitting existing facilities to reduce noise and
 the handler puts pressure on the nose strap and pulls the
visual contact can be more challenging, cleanable but
nose back to the handler. Although the pressure is aversive,
sound-absorbing rubber and certain fiberglass panels can
it is safe and not painful when applied correctly. The owner
be used in most areas.
should be encouraged to acclimate the dog to the head
Classical music may promote quiet and resting behav-
 halter at home by associating it with treats and other enjoy-
ior, whereas heavy metal music seems to agitate dogs.29
able activities, like walks (Figure 4-6). However, this can
Barking and other anxiety-related behaviors may also be
usually be done in just a few minutes at the clinic. Head
decreased by occupying the dog with treat-dispensing
halters can be extremely useful during the session. A dog
objects (e.g., Kong toys* or Premier Pet Products Busy
that becomes distressed will often attempt to escape from
Buddy line of toys') filled with palatable food. Decreasing
the situation. The handler may, in tum, react by speaking
the motivation to bark by alleviating underlying distress is
sharply to the dog or taking a "death grip" on the patient.
 preferable to aversive methods that may increase anxiety,
This reaction may suppress the struggle in that moment but
but persistent barking by just one or two dogs can increase
it will only increase the patient's fear and make subsequent
the stress level of all other patients and staff. A spray (cit-
 interactions more difficult. Some dogs may appear calmer
ronella or scentless) bark collar for specific offenders may
when simply wearing a properly fitted head halter. If a dog
 be helpful in these situations. 30
does become overly aroused, judicious use of pressure and
Pheromones are another simple modality that may be
release of pressure from the nose loop can quickly calm
used to reduce stress in kennel and therapy areas. 31 Feliway
the dog by preventing escape and allowing the handler to
is a synthetic version of the feline facial pheromone. The
remain calm and quiet.
diffuser can be used in wards or treatment rooms, and the
A head halter can prevent low levels of aggression, but
spray form can be applied to towels or hands several
 dogs with a biting history may require a muzzle. A basket
minutes before the procedure. Adaptil is a synthetic
muzzle is preferred in most situations. A basket muzzle
version of a lactating bitch mammary pheromone and is
allows the dog to take treats and pant, whereas a sleeve
also available as a diffuser or spray. The spray reapplied
muzzle can exacerbate distress by restricting panting
every few hours to a towel or bandana could potentially
and breathing. Although there may be no obvious differ-
 provide better pheromone concentration and efficacy for
ence for brief examinations or events like a venipuncture,
that individual dog or cat. Collars that are impregnated
extended procedures are more common in physical reha-
with pheromones and claim to emit the chemical for
bilitation, thus making basket muzzles more desirable.
approximately 1 month are also available (Adaptil and
As with the head halters, animals will accept the muzzle
Nurturecalm)
more willingly if a desensitization program is outlined for
Finally, nonslip fooring and substrates are essential to
the owners and performed before it is used in the session.
creating a relaxed patient. A dog that feels unsteady is
In short, place spreadable food such as peanut butter,
more likely to panic and injure itself or staff during
canned cheese, or meat-flavored dog pastes (e.g., Kong
liver favor paste) into the muzzle. Encourage, but do not
force the dog to put its nose in the muzzle for the treats
(see Figure 4-6, A). When the dog does not hesitate to put
*Kong Rubber Toys, Kong Company, Golden, Colorado.
its nose in the muzzle and keep it there, the strap behind
Busy Buddy Toys, Premier Pet Produtts, Midlothian, Virginia.
FAdaptil, Ceva Sante Animale, Rutherford, New Jersey.
the ears can be fastened. The time the dog wears the muzzle
FNurturecalm 24f7 Pheromone Collar Meridian Animal Health, Omaha, Nebraska.
can be gradually increased by a few seconds as long as it
38
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
A
Figure 4-6 A, Acclimate the dog to the head halter by initially rewarding with treats when he puts his nose through the loop. B, Continue to
associate the head halter with rewards by treating the dog for calmly walking by your side.
is relaxed. Continue to provide the treats while the dog is
wearing the muzzle.
Handling of the Physical
Rehabilitation Patient
Physical therapists and their staff are encouraged to read,
watch videos, and practice handling techniques that are
extensively detailed in other publications to supplement the
material in this chapter. In Low stress handling. restraint,
Figure 4-7 Secure and proper towel-wrap restraint can allow
and behavior modification of dogs and cats, Yin outlines
access to both the head and hind-end while decreasing the cat's
10 basic principles of low-stress handling, including proper
stress and injury to the handler.
and minimizing the duration of restraint. Most importantly.
handlers should become highly skilled at recognizing
subtle signs of fear and distress in pets. When fear is first
 sO uncomfortable scruffing and stretching can be avoided
 detected, handling strategies can then be adjusted, allowing
(Figure 4-7). The tight wraps provide security and ample
the animal to remain relaxed and avoid extreme escape
 access to the needed area while also decreasing agitating
behaviors and aggression.
sensory overstimulation.18
Choke chains and slip leads should be avoided. As dis-
Figures 4-8 and 4-9 show how the head halter can be
cussed previously, head halters provide the most humane
used to keep the dog focused on the reward during a pro-
control. Treats and the head halter can be used to lure the
cedure. Note the point of control is on the dog's head. It
dog from one position to another and minimize the need
would be difficult for him to tum his mouth far enough to
for physical positioning. However, the use of hands and
bite; however, the body restraint is minimal so any discom-
body to properly place the animal is usually necessary at
fort from the ultrasound may be easily detected. Figure 4-8
some point during a therapy session. When moving a dog
is appropriate for a dog with a history of aggression. The
from one position to the next, motions should be slow and
 leash is kept between the dog and the wall, preventing the
smooth, and the handler's body should be a solid support,
mouth from reaching the handler and therapist. An Eliza-
not painfully forcing the patient into a certain position.
bethan collar or rolled towel wrapped around the neck
Staff should become adept at towel-wrap restraints for cats 
can also be used to block bites, particularly in cats and
Chapter 4
Canine Behavior
39
Figure 4-8  The handler uses the head halter and treats to distract
and control the dog during a procedure. This low-restraint method
keeps the dog calm and also prevents the dog from turning to bite
the handler or therapist. However, a basket muzzle can be placed
Figure 4-10  Luring a dog into the water treadmill using a previ-
over the head halter for added safety.
-e1 panaisew bop aul puewwos buabiei-puey pauopuos Aisno
geting in quiet areas and then near the treadmillbefore he was ured
into the apparatus.
Tasty treats or other motivators like a favorite toy or
person can be used to lure a hesitant dog onto apparatuses
like inclines or treadmills. Asking the animal to perform a
command for the reward often improves compliance by
focusing the dog on an altermate activity. A correctly per-
formed counterconditioning with systematic desensitiza-
tion may take more time to complete during the initial
training phase, but it is a time saver, as well as being more
humane, 0ver the long tenm. Figure 4-10 demonstrates a
dog being lured into the water treadmill using a hand target
command. The dog was previously taught to touch the
hand with his nose when giving the visual cue of the hand
and the verbal command "touch." This dog is nervous
Figure 4-9  Restraint for examining the hind limbs or back of an
about approaching the treadmill. The targeting and other
aggressive dog. The dog is placed against a wall and one handler
commands are initially asked at a great distance from the
stands close to the dog's shoulder This handler keeps the leash of
apparatus. The handler and dog close the distance to the
the head halter between the dog and the wall, thus preventing the
 treadmill by a foot or two when the dog appears relaxed
dog from turning to bite. Another handler is offering treats during
 and focused on the handler. If the apparatus has a poten-
-eis uewai oi bop aui ahennoua di annpnond no uoeuwexa au
tionary. A basket muzzle may be placed over the head halter
tially frightening sound, the first phase of the desensitiza-
tion should be the gradual approach with the machine off
and quiet. The next stage is repeating the session with the
brachycephalic (very short muzzled) dogs for which a head
motor tumed on. The dog should not be forced into
collar can be difficult to fit. Also note that treats are given
approaching. A dog too frightened, tired, or ummotivated
liberally throughout the procedure. Handlers often wait
to ambulate on the treadmill is not receiving the full benefit
until after the procedure to reward the dog for good behav-
 of the exercise and may injure itself. Verbally praising the
ior. As discussed in Leaming and Behavior Modification
dog and luring with the target and treats increase the dog's
 earlier in this chapter, the action the animal is performing
motivation and classically condition the patient to the
within 1 second of receiving the reward or punishment is
treadmill with an enjoyable emotion. This procedure can
 the behavior being operantly conditioned. Thus a treat and
be used for a myriad of active exercises such as incline
verbal praise given as the procedure is ending and restraint
walking, swimming, dancing, and cart exercises. Target
is removed is rewarding the pet for moving away from the
training and desensitization, along with good control using
handler. Although the procedure room and staff are pos-
a head halter, can also successfully condition the pet to
participate willingly in other exercises, such as the balance
classical conditioning, remaining calm and still during the
platform and exercise ball, both of which can be discon-
 procedure is not being reinforced.
certing because of the imbalance they create.
40
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
REFERENCES
17. Bradshaw JwS, Blackwell E, Casey R: Dominance in
1. Millis DL, Lewelling A, Hamilton S: Range-of-motion and
domestic dogs: useful construct or bad habit? J Vet Behav
stretching exercises. In Millis DL, Levine D, eds: Canine
134:135-144, 2009.
rehabilitation and physical therapy, ed 2, St Louis, 2004,
18. Yin S: Low stress handling, restraint, and behavior modijfication.
Saunders.
of dogs and cats, Davis, Calif, 2009, Cattle Dog Publishing.
2. Heinrichs K: Superficial thermal modalities. In Millis DL,
19. Moffat K: Addressing canine and feline aggression in the
Levine D, eds: Canine rehabilitation and physical therapy,
veterinary clinic, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
ed 2, St Louis, 2004, Saunders.
38:983-1003, 2008.
3. Johnson J, Levine D: Electrical stimulation. In Millis DL,
 20. Robbins SJ, Scwhartz B, Wasserman EA: Psychology of
Levine D, eds: Canine rehabilitation and physical therapy,
tearning and behavior, ed 5, New York, 2001, W.W. Norton
ed 2, St Louis, 2004, Saunders.
& Company.
4. Bradshaw JWS, Brown SL: Behavioral adaptations of dogs
 21. Mills DS: Training and learning protocols. In Horwitz DF,
to domestication. In Berger IH, ed: Pets, benefits, and prac-
Mills DS, eds: BSAVA manuat of canine and feline behav-
tice, London, 2000, British Veterinary Association.
ioural medicine, ed 2, Gloucester, England, 2009, British
5. Overall K: Clinicat behaviorat medicine for small animats,
 Small Animal Veterinary Association.
 22. Seligman MEP, Maier SF: Failure to escape traumatic shock,
St Louis, 1997, Mosby.
 6. Schassburger RM: Vocal communications in the timber wolf,
J Exp Psychot 74:1-9, 1967.
23. American Veterinary Society of Animal Behavior: AVSAB
Canus lupus, Linnaeus. In Advances in ethology 30, Berlin,
1993, Paul Parey Scientific Publishers.
Position  Statement Website.  http://w ww.av sabonline.org/.
 7. Yin S, McCowan B: Barking in domestic dogs: context speci-
Accessed 2011
ficity and individual identifcation, Anim Behav 68:343-355,
 24. Pageat P, Gaultier E: Current research in canine and feline
2004.
pheromones, Vet Clin North Am Smafl Anim Pract 33:187-
 8. Pongracz P, Miklosi A, Molnar C et al: Human listeners are
211, 2003.
able to classify dog barks recorded in different situations,
 25. Gandia Estelles M, Mills DS: Signs of travel-realted prob-
lems in dogs and their response to treatment with dog-
J Comp Psychol 119:136-144, 2005.
 9. Fox MW, Cohen JA: Canid communication. In Seboeok TA,
appeasing pheromone, Vet Rec 159:143-148, 2006.
ed: How animais communicate, Bloomington, 1977, Indiana
 26. Wells DL: Aromatherapy for travel-induced excitement in
University Press.
dogs, JAVMA 229:964-967, 2006.
10. Houpt KA: Domestic animal behavior for veterinarians and
27. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: CDC Occupa-
animal scientists, ed 5, Ames, Iowa, 2010, Blackwell-Wiley.
tional Noise Exposure Website. http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/
11. Beaver BB: Canine behavior: insights and answers, ed 2, St
docs/98-126/. Accessed 2011.
Louis, 2009, Saunders.
 28. Coppola CL, Enns MR, Grandin T: Noise in animal shelter
12. Theberge JB, Falls JB: Howling as a means of communica-
 environment: building design and the effects of daily noise
tion in wolves, Am Zoot 7:331-338, 1967.
exposure, J Appt Anim Welf Sci 9:1-7, 2006.
 13. Bradshaw J, Cameron-Beaumont C: The signaling repertoire 
 29. Wells DL, Graham L, Hepper PG: The infuence of auditory
of the domestic cat and its undomesticated relatives. In
stimulation on the behavior of dogs housed in a rescue
Turner DC, Bateson P, eds: The domestic cat: the biotogy of
shelter, Anim Wetf 11:385-393, 2002.
its behavior, ed 2, Cambridge, England, 2000, Cambridge
30. Moffat K, Landsberg GM, Beaudet R: Effectiveness and
University Press.
comparison of citronella and scentless spray bark collars for
14. Remmers JE, Gautier H: Neural and mechanical mechanisms
the control of barking in a veterinary hospital seting, J Am
of feline purring, Respir Physiol 16:351-361, 1972.
Anim Hosp Assoc 39:343-348, 2003.
 31. Kroen Pw, Ludders JW, Erb HN et al: A synthetic fraction
15. Frazer-Simmon DE, Rice DA, Peters G: How cats purt, J
Zoot 223:67-78, 1991.
of feline facial pheromones calms but does not reduce strug-
16. Drews C: The concept and definition of dominance in animal
gling in cats before venous catheterization, Vet Anaesth
behaviour, Behaviour 125:283-313, 1993.
Anatg 33:258-265, 2006.
Canine Anatomy
Cheryl Riegger-Krugh, Darryl L. Millis, and Joseph P. Weigel
his text is intended for people who already possess 
ulna, respectively; (2) axial and abaxial to indicate toward
 knowledge of either veterinary or human anatomy.
or away from the axis of the digits, which is between
To assist communication among human rehabilita-
the third and fourth digits of the forepaw, and the third
tion and veterinary colleagues, some anatomic tenms used
and fourth digits of the hind paw, respectively; and (3)
for dogs appear in regular print with the analogous tenmi-
tibial and fibular to indicate toward the tibia and fibula,
nology for humans in parentheses following the canine
respectively.
tenm. These comparisons have been minimized, as this is
Anatomic Planes
a chapter about canine anatomy and not a chapter about
comparative anatomy. Comparative anatomy between dogs
The main planes of motion for dogs are as follows (see
 and humans has been described in other sources.1-3
Figure 5-1):
We have chosen to use some terms consistently through-
 The sagittal plane divides the dog into right and left
out the chapter, rather than use equally acceptable syn-
portions. If this plane were in the midline of the body,
onyms. The canine forelimb is known also as the thoracic
this is the median plane or median sagittal plane.
limb and the pectoral limb, but we use the term forelimb.
 The dorsal plane divides the dog into ventral and dorsal
The canine hindlimb is known also as the pelvic limb or
portions.
rear limb, but we use the term hindlimb. Because the tenm
· The transverse plane divides the body into cranial and
foot can be interpreted as a front foot or a hind foot, this
caudal portions.
term is clarified when used or specifed as forepaw or
manus, or hindpaw or pes. The terms trunk, neck, and head
Axes of Rotation
refer to the same body segments in dogs and humans. The
Motion may occur in any of three planes of motion or some
word canine is an adjective and the word dog is a noun;
combination. Joint motion within a plane usually occurs
these terms are used in this consistent grammatical form
around an axis of rotation, which may be centered within
throughout the chapter.
the joint space or within the bone comprising the joint.
Some joint motions are planar or gliding motions and do
Directional Terms and Anatomic Planes
not occur around an axis of rotation.
An axis of rotation for a joint motion is a straight line
or rod that is 90 degrees to the plane of motion. For each
Directional Terms from Normal Stance
axis of rotation listed in the next section, the plane of
(Anatomic Position)
motion around which joint motion occurs can be viewed
The dog stands upright on digits or phalanges of each
from Figure 5-1.
forepaw or manus and each hindpaw or pes (Figure 5-1).
Axes of Rotational Joint Motion
This type of stance is termed a digitigrade stance. The
human stands upright on the feet, with the plantar aspect
The axes of rotational joint motion are as follows:
of the feet contacting the foor and adjacent to each other.
 Transverse axis: Sagittal plane motion occurs around an
The upper limbs hang at the sides of the body, palms facing
axis of rotation that is directed mediolaterally.
forward. This type of stance is called a plantigrade stance.
· Ventrodorsal axis: Dorsal plane motion occurs around
 Directional terms from anatomic position in dogs are
an axis of rotation that is directed ventrodorsally.
more directly compared with the directional tenms in
· Craniocaudal axis: Transverse plane motion, such as
humans when the human is in a quadruped position or the
rotation of the trunk, occurs around an axis of rotation
dog is in an upright stance posture. Directional tenms
that is directed craniocaudally.
include cranial, caudal, rostral, dorsal, palmar, plantar,
Most joints allow motion in more than one plane. Dogs
medial, and lateral. Other specific directional terms include 
and humans have the ability to selectively produce motion
(1) radial and ulnar to indicate toward the radius and
in one, some, or all of the planes of motion at one time.
41
42
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Lateral Medial
Ventra
Figure 5-1 Orientation to planes of
motion and directional terms for the dog.
(From Dyce KM: Textbook of veterinary
Dorsal
anatomy, ed 4, St Louis, 2010, Saunders.)
planes
Transverse planes
Dista
Median
Sagittal
plane
planes
Dogs have much more limitation in motion in the dorsal
 and transverse planes.
Bones
The bones of the dog skeleton and limbs are illustrated in
Figures 5-2, 5-3, and 5-4. Bony landmarks on the bones of
the limbs are shown in Figures 5-5 through 5-10.
Forelimb
The forelimb skeleton consists of the thoracic or pectoral
Figure 5-2 Skeleton of a male dog, left lateral view. (From Evans HE:
 girdle and bones of the forelimb (see Figures 5-5 and 5-6).
The size of forelimb bones varies a great deal, because of
Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2013, WB Saunders.)
the greater variation in size for breeds of dogs. The fore-
The radius is the medial forearm bone and is the main
limbs bear 60% of the dog's weight.
weight-bearing bone of the antebrachium distally. The
 The canine scapula is positioned close to the sagittal
proximal surface of the radius articulates with the humeral
plane. Dogs have an abbreviated clavicle that does not
capitulum, which is not as prominent as in the human. The
articulate with the rest of the skeleton. It is a small oval
canine distal radius has distinct facets for articulation with
plate often 1 cm or less in length and % cm wide, located
carpal bones, providing stability in weight bearing.
at the tendinous intersection of the brachiocephalicus
The ulna is the lateral forearm bone and has a very promj-
muscle. The adult canine clavicle is mostly cartilage and
is usually not visible on radiographs.
the large triceps brachii muscle, needed as an antigravity
The canine humeral head is less rounded compared
muscle for weight bearing in dogs. The ulna is the longest bone
with the human head, to assist with weight bearing.
 Of the canine body. It articulates distally with the ulnar carpal
Distally, there is an olecranon fossa and supratrochlear
nd accessory carpal bones by two distal facets and does not
foramen for the secure positioning of the protruding
have an articular disk. The dog has an anconeal process, which
anconeal process of the ulna for more stability in weight
is near the attachment site of the anconeus muscle. The anco-
bearing.
 neal process is needed for stability in weight bearing.
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
43
LIUM, ISCHIUM
SCAPULA
PUBIS
Sacroiliac joint
Hip
Coxa
Flexor
Hip joint
CLAVICLE
surface
Collarbone
Flexor
Shoulder
FEMUR
surface
Thigh
HUMERUS
Arm
 Brachium
Flexor
Elbow
surface
xl
 Stile joint
surface
RADIUS AND ULNA
TBIA, FIBULA
Forearm
Leg
Antebrachium
Crus
PES
Flexor
MANUS
Flexor Carpal joints
Tarsus
surface
Carpus
surface
Tarsal joints
Metacarpus
Metatarsus
Digits
Flexor
Digital joints
Digits
surface
Digital joints
9
Flexor
Figure 5-3 Left forelimb skeleton, noting joints and flexor surfaces.
surface
(From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the
Figure 5-4  Left hindlimb skeleton, noting joints and flexor surfaces.
dog. ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
(From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the
dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
At the carpus or wrist (see Figure 5-7), there are seven
 carpal bones. The radial carpal bone is analogous to the
of the hindlimb (see Figures 5-8 and 5-9). The size of
fused scaphoid and lunate. There are five metacarpal bones.
hindlimb bones varies a great deal, because of the great
The first metacarpal is short and nonfunctional. Dogs have
variation in size for breeds of dogs. The hindlimbs bear
many sesamoid bones that are embedded in tendons or near
40% of the dog's weight.
them. Sesamoid bones occur when there are significant
The canine pelvis is positioned between the dorsal and
changes in directions of pull on tendons in addition to the
transverse planes and closer to the dorsal plane. The canine
tensile forces produced during muscle contractions. They
pelvis is relatively small and narrow. The canine ischiatic
allow for constant, biomechanically advantageous align-
 or ischial tuberosities are wide and project caudally to form
ment of angles of insertion of tendons at their attachment
a broad ischiatic table. The canine pelvis shape from a
sites, which helps relieve stress on the tendinous insertions
ventral view resembles a rectangle. The symphysis pelvis
for animals that walk on their digits. Dogs are digitigrade
 is relatively long and has two portions, the symphysis ischii
animals and bear weight on digits II to V, with the main
 and symphysis pubis, compared with the relatively shorter
weight bearing occurring on digits IMI and IV. The sesa-
 joining of the anterior aspect of the human innominates at
moid bones at the dorsal surface of each metacarpophalan-
the symphysis pubis. The distinction of the shape of the
 geal joint align the extensor tendons for optimal muscle
male and female pelvic inlet and outlet in humans is not
action. Those on the pad surface of the manus align the
made in dogs.
fexor tendons.
The canine femur is the heaviest and largest canine
 bone. In most dogs, it is slightly shorter than the tibia and
Hindlimb
the ulna and approximately one-fifth longer than the
The hindlimb skeleton includes the pelvic girdle, consist-
humerus. The average canine angle of inclination or cervi-
ing of the fused ilium, ischium, and pubis, and the bones
ar ue aa ssoa gsisap Ltti si alsue [oo
44
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Cranial angke 
smallest, is located in the proximal attachment of the
Cranial border
popliteus muscle, and articulates with the lateral tibial
condyle.
Supraspinous fossa-
The canine patella, or kneecap, is the largest sesamoid
Scapular notch 
bone in the body. It is an ossification in the quadriceps
 Infraspinous fossa
Supragenoid tubercke 
femoris muscle. The patella alters the pull, increases the
Clavick
Spine
Acromion
moment arm, and protects the quadriceps tendon, as well
C
Glenoid cavity
 Infraglenoid tubercke
as provides a greater contact surface for the tendon on the
Greater tubercle
Head
 trochlea of the femur than would exist without the patella.
Neck
Tricipital line 
The canine patellar articular surface is mildly convex.
Body
The canine tibia is the major bone in the crus. The tri-
Deltoid tuber
angular proximal tibia is wider than the distal cylindrical
tibia. Medial and lateral tibial condyles, an intercondylar
 Olcranon
Condyle
eminence, and a tibial tuberosity are on the proximal tibia.
Lateral epioondyle -
Lateral coronoid prooess
The tibial plateau slopes distally from cranial to caudal.
Capitular fovea
The extensor groove, on the cranial tibia and lateral to the
Head
tibial tuberosity, provides a pathway for the long digital
Body of radius
Body of u lna
extensor muscle. There is a popliteal notch on the caudal
 tibia in the midline, where the popliteal vessels course. The
tibia articulates with the fibula proximally, along the inter-
 Osseous crest, and distally. The tibial cochlea articulate
Styloid process
with the trochlea of the talus to form the talocrural joint.
-Accessory carpal or pisiform
 The canine fibula is a long, slender bone that articulates
with the tibia and also serves as a site for muscle attach-
ment. There is a distinctive groove in the lateral malleolus,
the sulcus malleolaris lateralis, through which course the
al phalanx
tendons of the lateral digital extensor and peroneus brevis
Middke phalanx
muscles.
Distal phalanx
The tarsus, or hock, consists of the talus, calcaneus, a
Ungual prooess
central tarsal bone, and tarsal bones I to IV (see Figure
Figure 5-5 Skeleton of the lateral forelimb of the dog. (Adapted 
5-10). The talus articulates with the distal tibia and has
from Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the
dog. ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
prominent ridges. At the talocrural joint, two convex ridges
of the trochlea of the talus articulate with two reciprocal
concave grooves of the cochlea of the tibia. The orientation
degree of anteversion or positive femoral torsion of +27 to
of the grooves and ridges deviates laterally approximately
31 degrees, when measured from a direct radiograph or
 25 degrees from the sagittal plane. This deviation allows
with a method using trigonometry and biplanar radiogra-
the hindpaws to pass lateral to the forepaws when dogs
phy, respectively. The canine femur has a relatively thick
gallop.4 The calcaneus is large and serves as the insertion
and short femoral neck, a caudomedially located lesser
of the common calcaneal tendon. The central tarsal bone
trochanter, a prominent lateral greater trochanter, and a
lies between the talus and the numbered tarsal bones I to
relatively short and wide shaft with a narrow isthmus in
III. Tarsal IV is large and articulates with the calcaneus and
the middle. The greater trochanter has a craniolateral
 metatarsal bones, spanning this entire region.
 prominence called the cervical tubercle. Dogs have a third
The canine hindpaw has five metatarsal bones; however,
trochanter, which is the attachment site of the superficial
the first metatarsal can be short or absent. Dogs have many
gluteal muscle. Canine medial and lateral femoral condyles
sesamoid bones that are embedded in tendons where there
are equally prominent, but the articular surface of the
are significant compressive and tensile forces produced
medial femoral condyle projects more cranially than that
during muscle contractions. The sesamoid bones at the
of the lateral femoral condyle.
There are three sesamoid bones in the caudal stife joint
extensor tendons for optimal joint action. The sesamoid
region. Two are located in the heads of the gastrocnemius
bones on the plantar surface of the hindpaw align fexor
muscle caudal to the stife joint and are called fabellae. The
tendons.
sesamoid in the lateral head is the largest, is palpable, and
Spine
articulates with the lateral femoral condyle, whereas the
one in the medial head is smaller and may not have a dis-
The spine consists of five areas of the vertebral column:
tinct facet on the medial femoral condyle. The third is the
the cervical vertebrae and its articulation with the head,
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
45
Cranial angle
Caudal angle -
- Cranial border
Subscapular fossa -
Caudal border -
Head ~
Ventral angle
Greater tubercle
Intertubercular groove
Lesser tubercle
 and crest
Tuberosity for teres major
Body
Olecranon
 Medial epicondyle
Condyle
Accessory carpal
(pisiform)-
Metacarpal I
Sesamoid
Figure 5-6 Skeleton of the medial forelimb of the dog. (Adapted from Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog, ed
7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
thoracic vertebrae, lumbar vertebrae, sacral vertebrae, and
vertebrae are fairly consistent in size. The consistent size
the coccygeal vertebrae (Figures 5-11 through 5-14). The
 in dogs refects the relatively equivalent cranial-to-caudal
number of vertebrae is listed in Box 5-1.
 compressive loading. Because dogs are quadruped, there
All vertebrae, except the sacral vertebrae, remain sepa-
is weight bearing on all four limbs. There is cervical spine
rate and form individual joints. Four sites with limited
 compression as a result of the positioning of the dog's head
 motion exist within the canine spine. These sites occur at
as a cantilever, which requires cervical extensor muscle
areas where the cranial and caudal articular surfaces are
activity to maintain head posture. The massive cervical
inclined in a nonparallel manner and in different directions.
extensor muscle activity requires relatively large and strong
The nonparallel aligmment of the articular surfaces mark-
cervical vertebrae to support the muscle mass. Canine
edly restricts joint accessory motions, such as glides. The 
intervertebral disks likewise change little in size from the
restricted joint motions and areas resulting from these joint
cervical through the lumbar vertebrae. The C5-C6 area is
alignments include atlantoaxial motion other than rotation,
a site of relative hypermobility in large dogs. The spinal
the cervical (C) 7-thoracic (T) 1 junction, the caudal tho-
cord ends at lumbar (L) L6-L7.
racic region, and the sacrum.
The canine atlas, or C1 vertebra (see Figure 5-12), has
Individual vertebral bone size and shape vary among
 a transverse foramen in each transverse process, a cranio-
breeds. For any one breed, canine cervical through lumbar 
dorsal arch, and right and left lateral vertebral foramina
ACC
Proximal
medioradial
Intermedic
carpalbones
Sesamoid
in abductor
bones
dligiti I longus
digiti I longus
Distal carpal
Proximal
sesamoid
Bd
bone
Proximal
Metacarpal
phalanx
halan.
bones
Distal
phalanx
Dorsal st
Proximal
Body
Proximal
Bodly
phalanges
phalanges
Head
Micddle
Middle
phalanges
phalanges
Base
Distal
tubercle
Distal
phalanges
Figure 5-7 Skeleton of the left dorsal (A) and left palmar (B) forepaw of the dog. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the
dissection of the dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
lliac crest 
Cranial dorsal iliac spine
Caudal dorsal iliac spir
Cranial ventral
Caudal dorsal iiac spin
Greater ischiatic notch 
Tuber
iliac spine
 Greater ischiatic notch
Caudal ventral
Ischiatic tuberosity
lschiatic spine
iliac spine
Ischiatic tablke ~
 Le sser ischiatic notch
Medial ange of the
Caudal ventral iliac spine
liumbody
wing
Ischiatic tuberosity
ischiatic tuberosity
Body of llium
Greater trochant
Ischium
 Cbturator foramen
Illiopubic eminence
- Obturator forame n
Illiopubic 
Symphysis pelvis 
Pubic tubercle
Medial angk of
Third trochant
Pubis
ischiatic tuberosity
Lesser trochanter
Body
Body
saq je/puodns (epa
Fabella ~
Patella
Medial epicondyle -
Medial trochlear ridge
Medial condyke 
Lateral trochlear rid ge ~
-Fabella
 Tibial tuberosity
Patella-
 Lateral epicondyle
Lateral condyle
Body of fibuls
Cranial border
Extensor fossa 
Head of fibula
Tibial tuberosity 
Body of tibia
sseous border
Cranial borde
Cakcaneal tuberosity
- Body of fibula
Calcaneous
Sukus for flexors
Medial malleolus
Body of tibia
malleolus
Talus
Tarsal bone Il
Cakaneal tuberosity
 Central tarsal bone
Tarsal bone 1
lateral mallolus
arsal bone III
Calcaneus
Metatar
etatarsa ls, II1 
Talus 
Tarsal bone IV
Tarsal bo
Metatarsals
Figure 5-9 Skeleton of the medial hindlimb of the dog. (Adapted
from Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Mier's guide to the dissection of the
Proximal phalanx
dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
Midle phalanx
Distal phalanx
Ungual prooess
Figure 5-8  Skeleton of the lateral hindlimb of the dog. (Adapted 
from Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the
dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
47
Calcaneal tuber
Calcaneus
Calcaneal tuber
of tuberosity
Trochlea
Sustentaculum tali
Calcaneus
Talus
Articular facets
Neck
for talus
Head
Talus
Tarsal bone IV
 Central tarsal
Central tarsal
bone
Sulcus for
bone
peroneus longus
Tarsal bone IV-
Tarsalbones
Tarsal bones
Base
A
C
Metatarsals
Metatarsals
Proximal
Sesamoid
Phalanges
Middle-
bone
Head
Distal-
Calcaneus
Talus
Central tarsal bone-
Tarsal bone IV
Tarsal bone II
Metatarsal bone Ill
Metatarsal bone IV
Metatarsal boneV
B
Sesamoid bone
Proximal
-Middle
Phalanges
Distal
Ungual process
Figure 5-10 Skeleton of the left plantar (A), left lateral (B), and left dorsal (C) hindpaw of the dog.
for the passage of cervical spinal nerve 1. The atlas has
spinous processes, large and fat spinous processes, caudal
correspondingly shaped condyles for articulation with the
and cranial articular surface facets that are narrower than
Occiput. The canine lateral wings or transverse processes
the transverse processes, large transverse processes, and
are prominent and easily palpable from the skin surface.
transverse foramina for the passage of vertebral arteries.
The canine axis or C2 has a large spinous process with an
Caudal and cranial articular surfaces are oriented between
 expanded arch, a wide body, and large trans verse processes
the dorsal and transverse planes to facilitate cranial and
(see Figure 5-12). The spinous process is nonbifid. The
caudal glides needed for cervical spine fexion and exten-
canine axis is very large relative to the size of other canine
sion. The C7 vertebra has a similar shape, a large prominent
cervical vertebrae. The axis has a dens, which projects
 nonbifid spinous process, and caudal and cranial articular 
cranially to allow pivotal motion between the atlas and axis.
surfaces, which are oriented nearly craniocaudally.
The condyles are oriented near the transverse plane to allow
Thoracic vertebrae (see Figure 5-13) have small bodies
cervical spine rotation. The C3-C6 vertebrae have nonbifid
relative to the size of the entire vertebrae. Canine spinous
48
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Manubrium of
sternum or
Rib 1
Costovertebral joint
Rib
Second sternebra
cartilage
Thoracic 13
AngleNeck
Tubercle
Supraspinatus ligament
Costal cartilage
-Body of rib
Rib1
Head
Nuchal ligament
Costochondral
 junction
Seventh
sternebra
Oociput
of skul
Xiphoid
orocess
B
Xiphoid
cartilage
Costal
cartilage
Sternum
Xiphoid process 
Rib 13
and cartilage
Costochondral junction
Figure 5-11 A, Identified portions of the axial skeleton cranial to the thirteenth thoracic vertebra. B, Ribs and sternum, ventral view.
 Spinous process of axis
 Spinous process of axis
Arch of axis
Transverse ligament
Dorsal tubercle
of atlas
 Transverse foramen
of atlas
of axis
Lateral mass or
wing of atlas
Transverseprocess
of axis
A
B
Sadlet
Dens of axis
Cranial articular 
Lateral vertebral
surface of atlas
Body of atlas
foramen of axis
Dens of axis
Body of atlas
Cranial articular surfaces
Spinous process
Caudal articular
C
surface
Bod
Transverse foramen
Figure 5-12 Detailed skeletal anatomy of the atlas and axis from a craniolateral view (A), atlas and axis from a cranial view (B), and C5
vertebra from a craniolateral view (C). (A from Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog, ed 7, St Louis, 2010, WB
Saunders.)
 processes are relatively long. The spinous processes block
lateroventrocranially. In the cranial lumbar spine, cranial
excessive extension of the thoracic spine. At T10, the size
and caudal articular  surfaces  are  oriented between the
of the body begins to increase and the length of spinous
transverse and sagittal planes, which facilitate lumbar
process decreases. The spinous processes are oriented
spine fexion and extension. The L7-S1 joint appears to
close to the transverse plane. Cranial to T11, the spinous
orient between the sagittal and frontal planes to allow more
processes project caudally, but caudal to T11, they project
rotation at this intervertebral level. The canine sacrum is
cranially. Caudal and cranial articular surfaces are oriented
relatively narrow and is linked to the pelvis with sacroiliac
close to the dorsal plane.
joints (see Figure 5-14).
Lumbar vertebrae (see Figure 5-13) have bodies that
Caudal (Cd) vertebrae (see Figure 5-14) have distinct
 are larger than thoracic vertebral bodies. Canine lumbar
bodies and transverse processes. The cranial articular
od ar p u n o a assnd asrasn
surfaces are similar to those in more cranial vertebrae in
Spinous
Spinous
process
process
Mamillary
process
Caudal articular surface
Transverse
Transverse
A
process
process
B
Lamina
Cranial costal
Caudal articularsurface
 Costal fovea of
articular surface
transverse process
Pedicle
Caudal costal
articular surface
Cranial costal
articular surface
Body
Body
Spinous process
Spinous process
Cranial articular surface
Mamillary process
Mamillary
Caudal articular
Caudal
process
process
articularprocess
Cranial articular
process
Accessory
process
C
Body
Transverse
process
Body
Figure 5-13
Detailed skeletal anatomy of T6 vertebra from a lateral view (A) and craniolateral view (B), L1 vertebra from a craniolateral view 
(C), and L5 vertebra from a caudolateral view (D).
Cranial
Median sacral crest
Intermediate
articular process
sacral crest
Dorsal surface
Dorsal
Intermediate
Cranial articular
sacral
sacral crest
process
foramina
 Caudal articular
Wing
/process
Spinous process of
median sacral crest
Body
Pelvic surface
Transverse process
Caudal
A
articular process
B
Auricular surface
Lateral sacral crest
Caudal articular process
Cranial articular
Cranial articular
process
process
 Mamillary process
vertebralarch
Caudal articular
process
Body
Transverseproces
C
Hemal arch
D
Figure 5-14  Detailed skeletal anatomy of the sacrum from a caudolateral view (A), sacrum and caudal 1 or Cd1 vertebra from a lateral view
(B),. Cd4 vertebra from a cranial view (C), and Cd6 vertebra from a dorsal view (D). (From Evans HE: Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 4, Phila-
delphia, 2013, WB Saunders.)
50
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Box 5-1
Body Segments
Forelimb
Digit I: One per digit, smaller
Forelimb: Arm, forearm, and forepaw
Dorsal and plantar on DIP joints—cartilaginous; one per
 Thoracic or pectoral girdle
digit I to V; small
Scapula, clavicle
 Digits or phalanges or toes
Arm or brachium: Shoulder to elbow
I to V
 Forearm or antebrachium: Elbow to carpal joint
·
Dewclaw or digit I or hallux—may be absent, fully
 Forepaw or manus
developed and articulating with a metatarsal, or may
Carpus or carpals
be a vestigial, that is, a trace or rudimentary structure,
Metacarpus or metacarpals
with a terminal phalanx and no proximal phalanx or
 Phalanges or digits
metatarsal bone
 Sesamoid bones or cartilages
 Digital pads or pads on the hindpaws—weight-bearing pads
 Dorsal on MCP joints in common digital extensor tendons
 Tarsal pad: Small pad plantar to the talocrural joint
 of digits II to V; one per digit; small
Metatarsal pad: Largest pad plantar to the MTP joints;
Pad surface on MCP joints in interosseous tendons of digits
triangular in shape
 II to V; two per digit; smaller
Digital pads: Plantar to the DIP joints; ovoid and fat
Dorsal and palmar on DIP joints of digits I to V; cartilage;
 Ungual process: Extension of the distal phalanx into the nail
·
small
Nails or claws
 One sesamoid bone in the tendon of the abductor pollicis 
Spine
longus
·
 Digits or phalanges I to V, numbered medial to lateral
 Borders: Inguinal ligament to C7-T1 disk
No common names for digits
·
 Neck or cervical spine
Anatomic name: pollex for digit I
·
Head
Dewclaw or pollex or digit I with 2 phalanges
·
Tail
 Pads on the paws or digital pads: Weight-bearing pads
 Spinal regions
Carpal pad: Small pad palmar to the carpus
Cervical: C1 through C7
Metacarpal pad: Largest pad palmar to the MCP joints;
Thoracic: T1 through T13
triangular in shape
Lumbar: Ll through L7
Digital pads: Palmar to the DIP joints; ovoid and fat
Sacral: S1 through S3
Ungual process: Extension of the phalanx into the claw
Caudal or coccygeal: Cdl-Cd20; some dogs have more or
·Nails or claws
fewer
Hindlimb
Ribs: 13
 Hindlimb pelvic limb, or rear limb
 Bones in the dog skeleton (excludes auditory ossicles)
Thigh, leg, hindpaw
Vertebral column: 50
Hip bone or os coxae
Sku1l: 49
 Ilium, ischium, pubis
Hyoid bone: 1
 Pelvic girdle
Ribs: 26
Right and left hip bones and sacrum
Sternum: 8 fused bones—manubrium or first sternebra, 6
Thigh: Hip to stifle or knee
 additional sternebrae, and the xiphoid process
Leg or crus: Stifle to talocrural joint
Forelimbs: 90
Hindpaw or hind foot or pes
Hindlimbs: 96
Tarsus or tarsals (hock area)
Total: 320
Metatarsus or metatarsals
 Other: os penis in males—1
Phalanges or digits or toes
Hip bone or os coxae
 Sesamoid bones or cartilages
 Ilium, ischium, pubis
 Dorsal on MTP joints in long digital extensor tendons of
Sacrum
digits II to V; one per digit; small
 Pelvic girdle: Right and left hip bones and sacrum
 Plantar surface on MTP joints in interosseous tendons of
Pelvic complex: Hip bones, lumbar spine, sacral spine,
digits II to V; two per digit; large
caudal spine, sacroiliac joints, and hip joints
C, Cervical; Cd, caudal; DIP distal interphalangeal; L, lumbar; MCP, metacarpophalangeal; MTP, metatarsophalangeal; S, sacral; T, thoracic.
shape and location; however, the caudal articular processes
median coccygeal artery, which is enclosed by the arches.
are bifid and are more centrally located, whereas articular
In vertebrae caudal to Cd6 and in relatively the same posi-
processes in more cranial vertebrae are located more later-
tion as the hemal arches are the paired hemal processes,
ally. Hemal arches are separate bones that articulate with
which extend from Cd7-Cd17 or Cd18.
the ventral surfaces of the caudal ends of the bodies of
The ribs have vertebral attachments (see Figure 5-11).
Cd4-Cd6. The hemal arches provide protection for the
There are nine pairs of vertebrostemal, or true, ribs and
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
51
four pairs of vertebrocostal, or false, ribs. The stermum is
identifying the joint motion, the direction of the glide, and
relatively long and has a manubrium and xiphoid process,
which bone is moving. For example, stife fexion involv-
with a prominent xiphoid cartilage. The ribs limit overall
ing the tibia and femur is termed caudal glide of the tibia
thoracic spine motion and protect intermal organs.
on the femur.
Joint Motion in the Limbs and Spine
Joint Motion
Joint motions are named by one body segment approaching
The body segments of the forelimb and hindlimb are illus-
or moving away from another body segment or movement
trated in Figures 5-3 and 5-4, respectively, with the major
of some referenced body landmark. Joint motions are
joints and their fexor and extensor surfaces. Body seg-
named in the following sections and described (see Figures
ments are listed and defined in Box 5-1. Types of joints are
5-3 and 5-4) as they refer to the limbs, starting from normal
listed in Box 5-2.
stance. Limb motion is usually described by motion of the
joint rather than a body segment. For example, elbow
Joint Motion and Shape of
fexion is recommended rather than forearm fexion. Occa-
Articular Surfaces
sionally, body segment motion is used to describe limb
The shape of articular surfaces of bones helps define the
motion when motion does not involve axial motion with a
motions available for a joint. Articular surfaces of two
joint as a pivot point. For ex ample, rotation of the forelimb
bones forming a joint are usually concave on one bone and
might be observable when pronation at the radioulnar joint
convex on the other bone. Some articular surfaces are fat.
would be difficult to observe clinically.
Occasionally adjacent bones are convex on both joint sur-
Flexion
faces. Intraarticular structures, such as the medial and
lateral menisci in the stife joint, may modify adjacent
 During fexion, a limb is retracted or folded, a digit is bent,
surfaces. Understanding the concave-convex relationships
and the back or neck is arched dorsally (i.e., the convex
 as a guiding principle in determining joint motion allows
portion of the arch is directed dorsally). In the limbs,
prediction of possible joint motions based on articular
fexion motion occurs as the bones on either side of a joint
surface shape. Ligamentous and other soft tissue around
move closer together and the joint angle becomes more
the joint guide and restrict the motion that would be pos-
acute. Flexion may also be referenced to limb motions
sible based on articular surface shape alone.
 involving closing angles during the swing phase of gait.
Joint motions are named, most commonly, by move-
Flexion motions of the limb joints are noted in Figures 5-3
ment of the distal bone relative to the proximal bone. For
and 5-4. In the spine, fexion occurs as the back or neck
example, cranial movement of the tibia on a stable femur
arches dorsally (i.e., the convex portion of the arch is
is named stife joint extension. The major direction of
directed dorsally).
motion, such as fexion of the stife, is physiologic or
A notable difference between dogs and humans is the
osteokinematic motion.
meaning of shoulder fexion. In dogs, caudal retraction of
Accessory, or arthrokinematic, motion is smaller in mag-
the humerus in relation to the scapula is shoulder fexion,
nitude and less observable. Examples of accessory motions
whereas cranial motion of the humerus in relation to the
are glide or slide, rotary motion, distraction or traction, and
scapula is shoulder extension. The direction of shoulder
compression or approximation. A normal amount of glide
fexion motion is opposite to this in humans. The terminol-
occurs in normal functioning joints. Glides are shear type
ogy used in dogs is consistent with naming fexion as
or sliding motions of opposing articular surfaces. Rolls
described previously.
involve one bone rolling on another. Gliding motion in
In normal stance, as shown in Figure 5-2, a dog's spine
combination with rolling is needed for normal physiologic
is fexed at the atlantooccipital and atlantoaxial joints,
joint motion. Spins are joint surface motions that result in
straight (neither fexed nor extended) in the remainder of
continual contact of articular cartilage areas on opposite
the cervical spine, extended at the cervicothoracic junction,
sides of a joint. Distraction or traction accessory motions
slightly lordotic in the thoracic spine, and fexed or nor-
 are tensile or pulling-apart movements between bones.
mally kyphotic in the lumbar spine. There is either a
 Compressive or approximation accessory motions are com-
slightly fexed or extended sacrum on the lumbar spine,
 pressive or pushing-together movements between bones.
depending on the tail posture. The fexed canine lumbar
Normal joint motion involves both physiologic motion
 spine is beneficial to running speed. During running, the
and accessory motion. Physiologic motion in joints with
lumbar spine moves through varying degrees of fexion as
opposing concave and convex articular surfaces involves
 running speed changes.
both roll and glide. Roll occurs in the same direction as the
Extension
movement of the moving segment of the bone, but glide
directions differ based on whether the moving articular
During extension, the limb reaches out, the digit is
surface is concave or convex. A glide is described by
extended, and the back or neck is less arched dorsally or
52
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Box 5-2
Types of Joints
Forelimb
Calcaneocentral
Artificial joint: Not described as a joint
Centroquartal
 Ball and socket: Shoulder
Centrodistal
 Hinge: Elbow, metacarpophalangeal I
Distal intertarsal: Central bone with tarsal III
 Pivot: Proximal, and distal radioulnar
Tarsal I with II, II with III
·
 Syndesmosis: Middle radioulnar
Tarsal III with IV
Hinge with lateral motion: Carpal
Tarsometatarsal
 Ellipsoid: Antebrachiocarpal, radiocarpal
Tarsal I with MT I
·
Plane: Middle carpal or midcarpal, intercarpal,
Tarsal II with MT II
Tarsal III with MT III
interrmetacarpal
 Saddle plane: First carpal with MC 1
Tarsal IV with MTs IV and V
 Plane: Second carpal with MC II, third carpal with MC III,
Intermetatarsal
fourth carpal with MC IV and V intermetacarpal
Tibiof bular
 Hinge: Metacarpophalangeal 1
Synovial: Proximal and distal tibiofibular
Condylar or condyloid: MC II to V with the same numbered
Syndesmosis: Middle tibiofibular
proximal phalanx
Hinge: Talocrural, tarsocrural, tibiotarsal (the tarsocrural has
Saddle/condylar
been referred to as the talocrural and the talocalcaneal joints
 Proximal interphalangeal 1I to V
combined) or ankle joint (the term ankie is commonly used
Distal interphalangeal I1 to V
with an animal's owner)
(Interphalangeal of thumb)
Metatarsophalangeal I—MT I with digit I
 Condylar: MT II to V with the same numbered digit
Hindlimb
Saddle
 Synovial and fibrous: Sacroiliac
 Proximal interphalangeal II to V
 Symphysis: Symphysis pelvis
 Distal interphalangeal 1I to V
Ball and socket: Hip or coxofemoral
Interphalangeal of hallux
·
 Complex condylar: Stifle (the term knee is used commonly
with an animal's owner)
Spine
·Plane
Part synovial and part fibrous: Sacroiliac
Patellofemoral
Condyloid: Atlantooccipital
Tarsal joints or hock joints (this joint is referred to as the
 Pivot: Atlantoaxial—dens of C2 and atlas
hock joint in common usage)
Plane
Atlantoaxial—articular surfaces
Talocalcaneal
Talocalcaneocentral and calcaneoquartal joints
Between cranial and caudal articular surfaces
combined
Costovertebral
Proximal intertarsal or talocentral
Sternocostal: Sternum and true ribs
Calcaneoquartal
Synchondrosis: Costochondral—ribs with cartilage
MC, Metacarpal; mT, Metatarsal.
arched ventrally. Extension is motion in the sagittal plane
the digits passes between digits IMI and IV. Digit I, or the
in the direction opposite to that of fexion motion. In the
dewclaw, in dogs is nonfunctional and is not considered in
limbs, extension motion occurs as the bones that are
a discussion of skeletal motion.
already close together and already fonm an acute angle
Adduction
move farther apart, such that the angle formed at the joint
is increased or straightened. Extension beyond normal is
 Limb joint adduction is movement in the transverse plane
sometimes tenmed hyperextension. The carpus normally
such that the distal aspect moves toward the midline of the
has greater than 180 degrees of extension. In the spine,
 body. Adduction of the digits is not routinely measured in
extension occurs as the back or neck is arched ventrally
dogs. The reference line for adduction is the same as for
(i.e., the convex portion of the arch is directed ventrally).
abduction.
Abduction
Side Bend
Limb joint abduction is movement in the transverse plane
 In the trunk and head, side-to-side movement occurs in the
such that the distal aspect moves away from the midline of
 dorsal plane such that lateral aspects of adjacent areas of
the body. Abduction of the digits is not routinely measured
the spine approximate or move away from each other. For
in dogs. Separation of the toes may be noted as splayed
example, side bend to the right involves the right side of
toes or abducted toes. The reference line for abduction of
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
53
Circumduction
sacroiliac motions and postures are described in depth,
Circumduction is movement at a joint, during which a bone
although tenminology is not consistent among authors and
or body segment outlines the surface of a cone or circle.
clinicians. When pelvic and sacroiliac motions and pos-
This motion does not require rotation at the joint, but rota-
tures are analyzed and described in dogs, the following
tion at the joint may occur. Forelimb circumduction occurs
terminology could be useful for correct identification and
primarily at the shoulder. Hindlimb circumduction occurs
for accurate communication. Pelvofemoral rhythm, the
at the hips. Although circumduction at individual limb
human lower-limb counterpart to human scapulohumeral
joints is possible in dogs, veterinarians commonly observe
rhythm, has not been defined in dogs, but may exist.
and document circumduction of the entire limb, without
Pelvic Motion
distinction of the joints that contribute to the overall
motion.
Ventral and Dorsal Pelvic Tilt
Orientation of the pelvis with respect to the sagittal plane
Rotation
 describes tilt of the pelvis. Ventral tilt involves approxima-
Intermal rotation of a limb occurs with reference to the
tion of the ventral pelvis and cranial femur, and dorsal tilt
cranial aspect of the limb rotating toward the midline of
involves the ventral pelvis moving away from the cranial
the body or median plane and continuing in that direction.
femur. These motions occur with the hip joints as the axes
Extermal rotation of a limb occurs with reference to the
of rotation. Relative to a longitudinal axis through the
cranial aspect of the limb rotating away from the midline
entire spine, the canine pelvis appears tilted dorsally on the
of the body and continuing in that direction. Limb rota-
canine longitudinal axis.
tional motions occur in the dorsal plane. With reference to
Lateral Tilt of the Pelvis
the ventral aspect of a vertebral body, rotation to the right
or left is called rotation to the right or left, respectively.
Lateral tilt is dorsal plane movement such that the lateral
Spinal rotations occur in the transverse plane.
aspect of the pelvis approximates the lateral aspect of the
trunk. Lateral pelvic tilt to the right, for example, would
Supination
occur as the cranial border of the pelvis tilts to the right,
In the limbs, supination is extemal rotation of the limb, such
approximating the right lateral side of the pelvis toward
that the pad surface of the paw faces medially. Supination
the right trunk.
motion therefore could involve forelimb carpal and forepaw
Pelvic Rotation
supination, shoulder extermal rotation, or hindlimb talocru-
ral and hindpaw supination, as well other motions such as
With reference to the movement of the ventral aspect of a
hip joint extermal rotation. Scapular motion and glenohu-
pelvis, rotation toward the right or left is called rotation to
 meral extermal rotation occurring as part of supination occur
the right or left, respectively. This motion occurs in the
 in the dorsal plane. However, dorsal plane scapular motion
transverse plane. Pelvic rotation can be referenced to the
is blocked by contact of the scapula with the trunk.
foor and one lower limb. If this convention were used,
intermal rotation with reference to the right hindlimb would
Pronation
Occur as the ventral pelvis rotates to the left. Intermal rota-
In the limbs, pronation is intermal rotation of the limb, such
tion motion of the right hindlimb would occur in the same
that the pad surface of the paw faces laterally. Pronation
direction, that is, with the cranial aspect of the thigh or
 motion therefore could involve forelimb carpal and forepaw
femur rotating to the left and the ventral aspect of the leg
pronation, as well as other motions, opposite to those of
or tibia and fibula rotating to the left.
supination.
Sacroiliac Motion
Other Shoulder Girdle Motions
The suggested but as yet undefined terminology uses appli-
Other shoulder girdle motions that are defined for humans
cation of human terminology. with movements of the
exist in dogs, but have not been defined and measured in
 canine cranial and caudal aspects of the sacrum correlated
dogs. They include the human motions of scapular protrac-
 to movement of the human superior and inferior aspects of
tion, retraction, upward rotation, down ward rotation, eleva-
the sacrum, respectively.
tion, depression, anterior tilt and returm from anterior tilt
Sacroiliac Flexion or Nutation
of the scapula, and glenohumeral horizontal abduction and
horizontal adduction. Human scapulohumeral rhythm has
Sacroiliac fexion involves the cranial aspect of the sacrum
 not been defined in dogs, but may exist.
tilting ventrally.
Pelvic and Sacroiliac Motions
Sacroiliac Extension or Counternutation
Pelvic and sacroiliac motions and postures are less well
Sacroiliac extension involves the cranial aspect of the
defined in dogs than in humans. Human pelvic and
sacrum tilting dorsally.
54
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Sacroiliac Side Bend or Lateral Flexion
  a   e  s
Sacroiliac lateral fexion involves the cranial aspect of the
the alignment at other joints, especially at joints function-
sacrum tilting to the side. Right side bend or lateral fexion
 ing in weight-bearing or closed-chain activities rather than
occurs as the cranial aspect of the sacrum tilts to the right.
non-weight-bearing  or  open-chain  activities.  Skeletal
malaligmment can lead to arthritis of a malaligned joint or
Sacroiliac Rotation
of a compensating joint.
Sacroiliac rotation involves rotation around a longitudinal
Normal skeletal alignment results in normal correlated
axis through the sacrum. Rotation of the sacrum is identi-
motions and postures, which occur naturally and are nor-
fied by the motion of the ventral sacrum to be consistent
mally related to the motion or posture imposed at the joint.
with terminology for humans. For example, rotation of
Correlated motions and postures may not occur at all but
the ventral sacrum to the left is called sacral rotation to
can occur at any or several joints along the chain. This
the left.
concept is well defined in human physical therapy, although
Overall spinal motion is determined and affected by
 clinicians use different terms to describe it. These concepts 
many things. Among them are the orientation of the articu-
have been discussed in relation to dogs, mostly in the
lar surfaces (facets); disk shape and size; structural block-
context of canine gait and related to correlated motion as
ages, such as ribs and orientation of spinous processes;
a result of a limb with pain or dysfunction, rather than from
ligament fiber direction, strength, and tightness; and
skeletal malalignment alone.'° An example of correlated
muscle-tendon unit strength and tightness.
 posture or motion is the lateral rotation of the proximal
forelimb or hindlimb that occurs when the dog supinates
Normal Joint Motions and Ranges
of Motion
at the paw. Another example is the excessive shoulder or
hip adduction and medial positioning of the elbow or stifle
Appendix 2 summarizes normal joint motions and ranges
joints, which occur when the digits angle or point laterally
of motion for the peripheral joints.5.78 Joint ranges of
 in the forepaw or hindpaw, respectively.
 motion for the spine have not been documented in dogs.
For any skeletal malalignment or associated abnormal
correlated motion or posture, compensatory motions or
Distinction of Maintained Joint Postures
postures can occur. They occur to nonmalize mobility,
versus Joint Motion
improve cosmetic appearance of the limb, or improve foot
Motion is described by either referencing the joint or ref-
contact with the ground. The term compensation is used
erencing a body segment. Terms to describe motion include
to describe abnormal motion and posture in dogs."0 An
flexion, flexing, abduction, abducting, and so on. Motion
example is excessive weight bearing on one limb when
Occurs in a consistent direction, independent of the starting
dysfunction exists in the other limb. Another example of a
point of the motion. For example, the movement of the
compensatory motion is limb circumduction while advanc-
carpal joint from neutral to fexion is carpal joint fexion.
ing that limb during gait, as a result of inability to fex the
Movement of the carpal joint from full extension to neutral
 joints of a limb during swing.
is carpal joint fexion. Postures are maintained positions.
Spine
Terms to describe postures include fexed or abducted,
maintained flexion,or abduction.
Complex correlated and compensatory postures and
motions occur within the spine and pelvic complex. The
pelvic complex for dogs and humans is defined in Box 5-1 .
 Human correlated and compensatory postures and motions
Skeletal Alignment
related to the spine and pelvis are described in great detail
n st ary raamou p-i am Ada pesd a u!
Limbs
 ra    a  
Skeletal aligmment is important, bec ause it is closely linked
and postures are correlated or compensatory for other
to mobility, function, and pathologic conditions. A func-
motions and postures. This concept has been applied in less
tional example of the importance of skeletal alignment is
 detail to spinal and pelvic postures and motions in dogs;
seen at the talocrural joint. Alignment at this joint infu-
 however, development and use of terminology are encour-
ences angulation of the hindlimbs in relation to speed
aged for analysis of spinal motion and posture.
during the gallop. Figures 5-5, 5-6, 5-8, and 5-9 show the
normal alignment of the limbs.
Skeletal alignment is the alignment between bones at
Fascia (Fasciae)
joint surfaces or the alignment of one portion of a bone in
relation to another portion of the same bone. Skeletal
Fascia (fasciae), formed by fat, enveloping connective
malalignment is abnormal alignment of either of these two
tissue, weaves throughout the body and provides structural
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
55
connection. With damage, it can become adhered to adja-
intermuscular septum between the biceps femoris and
cent structures. Physical therapists and other clinicians
vastus lateralis muscles. The more loosely adhered medial
femoral fascia joins the lateral femoral fascia to envelop
stretching. transverse friction massage, and soft tissue
the thigh and attach to the medial femur by a septum
mobilization to reduce this adherence.
caudal to the vastus medialis. Both lateral and medial
fascial layers attach to the patella and femoral condyles.
Forelimb
The fascia extends around both the medial and lateral
The superficial and deep fascia of the shoulder and bra-
aspects of the stife, but it thins as it merges with the
chium are continuous with the superficial and deep fascia
patellar ligament and patella. The deep fascia continues
of the cervical spine and thorax. The superficial fascia in
in the crus as the crural fascia. The crural fascia has a
the region of the stemum is continuous with the medial
superficial layer, which extends to the metatarsus, and a
brachium, and it covers the cephalic vein during its course.
deep layer. The superficial and deep leaves are united
Distal to the elbow, the superficial fascia is more adhered
near the distal tendons of the biceps femoris and semi-
to the deep structures. The cutaneous nerves and vessels of
tendinosus, where they contribute to the common calcaneal
the forelimb travel long distances deep to the superficial
tendon. The layers are also united to the distal tendons
fascia before entering the skin.
of the semimembranosus and cranial tibial muscles. The
The deep fascia of the lateral shoulder and brachium,
deep crural fascia thickens to form the crural extensor
called the fascia omobrachialis lateralis, covers the
retinaculum, which envelops the long digital extensor and
 as a  se p ss  as
cranial tibial tendons, and the tarsal extensor retinaculum,
the scapula. The deep antebrachial fascia forms a single
which envelops the long digital extensor muscle. These
dense sleeve around the muscles in the caudal antebra-
retinacula ensheath all tendons and superficial muscles
chium and is thickest medially. Intermuscular septa extend
of the hindpaw and secure them to the bones in the
to the radius and ulna to separate the fexor and extensor
hindpaw.
carpal muscle groups.
Trunk and Neck
The deep fascia is closely joined with the connective
tissue around the tendons of the carpal joint. A thick
 The superficial and deep fascial layers of the neck and
and strong extension, the fexor retinaculum, bridges the
 head are continuous. Although the deep fascia is stronger
fexor tendons to the carpal joint and digits. On the palmar
than the superficial fascia, it is deeper and more difficult
surface of the metacarpophalangeal joints, thick extensions
to palpate; therefore the superficial fascia is emphasized
attach to the sesamoid bones and are called transverse
here. The superficial fascia of the neck ensheathes the
ligaments.
entire neck, is continuous toward the forelimb as the super-
ficial brachial fascia, and is continuous ventrally with the
Hindlimb
superficial fascia of the trunk in the stermal region. Cau-
The hindlimb also has superficial and deep layers of
dally, the superficial extermal fascia of the trunk is con-
fascia. At times the fascial layers are separable, especially
tinuous with the superficial gluteal fascia. At the dorsal
with a layer of fat in obese dogs, and at times they are
midline in dogs, there is no attachment of the superficial
not. In general, the deep fascia is stronger than the
fascia to deep structures, allowing the superfcial fascia
superficial.
to be lifted in a big fold when the skin is gently lifted.
The superficial fascia on the dorsal trunk is continuous 
Large quantities of subfascial fat are deposited in areas
with the superficial gluteal fascia of the hip area, whereas
where the superficial fascia and skin move freely on deeper
the superficial fascia on the ventrolateral abdomen is
structures.
continuous as the superficial lateral fascia of the lateral
 The deep extermal fascia is attached to the supraspinous
thigh and gluteal region. The superficial fascia encom-
ligament on the spinous processes of thoracic and lumbar
passes the thigh almost to the patella and is closely
vertebrae and ends cranially on the transverse processes
connected to the deep fascia of the biceps femoris
of C7 and T1. In the trunk, it is continuous with the lateral
muscle. The superficial and deep fascia are also closely
abdominal muscles. The deep fascia attaches to the
associated near the proximal sartorius muscle, the femoral
stemum and costal cartilages cranially and the ilium cau-
canal, and the gracilis muscle. The superficial fascia of
dally. The dorsally located thoracolumbar fascia has two
the crus, tarsus, and hindpaw is similar to that in the
layers and lies deep to large amounts of fat in well-
forelimb.
nourished dogs. The main layer serves as an attachment
The strong lateral femoral fascia, or fascia lata (iliotibial
site for the serratus dorsalis cranialis and the intermal and
band in humans), is formed on the lateral thigh from
extermal abdominal oblique muscles. The deep fascia is
the gluteal fascia and the fascia of the tensor fasciae
continuous with the deep gluteal fascia and other deep
latae muscle and attaches to the lateral femur by an
fascia of the thigh.
56
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Compartments
moment arm, and a good line of action based on the desired
Fascial layers and the bones they attach to can form well.
joint motions. Primary movers usually cross the joint with
 defined volumetric spaces called compartments. Compart-
the desired motion at the last joint crossed.
ments are described in the limbs and contain muscles and
Muscle strength depends on the multiplied product of
their associated neurovascular  supply.  Compartments
the muscle force applied in the direction of the desired joint
become important when interstitial fuid hydrostatic pres-
motions and the moment arm of the muscle force. The size
sure within the compartment exceeds physiologic levels,
of the muscle and the direction of its line of action force
causing ischemia, disruption of membrane integrity,
vector detenmine its ability to produce specific motion.
edema, and loss of viable muscle tissue.
 Muscle force is related to the physiologic cross-sectional
Four distinct compartments have been described in the
areas of muscle fibers. The line of action determines the
dog: (1) craniolateral compartment of the crus, (2) caudal
length of the moment arm, which determines the moment
compartment of the crus, (3) caudal compartment of the
arm's contribution to the muscle moment that can be
antebrachium, and (4) femoral compartment. '5 Unlike the
produced.
others, the femoral compartment is not a single space but
Interestingly, some canine muscles have been named
consists of three fascial envelopes; one contains the quad-
according to the number of heads in analogous human
 riceps muscles, another the hamstring group, and the final
muscles, but the actual number of heads making up the
one surrounds the adductor muscle.
muscle may be different. For example, the biceps brachii
 in dogs has one head and the human biceps brachii has two
Muscles
heads, but both muscles are called biceps brachii.
Forelimb
Muscles are characterized as primary movers (i.e., critical
Muscle number, size, and location are related closely to
forelimb function as a weight-bearing limb (Figures 5-15
the muscles that produce the necessary moments for normal
to 5-21). In addition, the need to suspend the head and neck
(physiologic) joint motion and have the best combination
increases the need for muscle mass and strong ligaments
of characteristics: large physiologic cross-section, large
that extend between the head, neck, and forelimb. The
Geniohyoideus
Mylohyoideus
Genioglossus
Digastricus
 Styloglossus
Masseter
Digastricus
ssso
 Mandibular lymph nodes.
Masseter
Parotid duct
Thyrohyoideus
Parotid gland
Cricothyroideus
Mandibular salivary gland
Stermothyroideus
Medialretropharyngeal lymph node
Trachea
Stermocephaiusoid
Serratus ventralis
Longus capitis
pars occipitalis.
Esophagus
Sternohyoideus
Trapezius
 External jugular vein
Common carotid artery
Vagosympathetic trunk
pars cervicalis-
Omotransversarius
Clavicular tendon-
Supraspinatus
Cleidobrachialis
Subscapularis
DeltoideL
Scalenus
Brachiali
_atissimus dorsi
Deep pectoral
Figure 5-15 Superficial muscles of the ventral shoulder and neck. (From Evans HE: Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2013, WB
Saunders.)
Rhomboideus capitis
Triceps, lateral head
Splenius -
Cleidobrachialis
Brachialis
Supraspinatus-
Serratus ~
entralis cervicis
Biceps
ateralepiconcyleofhumerus
Intertransversarius
Scalenus-
Brachioradialis
Longus capitis.
Commondigitalextensor
Sternocephalicus-
Extensor carpi radialis
Lateral digital extensor
Teresmino
Ulnaris lateralis
Humerus, greater tubercle
Triceps, long head
Triceps accessory head -
Brachialis
Biceps brachi
Deep pectoral
Anconeus
External
Extensor carpi radialis
abdcinal
oblique
 Abductor digiti I longus 
Common digital extensor
ateral digital extensor
Radius
-Ulnaris lateralis
Thefollowin
I nter medioradial
Una
Cutaneus trunci
Trapezius
Flexor carpi ulnaris,
carpal bone
Uinar carpal bone
Deltoiceus
ulnar head
Omotransversarius
Brachiccephalicus
Abductor
Triceps, lateral head
dligitiI longus
Flexor carpi ulnaris,
humeral head
Figure 5-16 Deep muscles of the left lateral forelimb. (From Evans
HE, de Lahunta A: Miler's guide to the dissection of the dog, ed 7.
Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
ratedface
Subs
Figure 5-18  Muscles of the left antebrachium and forepaw, cranial
Teres majo
view. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Milfer's guide to the dissection
of the dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
Coracobrachialis
Long head
Humerus
Tricep
Accessory head 
Medial head
Biceps brachii
Tensor fasciae
antebrachii
Brachialis
Fexor carpi ulnar
Extensor carpi radialis
Deep digital flex
Pronator teres
Flexor carpi radialis
Abductor digiti I long us
Radius
Figure 5-17 Muscles of the left medial forelimb. (From Evans HE,
de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog, ed 7, Phila-
delphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
58
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Tensor fasciae antebrachii
Suraspinatus
Triceps, medial head
Rhomboideus
Olecranon
Trapezius and deltoideus
-Biceps
Infraspinatus
Teres major
Omotransversarius
Subscapularis
Anconeus
Humerus
Biceps brachi
Triceps, long head
Supraspinatu
Teres minor
Pronator teres
Infraspinatu
Deltoideus
 Ulnaris lateralis -
 Flexor carpi radialis
Teres minor
Triceps, accessory head
Deltoideus-
Brachialis
Deep digital flexor,
 ulnar he ad -
Superficial pectorals
Triceps, lateral head
Cleidobrachialis
Anconeus
Flexor carpi ulnaris,
Extensor carpi radialis
Triceps
ulnar head ^
Superficial digital flexor
Extensors of ca
us and digits
 Ulnaris lateralis
 Flexor carpi ulnaris,
Supinator-
Anconeus
humeral head
Supinator
Pronator teres
Deep digital flexor
Abductor digiti I longus
UIna
Deep digital flexor
R adius
Extensor carpi radialis
 Ulnaris lateralis
Lateral digital exte
erosse
Lateral and common
 Superficial digital flexor
digital extensors-
Deep digital flexor
Tendon of
Figure 5-20  Muscle attachment sites on the lateral forelimb skel-
superficial digital flexor
eton. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection
of the dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
 Cut tendon of
deep digital flexor
Figure 5-19  Muscles of the left antebrachium and forepaw, caudal
view. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection
Carpal and digit fexors in closed chain and end-range
of the dog. ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
 open chain, and extensors in open chain from normal
stance
 Prime movers for forelimb muscle groups are as follows:
Shoulder fexors—latissimus dorsi, deltoideus, long
canine head and neck function mechanically like a
head of the triceps brachi, teres major, teres minor
cantilever beam. The weight of the head at the end of the
 Shoulder extensors—cleidobrachialis, biceps brachii,
"beam" produces a large neck fexion moment, which must 
supraspinatus, brachiocephalicus 
be balanced by spinal ligaments and neck extensor muscles.
Elbow fexors—biceps brachi and brachialis 
 Dogs have a large muscle mass in shoulder adductors
 Elbow extensors—triceps brachii
and elbow extensors because of the weight-bearing function
Carpal fexors—fexor carpi radialis, ulnaris lateralis,
fexor carpi ulnaris
in weight bearing. Antigravity muscle groups for the fore-
 Carpal extensors——extensor carpi radialis; carpal fexor
limb include the following (see Figures 5-15 to 5-21):
and extensor muscles have fexor and extensor retinac-
· Shoulder extensors in closed chain and end-range open
ula to keep tendons to the digits in proper alignment
chain, and shoulder fexors in open chain from normal
 Digit fexors—superficial and deep digital flexors
stance posture
 Digit extensors—common and lateral digital extensor
 Shoulder adductors and abductors, depending on the
muscles
weight-bearing posture
Web Appendix 1 contains information on muscles,
 Elbow extensors in closed chain, and fexors in open
attachment sites, joint actions, analogous human muscles
chain from stance
(muscle that performs a similar function in humans), and
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
59
Cut edge of deep gluteal fascia
Middle gluteal
 Superficial gluteal
Rhomboiceu
Thoracolumbar
Dorsal lateral sacroca
cal
Subscapularis
Teres major
fascia
Coccygeus
Internal
abdomin
Triceps, long head
Coracobrachialis
Teres minor
Biceps
Semitendinosus
Subscapularis
Triceps, accessory head
External
Coraco
Triceps,medial heac
abdominal
Brachialis
oblique
Anconeus
rficial pectora
Cleicobrachialis
Tensor fasciae antebrach
Flexor carpi ulnari
Cauda
Fascialat
crural
abductor
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Crural fas
Abductor digiti I longu
Figure 5-22 Superficial muscles of the left lateral hindlimb. (From
Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog.
ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
Interossei
Lateral digital extensor
Superficial digital flexor-
→Lateral and common
digital extensors
Figure 5-21  Muscle attachment sites on the medial forelimb skel-
eton. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection
/entral lateral 
|EpnEDIES
of the dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
inal sphincte
chiatic tuberasity
Sarta
innervation for prime movers of joint actions of the fore-
limb, hindlimb, and trunk and neck.
Greate
Hindlimb
trachanter
Adductc
The antigravity muscles of the hindlimb support the dog
in weight bearing or closed chain (Figures 5-22 to 5-30).
In normal stance, the angle of the hip and stifle are both
fexion in the stife joint. This posture creates a constant
requirement for large hip extensor and stife extensor
moments. The main antigravity muscle groups for closed-
chain function in the hindlimb are as follows:
· Hip extensors in the sagittal plane
Cranial tibia
· Hip adductors in the frontal plane
·Stifle extensors
Long digital exten
Talocrural extensors
Tendans af biceps femari
·Digit fexors
Fibularis brevi
Prime movers
for hindlimb muscles include the
following:
Hip fexors-
iliopsoas, sartorius, tensor fasciae latae
endan of superficial digital fl
Fibula 
 Hip extensors—gluteal muscles, biceps femoris, semi-
Figure 5-23 Deep muscles of the left lateral hindlimb. (From Evans
tendinosus, semimembranosus
HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog, ed 7.
· Hip abductors—middle gluteal
Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
60
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Rectus
femoris
ectusfemoris
Vastus
medialis
Pectineus
Aclducto
Pectineus
Aclduct
Sartorius,
cranial part
stus medialis
Gracilis
Sartorius,
caudal part 
Semimemb
Bemitendinos
SemitendinosL
Popliteus
Gastrocnemius
Gastrocnemius
 Superficial
Lateral digital flex
Cranial tibial
Cranial tibial
dligital flexor
 Superficial
Tibia
ateral digital flexor
digital flexor
Common
Tibia
calcaneal
tencon
Crural extensor
etinaculum
Figure 5-24  Superficial muscles of the left medial hindlimb. (From
Figure 5-25  Deep muscles of the left medial hindlimb. (From Evans
Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miter's guide to the dissection of the dog.
HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog, ed 7.
ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
Hip adductors——adductor magnus et brevis, pectineus
antigravity muscles in which contraction is prominent at
 Hip lateral rotators—intermal and extemal obturator,
the point of foot placement and during the stance phase
gemelli
executing extension of the hip, whereas the caudal group
 Hip medial rotators—deep gluteal, semitendinosus 
contracts during the swing phase executing fexion of the
 Stifle extensors—quadriceps femoris: rectus femoris,
stife.16 When compared with the human, the dog's ischial
vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, vastus intermedius
tuberosity is farther from the hip joint. Therefore the origin
Stife fexors—biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semi-
of the hamstrings on the ischial tuberosity provides a
membranosus
longer moment arm and therefore a relatively larger exten-
Talocrural fexors-
-cranial tibial
sor moment about the hip joint. At the region of the femo-
 Talocrural extensors—gastrocnemius, superficial digital
rotibial joint, the entire biceps femoris muscle courses
fexor
superficial to the vastus lateralis muscle and, as an aponeu-
Digit flexors-
superficial and deep fexor
rosis, joins the fascia lata and the fascia cruris. Based on
 Digit extensors—long digital extensor
these attachments, the biceps femoris is very effective in
Whereas the front limbs bear the majority of the static
producing hip extension and stife fexion, making this
weight of the dog, the rear limbs provide the necessary
muscle an effective source of propulsion. The middle
propulsion for dynamic activity such as running and
 gluteal and adductor muscles are large, thick muscles. The 
jumping.
superficial gluteal is small and located more on the lateral
As a result, the hamstring muscles are large and there-
hip than the caudal hip.
fore have a large force capacity. The hamstring muscles in
The quadriceps femoris muscles are large. This is con-
the dog are divided into cranial and caudal groups. The
sistent with the constant and large stife extension moment
cranial group consists of the cranial parts of the biceps
caused by the stife position in normal stance.
femoris and semimembranosus. The caudal group consists
At the talocrural joint, the canine gastrocnemius muscle
of the caudal parts of the biceps femoris and semimembra-
is relatively large, and usually there is no soleus muscle.
nosus and the whole semitendinosus. The division into
The long digital extensor muscle crosses the stife and
groups is based on electromyographic and functional
tarsal joints on the cranial surfaces. The tendons of the
characteristics. The cranial group functions primarily as
lateral digital extensor and peroneus brevis muscles travel
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
61
Femur
Lateral
snalldod
gastrocnemius
 Medial 
Gastrocnemius
gastrocnemius
Fibularis lon gus
Cranial tibial
 Superficial digital flexor
Tendon of biceps femoris-
Tendon of semitendinosus
Tendon of gastrocnemius-
and gracilis
Tendon of superficial
digital flexor
 Long digital extensor
-Fibula
Lateral digital extensor.
Medial digital flexor
Crural extensor
retinaculum-
Calcaneus
Fibularis brevis-
Lateral digitalflexor
-Tarsal extensor
Extensor
retinaculum
Fibularis longus
snbuallip
 Short digital extensor 
Deep digital flexor
Lateral digital extensor
lexormanica
Tendon of
superficial digital flexor-
Cut tendon of
deep digital flexor
Figure 5-26 Muscles of the left leg and hindpaw, cranial view.
Figure 5-27 Muscles of the left leg and hindpaw, caudal view.
(From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the
(From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the
dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
in a distinctive groove, the sulcus malleolaris lateralis, on
The superficial dorsal trunk muscles act on the forelimb as
the lateral malleolus.
well as the cervical spine and are innervated by the ventral
rami.
Trunk and Neck
Antigravity muscle groups for the spine are the trunk
Figures 5-3 1 to 5-36 display visual information about trunk
and neck extensors. Prime-mover muscles for spine motion
and neck musculature. Canine muscles of the trunk and
include the following:
  s au  r  s
中
Cervical spine fexion of C1-C2—longus capitis and
development into hypaxial and epaxial muscles. The
longus colli
epaxial muscles develop locally in the trunk and are immer-
 Cervical spine fexion caudal to C2—stermomastoideus,
vated by the dorsal rami of the spinal nerves. They include
longus capitis, and longus colli
muscles that lie dorsal to the transverse processes of the 
 Cervical spine extension—splenius
vertebrae and have a main action of extension of the spine.
Cervical spine side bend—scalenus
-d assn a o [a ll sa idu a
Rotation
of
the
cervical
spine—splenius
and
cesses, are innervated by the ventral rami, and have a main
stermomastoideus
action of fexion of the spine. The hypaxial group also
Flexion of the trunk (thoracic and lumbar spine)-
includes the muscles of the abdominal and thoracic walls.
rectus abdominis muscle
62
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
the iliocostalis muscle system laterally, the longissimus
muscle system intenmediately, and the transversospinalis
muscle system medially. Different arrangements of fused
Tendon of long
Gastrocnemius
portions of these three primary segmental muscle masses
digital extensor
Lateral meniscus
exist, based on the running abilities of the breed. Dogs that
run fast may have longer fascicles, which allow muscles to
attach to the spine for increased leverage. These breeds
Fibularis longus
have fused caudal portions of the iliocostalis muscle with
Cranial tibial
the longissimus muscle to form the erector spinae or sacro-
uperficial digital flexor
spinalis muscle group.
Long digital extens
Lateral digital flexor
Bursae
A synovial bursa (bursae synoviales) is a walled space
containing a viscid fuid. The wall is composed of an outer
Lateral digital extensc
Tendon of biceps femoris,
semitendinosus, and gracilis
tough layer, the membrana fibrosa, and a inner delicate
layer, the membrana synoviales. Synovial bursae provide
a gliding surface and a cushion for soft tissues as they pass
-Fibularis brevis
over skeletal prominences and are found over bone and
Calcaneus
under muscle, tendon, ligament, fascia, or skin. Not all
Superficial digital flexor
bursae are consistent structures, as some are present at
4th tarsal bone
 birth (congenital) whereas others form later (acquired) in
response to mechanical stresses.17 Bursae can also be elim-
Interosseus V
inated by aggressive infammation as a result of infection
or traumatic injury.
 In the front limb of the dog, there is a bursa between the
tendon of insertion of the infraspinatus muscle and the
greater tubercle of the humerus. Frequently a second more
Deepdigitalflexoi
proximal bursa can be found in association with the infra-
spinatus insertion.'7 Ossification of this bursa and the tendon
Figure 5-28 Muscles of the left leg and hindpaw, lateral view.
(From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the
of the infraspinatus tendon has been reported as a cause of
lameness.' Diagnosis is suspected when pain is elicited by
dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
 digital pressure over the site of the bursa and the tendon.
A bursa is present under the origin of the deep digital
 fexor muscle at the medial epicondyle of the humerus. The
Extension of the trunk—sacrospinalis or erector spinae
distal portion of the muscle is surrounded by a sheath
muscles
extending from the level of the distal radius to the meta-
· Side bend of the trunk—pars lumbalis of the extemal
carpus. In some cases the sheath is less well defined with
abdominal oblique
weaker walls and no fuid.4
 Rotation of the trunk—longissimus and pars costalis of
Bursae are commonly associated with the extensor
the extemal abdominal oblique
carpi radialis muscle. The joint capsule of the elbow forms 
The posturing of the dog's head and neck as a cantilever
a pocketlike structure under the proximal portion of the
beam produces a large amount of extensor or resisting neck
extensor carpi radialis muscle. Distally the extensor carpi
fexion moment on the cervical spine. This posture creates
radialis gives rise to two tendons, a medial tendon attaching
a constant requirement for large neck extensor muscle
to metacarpal II and a larger lateral tendon attaching to
 n s I yo  xde   [
sor muscle mass. Trunk fexor and extensor muscle masses
a bursa that completely envelops both tendons as a
are both large, reflecting a large requirement for trunk
 complete fuid-filled tendon sheath. A separate bursa may
extensor and fexor muscle activity. The abdominal muscles
be present under both tendons or just the lateral tendon at
have a big role in supporting the weight of the intermal
the level of the proximal row of carpal bones. A second
organs.
bursa can be found under the lateral tendon at the level of
The deep dorsal trunk musculature, the extensor muscle
the distal row of carpal bones. In other dogs fuid-filled
 groups, consists of three longitudinal muscle masses, each
sheaths or sacs are absent with a loosely meshed connective
having many overlapping fascicles. The three masses are
tissue in place.4
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
63
licdle gluteal
Deep gluteal
Illiocostalis and
Micdle gluteal
Cemelli
Coccygeus
uadrat
asctae
Biceps femoris
Pectus femoris
Se mite ndinosus
Internal obturator
Sermimembranosus
Levator ani
Pectineus
Quadratus femoris
Ischiocavernosus
- Psoas minor
External obturator
Pectineus
Gracilis
Adductor
Pectineus
Semimembranosus
Gastrocnemius
Gastrocnemius-
 Popliteus
Semimembranosus
Long dligital-
Fibularis ongus
Quadtrensor
Popliteus-
-Quadriceps
Lateral digital flexor
Sartorius
Biceps
Lateral digital extenso
Lateral digital flexo
Cranatibial
Gracilis
Semitendinosus
Gastrocnemius
Gastrocnemius-
Superficial
 Superficial --
Biceps, gracilis and
ligital flexor
semitendinosus
digital flexor
Elhularis
Cranial tibial
Fibularis longus
Interosseus
_Ong digital exte
Superficial digital flexor
Long digital extensor
Deep digital flexor-
g
digital f lexor
Figure 5-30 Muscle attachment sites on the medial hindlimb skel-
Figure 5-29 Muscle attachment sites on the lateral hindlimb skel-
eton. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection
eton. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection
of the dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
of the dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
Longissimus thoracis
 Spinalis and semispinalis thoracis
Serratus dorsalis cranialis
Longissimus thoracis
Sternothyroic
Superficial pectoral
Scalenus
Rectus thoracis
Deep pectoral
External interoostal miuscle Ill 4th rib
Rectus abdominis
Serratus ventralis (thoracis) External abdominal oblique 
Figure 5-31 Muscles of the left lateral neck and thorax. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miler's guide to the dissection of the dog, ed 7.
Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
64
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Figure 5-32
2Deep muscles of the left lateral neck. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog, ed 7, Philadelphia.
2010, WB Saunders.)
1. Splenius
6.Serratus dorsalis cranialis
13. Vagosympathetic trunk 
 2. Semispinalis capitis:
7. Serratus ventralis 
14. Longus capitis
a. Biventer cervicis
8. lliocostalis thoracis
15. Intertransversarius 
b. Complexus
9. First rib
16. Omotransversarius 
3. Longissimus capitis 
10. Scalenus
1 7. Mastoid part of cleidocephalicus
 4. Longissimus cervicis
11. Esophagus
 5. Longissimus thoracis 
12. Common carotid artery
lliocostalis
 Spinalis et semispinalis
 Serratus dorsalis
Longissimus
caudalis
thoracis
Obliquus internus
Serratus dorsaliscranialis
abdominis
Serratus ventralis, cut 
Scalenus dorsalis-
Obliquus externus
Rectus
abdominis
thoracis
Intercostalis
Rectus
externus
abdominis
Figure 5-33
Saunders.)
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
65
6th rib-
and forelimb. The superficial cervical lymph nodes are
External
almost always palpable. Axillary lymph nodes are located
intercostal
Rectus abdominis
 dorsal to the deep pectoral muscle and generally are not
9th rib-
palpable unless they are abnormally enlarged. The deep
External abdominal
Rectus
oblique
structures of the forelimb, as well as lymph vessels from
abdominis
the thoracic wall, drain into these nodes.
Umbilicus
Hindlimb
 Internal abdominal
oblique
Linea alba
The popliteal lymph node lies in the fat just caudal to the
Cut edge of aponeurosis
stife joint and at the caudal border of the biceps femoris
 of external abdominal
muscle. This is the largest lymph node in the hindlimb. The
oblique
hindlimb structures distal to the stife joint drain into this
Sartorius
Pelvic tendon
lymph node. The femoral lymph node is not consistently
Abdominal
present and is small when present. It lies in the fat deep to
tendon
Ext.cremaster
the deep medial femoral fascia at the distal part of the
Pectineus
Adductor
femoral triangle. The femoral vessels lie cranial to the
Spermatic cord
in vaginal tunic
Gracilis
femoral lymph node.
Prepubic tendon
Trunk and Neck
Figure 5-34  Superficial muscles of the ventral trunk. (From Evans
HE: Miler's anatomy of the dog. ed 4, Philadelphia, 2013, WB
The superficial inguinal lymph nodes are important lymph
Saunders.)
nodes in the trunk. In addition to the lymph nodes, trunk
intermal organ anatomy that is particularly relevant for
rehabilitation includes the lung lobes, the anatomy of
which is critical when administering postural drainage of
 individual lobes for dogs with respiratory insufficiency.19
External
Rectus
intercostal
abdominis
Ligaments
Internal
intercostal
Information about attachment, fiber direction, and motion
restricted by the major forelimb, hindlimb, and spinal liga-
Tendinous
ments is noted in Web Appendix 2.4.20 Listed order of the
intersection
fiber direction in three planes is noted by the main orienta-
tion of the fibers first and follows in sequence for the
Transversus
second orientation of importance and then the third.
Cut edge of
abdominis
rectus abdominis 
Forelimb
 Cut edge of internal
 abdominal oblique
Figures 5-37 and 5-38 display ligament attachment site,
- Inguinal ligament
location, and line of direction for the major ligaments of
 Spermatic cord
the forelimb. The canine shoulder joints have medial and
Sartorius
 in vaginal tunic 
lateral glenohumeral ligaments, which are mildly thick-
Pectineus
ened regions of fibrous joint capsule. The transverse
Inguinal canal
Adductor
humeral retinaculum holds the tendon of the biceps brachi
Prepubic tendon
Gracilis /
securely in place. The annular ligament holds the prox imal
radius securely to the ulna. The medial and lateral collat-
Figure 5-35 Deep muscles of the ventral trunk. (From Evans HE:
Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 4, St Louis, 2013, WB Saunders.)
eral ligaments of the elbow are substantial structures and
contribute to elbow stability. Although there are no carpal
 collateral ligaments that span all the joints of the carpus,
there are individual collateral ligaments at the various
levels that are critical to carpal stability. Palmar ligament
 and fibrocartilaginous support of the carpus are vital for
Forelimb
 normal weight bearing.
Superficial cervical lymph nodes are located just cranial to
Hindlimb
the shoulder joint. They are deep to the cleidocephalicus
and omotransversarius muscles and are on the lymph
Figures 5-39 to 5-41 display hindlimb ligament attachment
drainage path from the cutaneous area of the head, neck,
site, location, and line of direction for the major ligaments
66
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
2nd lumbar vertebra
Multifidus lumborum 
Longissimus dorsi
Sacrocaudalis.
dorsalis lateralis
7th lurmbar vertebra,
splnous process
Sacrocaudalis
dorsalis medialis
Intertransversarius
dorsalis caudalis 
Sacrocaudalis
Sacrocaudalis,
dorsalis lateralis
Origins
Insertions
A
B
Figure 5-36 Muscles of the lumbocaudal region. A, Epaxial muscles, dorsal view. B, Diagram of skeleton and sacrocaudal muscle attachments,
dorsal view. (From Evans HE: Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2013, WB Saunders.)
of the hindlimb. The iliofemoral, pubofemoral, and ischio-
normal range of motion, these bands accept varying stress
femoral ligaments are not present in the dog. The ligament
loads depending on the stage of motion. With the stife in
of the femoral head does not contribute to hip stability
moderate fexion, excessive stife intermal rotation stretches
as much as the capsule, but is important in the develop-
the cranial cruciate ligament under the medial femoral
ment of the hip. The transverse acetabular ligament tra-
condyle, causing mechanical trauma to the ligament.
verses the acetabular notch and thereby completes the rim
The medial and lateral collateral ligaments of the stife
 Of the acetabulum. Without the transverse acetabular liga-
joint are substantial and important to joint stability. The
ment, the hip may luxate ventrally. Although the sacro-
medial meniscus is attached to the tibia cranially and cau-
tuberous ligament is a pelvic ligament, rather than a
dally, and to the medial collateral ligament. The lateral
hip-joint ligament, it is mentioned here because of its 
meniscus is attached to the tibia cranially and the femur
importance as one of the origins of the biceps femoris
caudally (through the meniscofemoral ligament) and is
muscle.
separated from the lateral collateral ligament. Although the
The cranial (anterior) and caudal (posterior) cruciate
menisci move with fexion and extension, the more fixed
ligaments are critical stabilizing ligaments that restrain
medial meniscus is less accommodating than the lateral if 
stifle motion within physiologic limits. The cruciate liga-
subluxation occurs with loss of the cranial cruciate liga-
ments are named by their cranial or caudal attachment to
ment. Therefore the medial meniscus is often damaged in
the tibia. Injury to the cranial cruciate ligament is common.
cases of cranial cruciate rupture.
The cranial cruciate ligament has different fiber bundles,
The fibrous extensor retinaculum secures the patella.
the craniomedial and caudolateral bands. Throughout the
The contribution from the fascia lata to the extensor
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
67
Bicepsbrachii tendon
 Medial glenohumeral 
ligament
Lateral glenohumeral
Transverse humeral
ligament
retinaculum
,Oblique
/ligament
Medial
Brachialis
collateral-
ligament 
Biceps
 brachii
Lateral
Annular
collateral
ligament
ligament 
Reflected
Biceps brachii
attachments
 and brachialis 
of the biceps
tendonsreflected
D
 brachii and .
from the ulna
brachialis
Biceps brachii
tendons on
the ulna
attachment to
the radius
Interosseous
ligament
Radius
Figure 5-37 Ligaments of the medial (A) and lateral (B) left shoulder and medial (C) and lateral (D) left elbow in the dog. (Adapted from
Evans HE: Miller's anatomy of the dog. ed 4, Philadelphia, 2013, WB Saunders.)
retinaculum is particularly important in holding the patella
extensor muscle and also surrounds the tendon of the prox-
in the troc hlea. Femoropatellar ligaments are mildly thick-
imal attachment of the popliteus muscle. The tibiofibular
ened regions of the fibrous capsule and are observed only
 joint has ligamentous support from the ligament of the
in large dogs. The tendon of the popliteus muscle separates
fibular head, the interosseous membrane, and the cranial
the lateral collateral ligament from the lateral meniscus.
tibiofibular ligament.
The patellar ligament is a strong support between the
 Medial and lateral collateral ligaments of the tarsocrural
patella and tibial tuberosity. There is no tendon from the
joint provide stability to the tarsus. There are long and
quadriceps muscle to the patella. The quadriceps is attached
short portions of the collateral ligaments. Plantar ligaments 
to parapatellar fibrocartilage.
are more developed and substantial in the dog than in the
There are three joint or synovial pouches in the stife,
human because of the upright weight-bearing stance in
two femorotibial joint pouches, and one retropatellar joint
humans. Ligaments in the hindpaw maintain what is
pouch. The femorotibial joint pouches incorporate the
described as a rigid tarsocrural area in dogs. The tendons
articulations of the sesamoids of the gastrocnemius muscle,
coursing into the hindpaw are secured by the fascia pedis,
but exclude the cruciate ligaments. The lateral femorotibial
which forms retinacula to stabilize tendons and superficial
pouch continues distally through the extensor groove as the
muscles of the hindpaw and secure them to all the project-
tendon sheath for the tendon of the proximal long digital
ing bones in the hindpaw.
68
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Radius
Olna
Radius.
Ulna
-Radioulnar ligament
Medial collateral
Medial collateral
Epiphyses
-Dorsal radiocarpal ligament 
ligament 
ligament
~ Lateral collateral ligament
Tendon of abductor
Articular disc
C2
CU
digiti I longus
C1-
CR-
CU
CIV
CIll
Tendon of lateral 
digital extensor
B
Collateral ligaments 
of proximal
 metacarpophalangeal
joint
Radius
Collateral ligaments 
of proximal
 Radioulnar ligarment-
 interphalangeal joint
Dorsal radiocarpal ligament-
Dorsal elastic
Collateral ligaments
ligaments
Lateral collateral ligament-
of distal
 interphalangeal joint
 Collateral ligarment of
 rmetacarpophalangeal joint\
Collateral ligament of proximal
 interphalangeal joint 
Lateral
sesamoidean
ligaments
Dorsal elastic
ligaments
Figure 5-38 Ligaments of the dorsal aspect of the left forepaw (A).
 Collateral ligament 
schematic section of the left carpus (B), and lateral aspect of the left
of distal 
forepaw (C) in the dog. (From Evans HE: Miller's anatomy of the dog.
 interphalangeal joint 
ed 4, Philadelphia, 2013, WB Saunders.)
C
Ventral
sacroiliac
Articular
Supraspinous
ligament 
capsule
ligament
Intervertebral
Dorsal
Yellow ligament
disk
sacroiliac
ligament
Ligament of
Articular
femoral head
capsule
Articular/
Sacrotuberous
Transverse
capsule
lig ament
acetabular
Sacrotuberous
ligament
ligament
A
Ischiatic arch
B
Ischiatic arch
Figure 5-39 Ligaments of the hip and pelvis from a ventral (A) and dorsal (B) view. (From Evans HE: Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 4, Phila-
delphia, 2013, WB Saunders.)
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
69
Tendon of
 Femoropatellar
Tendon of
quadriceps
quadriceps
~ ligament 
-Sesamoids-
Lateral
Patellar
 collateral ligament 
Patellar
ligament
Medial
ligament
Tendon
of popliteus
collateral -
Tendon of long
ligament 
digital extensor
 Cranial ligament
 of fibular head
A
Lateral
B
Medial
Patellar
ligament
Cranial tibial
Transverse
ligament of 
ligament
medial meniscus
Cranial
Figure 5-40  Ligaments of the left stifle in the 
Cranial tibial
cruciate
dog from a lateral (A),. medial (B), dorsal (C),
ligament
ligament of.
caudal (D), and cranial () view. (From Evans HE:
lateral meniscus
 Medial
Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 4, Philadelphia,
Lateral
meniscus
2013, WB Saunders.)
meniscus~
Medial
 Lateral 
collateral
collateral 
ligament 
ligament
Meniscofemoral Caudal
Caudal tibial
ligament
cruciate
ligament of
C
ligament
medial meniscus
Meniscofemoral
Cranial
 ligament
Cranial cruciate
cruciate
Transverse
ligament
ligament
ligament 
Lateral
Lateral
Medialmeniscus
meniscus
meniscus
 Caudal cruciate
Caudal ligament,
ligament 
of fibular head
 Patellar
ligament
D
Caudal
Cranial
Spine
General Nerve Supply
Figures 5-11, 5-12, 5-32, and 5-42 display ligament attach-
 ment sites, locations, and lines of direction for some liga-
Forelimb
ments of the spine. Spinal ligaments are extensive. Strong
Figures 5-43 to 5-45 show the main nerves of the forelimb.
ligamentous support in the spine is thought to decrease the
The brachial plexus innervates the forelimb. It is formed
risk of disk hemiation. The ligamentum nuchae, or nuchal
by ventral rami C6 through T2. Sometimes C5 contributes
ligament, is attached at the cranial and caudal extents of
to the brachial plexus. The nerves appear along the ventral
the cervical spine. This strong ligament acts as a tension
 border of the scalenus and enter the forelimb through the
band to oppose fexion of the head and neck and helps to
axillary space. The nerves of the canine brachial plexus
 hold the dog's head up with passive force, sparing muscle
 include the suprascapular (C6-C7), subscapular (C6-C7),
activity. This allows the dog relief from muscle fatigue.
thoracodorsal (C6-C8), brachiocephalic (C6-C7), lateral
70
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Crural extensorretinaculum
Lateral collateral ligament -
Short part -
Medial collateral ligament 
Long part 
 Short part
Tarsal extensor
- Long part
retinaculum
TC
Calcaneoquartal
TII-
ligament
Tl
 Long plantar ligament 
Medial
B
Lateral
Crural extensor
Tibia
retinaculum
Fibula-
Cranial tibiofibular
ligament
-Lateral collateral ligament -
Calcaneocentral
 Sustentaculum tali-
ligament
Tarsal extensor retinaculum
Plantar
Calcaneoquartal,
centrodistal
ligament 
ligament
-TI
Long plantar,
ligament
Tarsal
fibrocartilage
C
Dorsal
D
Plantar
Figure 5-41  Ligaments of the left hindpaw in the dog from a medial (A), lateral (B), dorsal (C), and plantar (D) view. (From Evans HE: Miller's
anatomy of the dog,ed 4,Philadelphia,2013, WBSaunders.)
Dorsal atlantoaxial ligament
Nuchal ligament
Supraspinousligament
Interspinous
ligament
Yellow ligame
 Dorsal costotran sverse
ligament
Figure 5-42
 Nuchal ligament. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB
Saunders.)
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
71
Suprascapular
Thoracodorsal
Subscapular.
To teres major and subscapularis
Radial
Axillary-
To supraspinatus muscle
To deep pectoral muscle
To superficial pectoral muscle
Lateral thoracic
To brachiocephalicus muscle -
Musculocutaneous ~
Totensorfasciaeantebrachiiand
To coracobrachialis muscle 
 long head of triceps brachi muscles
To deltoideus muscle
To accessory head triceps brachi 
To teres minor muscle
Median
Figure 5-43  Main nerves of the right arm and forearm,
To biceps brachi muscle 
~Unar
To anconeus and lateral head of
medial aspect. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's
Lateral cutaneous brachial
To medial head triceps brachii muscle
triceps brachii muscles
guide to the dissection of the dog, ed 7, Philadelphia,
 To brachialis muscle
Caudal cutaneous antebrachial
2010, WB Saunders.)
 Superficial radial, lateral branch
 Medial cutaneous antebrachial
Superficial radial, medial branch
To pronator teres
To extensor carpi radialis muscle
To supinator, common digital extensor, lateral
To flexor carpi radialis, superficial
 and deep digital flexor muscles
extensor digiti Ilongus and digitil
To pronator quadratus,radi
nterosseous
and ulnarheads ofdee
Dorsal branch of ulnar nerve
digital flexor muscles
thoracic (C8-T1), caudal pectoral (C6-C8), musculocuta-
Cephalic vein-
Cranial superficial antebrachial
artery, medial branch 
neous (C6-C8), axillary (C6-C8), radial (C6-T2), median
(C7-T1), and ulnar (C8-T2) nerves. Innervations of muscles
Cranial superficial 
 Superficial radial nerve,
antebrachial artery,
medial branch 
 Of the forelimb are included in Web Appendix 1.
lateral branch
Racdial artery,
Autonomous zones are areas of skin or cutaneous sensa-
Accessory cephalic vein-
cdorsal carpal branch
Cephalic vein
tion that are innervated by only one peripheral nerve. Main
Superficial radial
front-limb autonomous zones of the brac hial plexus are the
nerve, lateral branch -
Dorsal common
digital nerve I
regions of the axillary, musculocutaneous, radial, median,
UInar nerve, dorsal branch -
and ulnar nerves. Autonomous zones of the front limb and
Dorsal common
digital artery I
cranial trunk are displayed in Figure 5-46.
Dorsal common digital nerve IV -
Hindlimb
 Dorsal common 
Figures 5-47 to 5-49 show the main nerves of the hindlimb.
dligital vein and artery IV 
The lumbosacral plexus innervates the hindlimb. This
plexus can be divided into lumbar and sacral plexuses;
however, there are always communications between the
two plexuses. The plexus consists of ventral rami from the
Axial dorsal proper digital
caudal five lumbar, or L, nerves and the three sacral, or S,
vein, artery and nerve V
nerves. There are seven lumbar nerves and three sacral
 nerves. The lumbosacral trunk is the largest and most
xial palmar proper
important part of the lumbosacral plexus and becomes the
sciatic nerve outside the pelvis.
 The lumbar plexus is generally formed by ventral rami
from L3-L5, sometimes L2-L6. The nerves of the lumbar
plexus include the ilioinguinal from L3, genitofemoral
Figure 5-44 Nerves and arteries of the right forepaw, dorsal
from L3 and L4, lateral cutaneous femoral from L3 and
aspect. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection
L4, femoral from L4-L6, saphenous from L4-L6, and obtu-
of the dog. ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
rator from L4-L6 nerves. Innervations of the rear limb
muscles are included in Web Appendix 1.
The sacral plexus is formed by ventral rami from L6-S3.
The nerves of the sacral plexus that relate to the hindlimb
mclude the cranial gluteal from L6-S1; caudal gluteal from L7
(S1); caudal cutaneous femoral from S1-S2?"'; sciatic from
72
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Median arten
Median nerve
Cephalic vein
Caudal interosseous arteny
Radial artery
 palmar carpal branch
Axial palmar proper digital
Superficialpalmar arch
Figure 5-45 Nerves and arteries of the right forepaw, palmar
vein, artery, and nerve |
Abaxial palmar digital nerve V
aspect.(From EvansHE,deLahuntaA: Miller's guide to thedissection
Superficial
of the dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
palmar venous arch
 Abaxial palmar
proper digital nerve Il
Vein, artery, and
nerve to metacarpal pad
Palmar commor
digital nerve III
, and artery IV
L6-S1; common, superficial, and deep peroneal from L6-L7;
tibial from L6-Sl; proximal caudal cutaneous sural from
L6-S1; and lateral cutameous sural from L6-L7. In the hindpaw
T
 the dorsal metatarsal nerves are continuations of the deep pero-
neal nerve, and the medial plantar amd lateral plantar nerves
are the distal continuations of the tibial nerve. Innervations
 of muscles of the hindimb are included in Web Appendix 1.
T2 lateral
C5 ventral
cutaneous branch
Main hindlimb autonomous zones are the regions of
cutaneous branch 
Axillary nerve
distribution of the genitofemoral, femoral, lateral femoral 
T3 lateral
cutaneous, saphenous, caudal cutaneous femoral, sciatic,
cutaneous branch
tibial, and peroneal nerves. Autonomous zones of the
hindlimb and caudal trunk are displayed in Figure 5-50.
Trunk and Neck
Jnarnerve
The superficial muscles of the dorsal and lateral neck and
Radialnerv
trunk are innervated by the brachial plexus for muscles
near the forelimb and by the lumbosacral plexus for
Radial ner
muscles near the hindlimb. Most of the deep musculature
of the neck and trunk is innervated segmentally by dorsal
rami of spinal nerves (see Web Appendix 1). These deep
Figure 5-46 Autonomous zones of cutaneous innervation of the
muscles on the dorsal neck and trunk are epaxial muscles;
cranial trunk and forelimb. (After Kitchell RL et al: Electrophysiologic
that is, they developed in the dorsal neck or trunk area and
studies of cutaneous nerves of the thoracic limbs of the dog. Am J
received muscular innervation locally from the dorsal rami.
Vet Res 41:61-76,1980. In Evans HE, deLahunta A: Miller's guide t0
The advantage of the segmental innervation from many
the dissection of the dog. ed. 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
nerves is that there is less chance of a strength deficit from
damage to any one nerve.
 The hypaxial muscles of the lateral and ventral abdomi-
nal wall developed in the lateral and ventral abdomen and
received innervation from the ventral rami (i.e., the branch
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
73
S3
K
M
Figure 5-47 Schematic medial view of lumbar and sacral nerves. (From Evans HE: Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2013, WB
Saunders.)
A. Thirteenth thoracic nerve, 
H.
 Obturator nerve
0. Perineal nerve
U. Deep fibular nerve
ventral branch
1.
Cranial gluteal nerve 
 Caudal cutaneous femoral
V.
Superficial fibular nerve
 Cranial iliohypogastric nerve
 Pelvic nerve
nerve
W. Lateral plantar nerve 
C.
 Caudal iliohypogastric nerve 
K.
Caudal gluteal nerve
Q. Lateral cutaneous sural
X.
 Medial plantar nerve
D. llioinguinal nerve
L.
Nerve to mm. obturator 
nerve
Y.
 Saphenous nerve
E. Lateral cutaneous femoral
internus, gemelli, and 
R.
 Common fibular nerve
Z.
 Dorsal branches of lumbar 
nerve
quadratus femoris 
S.
Tibial nerve
and sacral nerves 
F.
 Genitofemoral nerve
M. Ischiatic nerve
T.
Caudal cutaneous sural
G. Femoral nerve
N. Pudendal nerve
nerve
of the spinal nerve that traveled laterally and ventrally and
sensory deficit does not often occur unless a minimum of
innervated the local structures).
 two consecutive spinal nerves are damaged.
The spinal nerves exit between the vertebrae through
 the intervertebral foramina. All of the spinal nerves, except
General Blood Supply
the cervical nerves, exit the intervertebral foramen caudal
to the vertebra of the same number. In the cervical region,
Forelimb
there are eight cervical nerves and seven cervical vertebrae.
C2-C7 exit the intervertebral foramen cranial to the verte-
Primary blood vessels to the dog's forelimb are the subcla-
bra of the same number. Cl emerges through the lateral
vian, axillary, brachial, common interosseous, and median
vertebral foramen of the arch of the atlas. C8 exits the
arteries (Figure 5-51). The axillary artery and branches and
intervertebral foramen caudal to C7.
the extemal thoracic, lateral thoracic, subscapular, and
Neck and trunk autonomous zones are circumferential
cranial and caudal circumfex humeral supply the scapular 
strips of skin sensation around the dorsal neck and trunk.
and shoulder area. The brachial artery and branches, deep
Because of extensive overlap in cutaneous sensation, a
brachial, bicipital, collateral ulnar, superficial brachial,
74
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Cranial tibial artery
Superficial
fibular nerve
Deep fibular nerve
 Saphenous artery.
cranial branch
 Dorsal pedal artery
Abaxial dorsal
digital nerve V~
Arcuate artery
Proximal perforating 
Dorsal common
Abaxial dorsal digital
branch of dorsal
digital nerves 
metatarsal artery Il 
nerve Il (saphenous)
Dorsal metatarsal
 Dorsal common
arteries
Dorsal metatarsal nerves
digital arteries
Abaxialdorsaldigitalarterym
Abaxial dorsal
Axial plantar digital artery Ill
digital nerve IllI
Figure 5-48 Nerves and arteries of the right hindpaw., dorsal aspect. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the
dog. ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
Saphenous artery,
Tibial
caudal branch
 Caudal cutaneous sural
Lateral plantar artery
Medial plantar
Lateral plantar nerve
Deep branch
Medial plantar artery
 Proximal perforating
Plantar metatarsals
branch of dorsal
 metatarsal artery Il -
Plantar common
digitals -
Deep plantar arch
Plantar metatarsal
arteries
Abaxial plantar
digital nerve Il-
Plantar common
digital arteries
Axial plantar
digital artery II
Abaxial plantar
digital nerve IV
Figure 5-49 Nerves and arteries of the right hindpaw, plantar aspect. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Mifer's guide to the dissection of the
dog, ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
75
Figure 5-50  Autonomous zones of cutaneous innerva-
tion of the caudal trunk and hindlimb. Asterisks indicate
LCF
palpable bony landmarks (medial and lateral tibial con-
dyles, greater trochanter, and lateral end of the ischiatic
CCF
 or ischial tuberosity). The sciatic nerve autonomous zone 
is for lesions proximal to the greater trochanter and
includes the zones for the peroneal and tibial nerves. For
sciatic nerve lesions caudal to the femur, the autonomous 
zone varies, depending on how many of its cutaneous 
branches are affected. (From Evans HE, de Lahunta A:
Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog, ed 7, Phila-
delphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
nternalpu
 Median sacral
Caudal gluteal
Left and right
liclumbar
internal iliac
Cranial gluteal
Superficial cervical-
Aorta
Lateral caudal
Axillary artery~
Caudal gluteal
Subclavian
Left and rig ht'
Prostatic/vaginal
External thoracic
thoracic
external iliac
Deepfemoral-
Medial
Subscapular
Pudendoepigastric
circumflex
Lrunka
femoral
Caudal
Cranial
circumflex
circumflex
circumflex
femoral
humeral
Bicipital-
 Collateral racdial
Sapheno
Bmar caudal
Superficial brachial 
Deep brachial
Descending genicular
femoral
 Cranial superficial
 Collateral ulnar
 antebrachial
Lateral branch
Transverse
Poplites
Cranial branch
Medialbranch
Cranial tibia
 of saphenous
-Ulnar
interosseous
p antebrachial
Radial
UInar
Median
Dorsal pedle
Perforating
ramus
Figure 5-51 Arteries of the right forelimb, medial view. (From
Figure 5-52 Arteries of the right hindlimb, medial view. (From
Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog.
Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of the dog.
ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)
76
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
and common interosseous supply the anm and forearm.
thickness of hair, skin, and subcutaneous fat. Structures
Common interosseous branches are the ulnar, cranial, and
that can be palpated in dogs are numerous. Almost all
caudal interosseous arteries, which supply the deep
fgures in this chapter illustrate some palpable structures.
forearm. The median artery, a continuation of the brachial
Forelimb
artery, has two branches, the superficial palmar arch, which
is the distal continuation of the median artery, and the
Bony Landmarks
radial artery. Arterial pulses are not easily palpable in the
The bony landmarks that are easily palpated include the
front limb and are not commonly used to assess cardiovas-
following:
cular function.
 Scapula: Borders, spine, acromion
Humerus: Greater tubercle, intertubercular groove,
Hindlimb
deltoid tuberosity, medial and lateral epicondyles
The abdominal aorta divides into the common iliac arter-
Radius: Head, medial styloid process
ies. The two branches of the common iliac arteries are the
 Una: Olecranon, lateral styloid process
intermal iliac artery, supplying the pelvic area, and the
The medial coronoid process is usually covered by to0
extermal iliac, which supplies the lower limb (Figure 5-52).
much soft tissue to be palpable, but the location can be
The intermal iliac artery supplies the caudal thigh via the
painful on palpation if the coronoid is fragmented.
caudal gluteal artery. The extermal iliac branches to the
 Carpus and digits: Accessory carpal bone, metacarpals,
deep femoral, which gives rise to the medial circumfex
phalanges, metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal
femoral and the femoral arteries. The femoral artery gives
joints, metacarpal pad in relation to the metacarpopha-
rise to the lateral circumflex femoral, saphenous, descend-
langeal joints, digital pads in relation to the distal inter-
 ing genicular, distal caudal femoral, and popliteal arteries.
phalangeal joints
Arterial pulses are palpable in the femoral artery in the
inguinal region. From the caudal stife area, the femoral
Joints
 artery becomes the popliteal, which divides into the cranial
 Joint motion can be palpated and observed with fexion and
tibial, which continues as the dorsal pedal and arcuate
extension of the shoulder, elbow, carpus, and the metacar-
 arteries supplying the dorsal hindpaw, and the caudal tibial
 pophalangeal and interphalangeal joints.
or posterior tibial arteries. The dorsal pedal artery is the
principal blood supply to the hindpaw. The saphenous
Muscles and Ligaments
artery from the femoral sends genicular branches to the
The forelimb muscles to be palpated include the
 stife before dividing into a superfcial and caudal branch.
following:
The superficial branch anastomoses with the superficial
 Scapulothoracic: Trapezius, rhomboideus
branch of the cranial tibial artery to form a series of dorsal
 Glenohumeral: Superficial pectoral, deep pectoral, brachio-
metatarsal, common digital, and axial and abaxial proper
cephalicus, latissimus dorsi, supraspinatus, infraspinatus,
dorsal digital arteries coursing between the toes. The
deltoideus, long head of triceps, biceps brachi tendon in the
caudal branch of the saphenous artery forms the larger
intertubercular groove, biceps brachi medially and brachia-
 medial and a smaller lateral plantar arteries, and from these
lis laterally on the distal cramial humerus.
are formed a series of plantar common digital arteries. A
Elbow: Triceps brachii and tendon of insertion
perforating branch of dorsal metatarsal artery I, which is
Forepaw: Flexor muscles on the medial humeral epi
a branch of the arcuate artery, forms the deep plantar arch,
condyle, distal attachments of the fexor carpi ulnaris
from which form the plantar metatarsal arteries. The
and ulnaris lateralis on the accessory carpal, flexor carpi
plantar metatarsal arteries join the plantar common digital
radialis as it tightens with carpal extension, extensor
arteries to form axial plantar digital arteries, which travel
muscles, tendons of the extensor carpi radialis and the
On the axial sides of the toes.
common digital extensor
The cranial branch of the lateral saphenous vein is com-
 Digit: Tendons of the superficial digital fexors at the
monly a site for venipuncture. It is located on the dorsal
carpal canal, and digital fexor tendons and extensor 
tarsus and courses proximocaudally along the lateral
tendons as groups
surface of the leg.
 Ligaments: Although the medial and lateral collateral
ligaments of the elbow, annular ligament, short radial
Palpation of the Dog
collateral, and short ulnar collateral ligaments of the
carpal joint are not palpable, their integrity can be eval-
Structures that are sufficiently superficial may be palpated.
uated by applying controlled stresses to the joints.
Palpation of structures, linked with knowledge of location
Nerves
of structures and the variation of feel with pathologic find-
ings, is an important skill in accurate palpation. Palpation
The ulnar nerve may be palpable caudal to the medial
is more difficult in some dogs, depending on the type and
epicondyle. The median nerve is located just cranial to the
Chapter 5
Canine Anatomy
77
humeral medial epicondyle where it is accessible for nerve
· Tarsus: Craniolateral muscle group that forms the tar-
stimulation but is not distinctly palpable.
socrural fexors and digital extensors, gastrocnemius
muscles, common calcaneal tendon, superficial digital
Arteries
fexor tendon, and portions of the biceps femoris, semi-
The brachial artery is located just cranial to the humeral
tendinosus, and gracilis tendons
medial epicondyle but may not be palpable. The median
Digits: Digital fexors and extensors as groups, digital
 artery passes deep to the fexor carpi radialis at the carpal
fexors in the caudal leg and plantar tarsus
joint, where the pulse may be palpable.
Ligaments: The medial collateral and lateral collateral
ligaments of the stife and tarsocrural joints, and the
Veins
patellar ligament, are palpable. The extensor retinacu-
The cephalic vein becomes prominent for palpation with
lum may be palpable.
compression of the cranial aspect of the proximal
antebrac hium.
Nerves
Lymph Nodes
The common peroneal nerve is palpable on the lateral
The superficial cervical lymph nodes can be palpated
surface of the proximal fibula. The tibial nerve is palpable
cranial to the shoulder.
cranial to the common calcaneal tendon and proximal to
the tarsus.
Hindlimb
Arteries
Bony Landmarks
The femoral artery is palpated in the area of the medial
The bony landmarks to be palpated include the following:
femoral triangle and just cranial to the pectineus muscle.
+
Pelvis: Iliac crests, sacrum, cranial dorsal and ventral
A pulse is palpable where the cranial branch of the saphe-
iliac spines, ischiatic tuberosities, ischiatic arch
nous artery typically crosses the medial side of the middle
· Femur: Greater trochanter, trochlea of the femur and
third of the tibia. The dorsal pedal artery can be palpated
patella that articulates with the trochlea, femoral
on the dorsal tarsus, often between the proximal ends of
condyles
the second and third metatarsal bones.
· Tibia: Tibial condyles, tibial tuberosity, cranial border,
Veins
medial side of the body of the tibia, medial malleolus
Fibula: Head of the fibula, lateral malleolus
The lateral saphenous vein is palpable and is a common
· Tarsus: Trochlea of the talus and lateral ridge, calca-
site for venipuncture.
neus, phalanges, metatarsal pad in relation to the meta-
Lymph Nodes
tarsophalangeal joints, digital pad in relation to the
 distal interphalangeal joints
 The popliteal lymph node, between the distal ends of the
 biceps femoris and the semitendinosus, is palpable.
Cartilage
 The parapatellar fibrocartilages sometimes can be palpated.
Trunk
Joints
Bony Areas
Joint motion can be palpated and observed in the hip,
Palpable bony areas of the trunk include spinous processes
stifle, tarsocrural, metatarsophalangeal, and interphalan-
 of thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, transverse processes of
 geal joints.
the lumbar vertebrae, wings or lateral masses of atlas, spine
of the axis, transverse processes of C3-C6, T13 spinous
Muscles and Ligaments
process from location of rib 13, cranial dorsal iliac spine,
The hindlimb muscles to be palpated include the following:
rib expansion with breathing, iliac crests and L7 spinous
·Hip: Superficial gluteal, middle gluteal, sartorius,
 process between the iliac crests, stermum from manubrium
biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semimembranosus,
to the xiphoid process, ribs.
gracilis, and pectineus
Joints
In the caudal thigh, the biceps femoris, semitendinosus,
semimembranosus, and gracilis are palpated in sequence
Joint motion may be palpated and observed during inter-
from lateral to medial.
vertebral joint motion.
· Stife: Vastus medialis, rectus femoris, vastus lateralis,
Muscles
biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semimembranosus,
medial and lateral gastrocnemius and their associated
The cervical and trunk extensor muscle mass and the rectus
sesamoid bones (fabellae), gracilis
abdominis muscle are palpable.
78
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
 9. Riegger-Krugh C, Keysor JJ: Skeletal malalignments of the
Soft Tissue
 lower quarter: correlated and compensatory motions and pos-
The lumbosacral space caudal to the last lumbar spinous
tures, J Orthop Sport Phys Ther 23:164-170, 1996.
10. Gillette RL, Gannon JR: Physical ex amination of the athletic
 process is palpable.
dog: biomechanics in rehabilitation. Papers presented at First
Nerves
International Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical
Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Aug 7-11, 1999, Corvallis,
No nerves are readily palpable in the neck and trunk.
Ore.
Arteries
11. Kapandji IA: Physiology of the joints, vot lll, New York,
1974, Churchill Livingstone.
The heartbeat can be felt over the left ventral thorax, and
12. Twomey LT,
Taylor JR:
 Lumbar posture, movement
the pulse can be felt from the carotid artery. No veins are
and mechanics. In Twomey LT, Taylor JR, ed: Physical
 palpable in the neck and trunk, but with compression at the
therapy of the low back, New York, 1987, Churchill
thoracic inlet, the extermal jugular vein is palpable
Livingstone.
13. Lee D: The pelvic girdle, New York, 1989, Churchill
Lymph Nodes
Livingstone.
 The inguinal lymph nodes are palpable.
14. Norkin CC, Levangie PK: Joint structure and function:
α comprehensive analysis, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1992, FA
Davis.
Summary
15. Basinger RR et al: Osteofascial compartment syndrome in
the dog, Vet Surg 126:427-434, 1987.
This chapter presents canine anatomy in the context of
16. Wentink GH: The action of the hindlimb musculature of the
association learming and the relevant anatomy for move-
dog in walking, Acta Anat 96:70-80, 1976.
ment rehabilitation. Some of the relevant biomechanics
17. Nickel R, Schummer A, Seiferle E, et al: The locomotor
that enhance association leaming have been included.
system of the domestic mammais, New York, 1986,
Knowledge of relevant anatomy and biomechanics is
Spri nger- Verlag.
-sp pun uonouny juauaaou supusrapun ui quou
18. McKee WM, Macias C, May C, et al: Ossification of the
function in animals.
infraspinatus tendon-bursa in 13 dogs, Vet Rec 161:846-52,
2007.
19. McGonagle L: Respiratory physical therapy for animals,
REFERENCES
Orthopaed Phys Ther Pract 11:47-48, 1999.
1. Riegger-Krugh C, Millis D: Canine anatomy and biomechan-
 20. Evans HE, de Lahunta A: Miller's guide to the dissection of
ics I (forelimb), LaCrosse, Wis, Jan 2000, Orthopedic
the dog, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders.
Section, American Physical Therapy Association (home study
 21. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Brinker, Piermattei, and Flo's hand-
course).
book of small animal orthopedics and fracture repair, ed 3,
2. Riegger-Krugh C, Weigel J: Canine anatomy and biome-
Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders.
chanics Il (hindlimb), LaCrosse, Wis, Feb 2000, Orthopedic
Section, American Physical Therapy Association (home
study course)
SUGGESTED READING
3. Riegger-Krugh C, Millis D: Canine anatomy and biomechanics
IIl (spine), LaCrosse, Wis, March 2000, Orthopedic Section,
General Canine Anatomy Texts and References
American Physical Therapy Association (home study course).
Bloomberg MS, Dee JF, Taylor RA: Canine sports medicine and
4. Evans HE: Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 3, Philadelphia,
surgery, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
1993, WB Saunders.
Boyd JS: Clinical anatomy, Boston, 1995, Mosby- Wolfe.
5. Mann FA, Wagner-Mann C, Tangner CH: Manual goniomet-
De Lahunta A, Habel RE: Applied veterinary anatomy, Philadel-
tic measurement of the canine pelvic limb, J Am Anim Hosp
phia, 1986, WB Saunders.
Assoc 24:189-194, 1988.
Douglas SW, Williamson HD: Veterinary radiologicat interpreta-
6. Komarek V: Vertebrae infex ae, Folia Vet 29: 103-125, 1985.
tion, Phitadetphia, 1970, Lea & Febiget.
7. Millis DL: Laboratory manual for canine physicat therapy
1, LaCrosse, Wis, 1999, Orthopedic Section, American Phys-
Canine Anatomy Atlases
ical Therapy Association.
 Boyd JS, Paterson D, Msay AH: A cotor atlas of clinical anatomy
 8. Newton CD: Normal joint range of motion in the dog and 
of the dog and cat, Bucks, UK, 1991, Mosby- Wolfe.
cat. Appendix B. In Textbook of small animal orthopedics,
Popesko P: Attas of topographicat anatomy of the domestic
 Philadelphia, 1985, JB Lippincott.
animais: 1, 11, 1ll, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1979, WB Saunders.
Tissue Healing: Tendons,
Ligaments, Bone, Muscles.
and Cartilage
Andrea Henderson and Darryl Millis
njury to tissue initiates a complex series of events
wound depends on the severity of the wound and degree
 involving many cellular and biochemical responses
of contamination. The contribution by neutrophils in a
Lthat ultimately result in wound healing. The series of
noncontaminated wound is not essential for normal wound
events depends on the severity of the injury and the tissues
healing.1.5
involved. The goal is regeneration or repair of the injured
 Macrophages appear within the wound approximately
 Or traumatized tissue. Bone generally restores tissue archi-
24 to 48 hours after neutrophil migration. The infux of
tecture by regeneration of the normal cell population while
macrophages into the wound appears key to the transition
other connective tissues respond by repair of the injured
from the infammatory phase to the reparative phase and
area. The wound repair response is generally described by
oeuu ay on euan ae au gt'ledai punom adoidde
three major phases: infammation, reparative (proliferative
functions: phagocytosis, wound debridement, matrix syn-
or fibroblastic), and remodeling (maturation).1-3 These
thesis regulation, cell recruitment and activation, and angio-
phases of healing overlap, and their sequence and timing
genesis. Phagocytosis and wound debridement occur with
vary with the tissue involved and the severity of the injury.
the release of oxygen radicals, nitric oxide, and collage-
The focus of this chapter is the basic wound healing
nases.? Working in conjunction with neutrophils, macro-
response as well as the specific healing patterms of bone,
phages create an optimal environment for entering the
 muscle, tendon, ligament, and cartilage.
reparative (fibroblastic) phase of wound healing. This activ-
ity is at a maximum in the first 3 to 4 days after injury. In
General Wound Healing
addition, macrophages release a host of cytokines, growth
factors, prostaglandins, and enzymes that subsequently
activate and mediate angiogenesis and fibroplasia.? The
Inflammatory Phase
 macrophage appears to be the central figure in control of
Most tissues undergo an initial infammatory phase that
cellular and biochemical events in general wound healing.
involves an acute vascular response followed by cellular
The presence of macrophages also attracts and activates
 infltration.3 The immediate vascular component of the
lymphocytes, whose function remains controversial.1.3
response is centered around hemostasis in the wound.
Lymphocytes secrete lymphokines such as interferons and
Blood vessel disruption within the wound allows extravas-
interleukins that stimulate fibroblast migration and colla-
cular movement of blood elements and exposure of suben-
-de yead on sieae Aanoe ul yet'siaus uas
dothelial collagen to platelets, causing activation of the
mately 6 days after injury.'
coagulation cascade.3- The result is formation of a fibrin
Reparative Phase
network to support the hemostatic plug and act as a scaf-
fold for cellular infiltration.
The reparative (proliferative or fibroblastic) phase of
The cellular aspect of the inflammatory phase follows
wound healing is characterized by the cellular response of
the initial vascular response. The release of cytokines asso-
endothelial cells and fibroblasts.'3 Fibroblast proliferation
ciated with the hemostatic plug and increased vascular
and migration predominate and are followed by matrix
permeability incites the chemotaxis of cells into the wound
synthesis, including collagen, elastin, and proteoglycans.
environment (Figure 6-1). Neutrophils are the frst cells
The fibroblasts begin appearing in the wound within 3 days
migrating into the area, appearing by 6 hours after injury
of injury; however, there is a lag phase of 2 to 3 days before
and peaking over a 2- to 3-day period.3.s The roles of
 initiation of collagen production with maximal proteogly-
the neutrophil are initial debridement and phagocytosis
can synthesis not occurring until 2 weeks after injury.
of microorganisms, thereby minimizing the potential for
Matrix synthesis increases over the following few weeks
infection. The extent of neutrophil action within the
with concurrent increases in tensile strength.
In addition, endothelial cells adjacent to the wound
begin to proliferate and form new capillaries that gradually
edition.
 migrate into the wound. The newly developing capillaries
79
80
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Wound healing
Debris
00
0
Hematoma
Capillary
~Neutrophils
Platelets
Figure 6-1 Inflammatory (A) and reparative (B) phases of
Macrophage
Cytokines
wound healing.
A
 migration
Capillary
Collagen
synthesis
B
Fibroblast migration
Box 6-1
Healing Timeline: General
Box 6-2
Healing Timeline: Skin
Infammation
Infammation
Immediate to 3-5 days
N/A
Repair
Repair
72 hr to 2 wk
Collagen stabilizes at approximately 21 days
Remodeling/Maturation
Remodeling/Maturation
Occurs in 2-3 wk (max collagen deposition) to 1 yr
N/A
Healing/Strength Characteristics
Healing/Strength Characteristics
Varies
Occurs in 21 days (20% normal strength) to 1 yr (70% normal
Implications for Rehabilitation
strength)
N/A
Implications for Rehabilitation
 Rates are generalizations of individual tissue healing. Results
Minimal effect
from each injury vary depending on the severity, chronicity, and
age of the individual.
inferior collagen fibers (type Ill) and replacement with the
follow immediately behind the migrating fibroblast and
fibers suitable for the specific tissue involved (generally
collagen scaffold and continue until normal ox ygen tension
type I collagen). In addition, decreasing proteoglycan con-
in the wound is restored. This dense network of macro-
 centration leads to a decrease in water content, resulting in
phages, fibroblasts, and neovascularization during the pro-
compression of the collagen fibers. As fibers become closer
liferative phase is generally recognized as granulation
in proximity because of realignment and compression,
tissue.
increased surface area is available for cross-linking, sub-
sequently increasing tensile strength. Thus a proper equi-
Remodeling (Maturation) Phase
librium between collagenolysis and matrix accumulation
 The remodeling phase is the final aspect of wound healing
becomes essential.
during which collagen fibers reorient parallel to lines of
stress and strain and the fibers cross link in a stable forma-
Bone Healing
tion.7′ This is the most important aspect of wound healing
for commective tissues, because appropriate collagen depo-
Bone Structure
sition and alignment are critical to adequate tensile strength
development in the repaired tissue. Although collagen
Bone is a dynamic tissue composed of 35% organic
deposition reaches a maximal point 2 to 3 weeks after
injury, tensile strength continues to progressively increase
 prises cellular constituents (osteocytes, osteoblasts, and
 Over the course of approximately 1 year (Box 6-1 and Box
osteoclasts) and matrix components. The osteocytes are
6-2). This period allows for removal of biomechanically
cells of mature bone that remain within spaces (lacunae)
Chapter 6
Tissue Healing: Tendons, Ligaments, Bone, Muscles, and Cartilage
81
surrounded by lamellar bone and are responsible for normal
small vascular channels are surrounded by layers of lamel-
mineral homeostasis. Osteoblasts are responsible for
lar bone.91 These channels in the cortical bone provide
osteoid production, and osteoclasts function in bone
resorption.1l12 A fine balance of bone resorption and depo-
Osteal arterioles are the least important contributors of the
sition is maintained for mineral homeostasis as well as
vascular supply in healthy intact bone and are primarily of
continuous remodeling secondary to mechanical stresses
concerm in areas of soft tissue attachment. Injury to the
placed on the bone in accordance with Wolff's law which
 bone results in disruption of the vascular supply to varying
states that a bone in a healthy individual will adapt to the
degrees depending on the severity of the fracture. If the
forces under which it is placed.12.13
endosteal supply remains intact, it will predominate during
Bone matrix is composed of predominately type I col-
healing. However, if the endosteal supply is disrupted, as
lagen and ground substance containing glycosaminogly-
in most fractures, the periosteal support becomes extremely
important, thus making careful maintenance and handling
with the collagen fibrils and serve as the primary reservoir
of soft tissue attachments crucial to healing (Box 6-3).14
for overall calcium homeostasis. Hydroxyapatite crystals
Primary Bone Healing
of calcium and phosphorus are aligned with the collagen
fibrils and provide the structural rigidity to bone.1l.12 This
As discussed previously, bone is one of the few tissues that
 unique arrangement between collagen and mineral creates
can undergo direct cellular regeneration to restore 100%
the viscoelastic property of bone with the crystal supplying
of the original biomechanical properties. This can occur
resistance to compressive forces and the collagen provid-
 through two major types of healing, primary or secondary.
ing tensile support. 12
Primary, or direct, bone healing occurs when there is a
Blood supply to bone is primarily based on the nutrient
minimal fracture gap with rigid stability, and it proceeds
artery that bifurcates into ascending and descending
by either contact or gap healing. Contact healing involves
branches within the medullary cavity (Figure 6-2). In
the direct formation of bone across a fracture line less than
 addition, there is vascular support from metaphyseal arter-
0.1 mm wide by creating resorption cavities, or "cutting
ies and periosteal arterioles.1l The metaphyseal vessels
cones,' through the Haversian canals parallel to the long
anastomose with the nutrient artery branches within the
medullary canal to provide complete collateral circulation.
front edge of the resorption cavity across the fracture line
The vascular fow is centrifugal, with elevated pressure
and remove bone and calcifed matrix in preparation for
in the medullary cavity driving blood toward the perios-
osteoblastic activity immediately following. Finally, nutri-
teum. The efferent system is a venous drainage system
tional support is supplied by capillary loops following the
using periosteal venules and the medullary venous sinus.
Cortical vessels fow through Haversian canals in which
remodeling continues across the fracture line until the sur-
rounding bone has been remodeled into new Haversian
systems.
Cortex
Medulla
When the fracture line is greater than 0.1 mm but less
than 0.5 mm, primary bone union can still occur through
 gap healing.0j6 This distance cannot be directly crossed
Blood
supply to
by a resorption cavity. As a result, lamellar bone produced
bone
Ascending
from cells lining the medullary cavity and periosteum first
branch
fills the void in a transverse direction. Subsequently.
Nutrient 
resorption cavities cross the newly formed lamellar bone
 artery
and again create new Haversian systems in the proper
contact healing may occur in different portions of the same
fracture line."6 with primary bone healing, there is little
radiographic callus formation, and the fracture line gradu-
Descending
ally disappears. Although direct healing entails direct for-
Haversian
 branch
canals
mation of lamellar bone and remodeling of Haversian
systems without intermediate fbrous or cartilaginous
tissue, it does not reduce the time for fracture healing, and
weeks to months may still be required before complete
union.' In fact, early stability is generally decreased when
Metaphyseal
compared with secondary healing, typically requiring
 arteries
longer periods before removal of stabilizing implants.'
Figure 6-2  Blood supply to bone.
Radiographic evaluation is generally performed at 4- to
82
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Box 6-3
Healing Timeline: Bone
Inflammation
nature and location of the fracture (faster in sites with abundant
Primary and secondary bone healing follow similar timelines.
cancellous bone and highly vascularized marrow), presence or
Immediate to 72 hr (hematoma and inflammation, secondary
 absence of concurrent disease and surgical fixation method.&s
bone healing)
Clinical union defined as ability to withstand load so that
fixation can be removed. In general, bone achieves clinical
Repair
union according to the following timelines'':
 Radiographic healing (secondary): appearance of callus at
Puppies under 3 months: 2-4 wk
10-12 days, disappearance of fracture line within 30 days.&
Puppies 3-6 months: 4-12 wk
Disappearance of fracture line radiographically as early as
 Puppies 6-12 months: 5-8 wk to 3-5 mo
30 days with secondary bone healing. Primary bone healing
·
Adult dogs (1 year of age or older): 7-12 wk to 5-12 mo
takes longer.
Rate is faster for IM pins and external skeletal fixation than for
Remodeling/Maturation
bone plating. Destabilize external fixators at approximately
Woven bone development over mineralized callus. Complete
4-6 wk in dogs.20 21
remodeling of the callus 90 days after fracture repair for a
Implications for Rehabilitation
simple fracture.& Primary bone healing (direct union, no callus
 Rehabilitation goals throughout healing have been suggested.&6
formation) produces less early stability than secondary, and
During inflammatory phase (immediately up to 2-3 days after
requires implants to be in place for a longer time than with
injury), decrease pain, minimize soft tissue inflammation,
secondary healing.!'
 maintain joint health/Range of motion (ROM) and establish 
Healing/Strength Characteristics
safe, controlled mobility, depending on fracture stability.
Regaining 100% tensile strength is possible because of
During repair phase (3 days to 4-6 wk after injury), small,
regeneration. Healing and strength are faster with secondary
gradually increasing cyclic loading to increase micromotion
bone healing and callous formation compared with primary
 and improve callus formation with secondary healing;
bone healing. Rate of healing depends on presence of
continued maintenance of joint health through ROM, active
interfragmentary strain (faster at less than 2%), animal age,
Or passive.
Cortex
Cortex
Cutting cone
Medulla
Callus
Osteoid
production
Figure 6-3 Bone healing. A, Primary bone
healing with the formation of cutting cones.
Cartilage
B, Secondary bone healing.
formation
Hematoma
Osteoclasts
Capillary
Primary
Secondary
loops
bone
bone
healing
healing
A
Osteoblasts
B
6-week intervals until the fracture line has resolved. The
fracture gap is greater than 0.5 mm and is characterized by
 goal is to achieve recovery of function and early weight-
bearing with implants employing interfragmentary com-
formation is related to the amount of instability at the
 pression so rehabilitation can begin at an early stage
fracture site. In general, secondary bone healing proceeds
Secondary Bone Healing
Similar to basic wound healing, hemostasis is the initial
Secondary, or indirect, bone healing occurs when there is
response at the time of injury, initiating the inflammatory
less rigidity or absence of anatomic reduction such that the
phase. Immediate hemorrhage and hematoma formation
Chapter 6
Tissue Healing: Tendons, Ligaments, Bone, Muscles, and Cartilage
83
occur within the fracture gap in addition to the surrounding
stimulates healing as long as the micromotion created does
soft tissues that may be damaged. Destruction of the
not exceed the acceptable interfragmentary strain for
Haversian canals at the site of injury causes osteocyte
osteoid deposition.' If the mechanical load exceeds the
death and necrosis of bone. The process proceeds with the
strength of the reparative tissues, inhibition of bone healing
migration of neutrophils followed by macrophages into the
or re-fracture occurs. Thus it is important that no or
injured site for removal of necrotic debris. In addition,
minimal motion between fracture fragments occurs early
biochemical mediators such as bone morphogenetic pro-
in the healing phase to allow adequate establishment of the
teins, platelet-derived growth factor, osteonectin, prosta-
extraosseous blood supply. After the vascular supply is
 glandins, and osteocalcin enter the fracture site tocontribute
established and callus formation has occurred, then con-
to bone healing.° As the inflammatory response previously
trolled axial micromotion can stimulate appropriate bone
described subsides (24 to 72 hours), the repair process
remodeling. As such, destabilization of extermal fixator
begins.9.10. 19
frames has been recommended at approximately 4 to 6
The reparative phase begins with the surrounding tissue
weeks following frame application to "dynamize' the frac-
 providing mesenchymal cells, which enter the fracture site 
ture line.20.21
to form osteoblasts, chondroblasts, and fibroblasts. During 
Electrical fields have been demonstrated in nonmal and
the initial 3 weeks, a fibrous and cartilaginous "soft"’ callus
injured bone and are related to either mechanical forces or
is formed by the deposition of types I, II, IMl, V, IX, and X
 bioelectric potentials.22 Strain-related potentials occur sec-
collagen synthesized by mesenchymal cells. Types III
ondary to mechanical loading of the bone and are related
and V collagen initially appear during the inflammatory
to piezoelectric activity resulting from collagen deforma-
phase, whereas types I and IX collagen peak during the
tion and fuid fowing through space in the extracellular
matrix." Bioelectric potentials are generated by cellular
after injury. Collagen type Iis initially present at low levels
functions associated with metabolic processes in the cell.2
in the first 2 weeks but becomes the predominant type by
These electrical fields can be stimulated exogenously and
day 14.8.13 The function of the soft callus is to unite the
have been demonstrated to favorably affect bone remodel-
fracture ends and decrease interfragmentary motion and
ing. Electrical stimulation can be provided by invasive or
strain.16 The fibrocartilage deposited is gradually trans-
noninvasive methods. Invasive stimulation includes direct
formed to bone by the process of endochondral ossification
surgical implantation of a cathode at the site of stimulation
and the anode placed in the surrounding soft tissue. Non-
Chondrocytes progress to a hypertrophied stage followed
invasive stimulation can be accomplished by capacitive or
by mineralization of the surrounding matrix. Invasion by
inductive coupling of current to the appropriate site. With
capillaries brings cells that resorb the mineralized cartilage
capacitive coupling, the electrodes are placed on the skin
matrix, produce osteoid, and deposit bone. This transition
on opposite sides of the stimulation site, and electrical
from soft cartilaginous callus to hard bony callus is directly
felds between 1 and 10 mV/cm are generated. Inductive
related to the blood supply available and the interfragmen-
 coupling uses extermal electromagnetic coils to establish
tary strain at the fracture gap. With high interfragmentary
an electromagnetic field of time-varying or pulsed nature
strain or poor blood supply, activity of osteoblasts and
to create a secondary electrical field in the bone.22 Cur-
 Osteoid production is limited, and the callus remains as
rently, the mechanism of electrical stimulation of bone
healing is not completely understood, but its use has been
The remodeling or maturation phase proceeds following
the transition from soft to hard callus. The fracture gap is
Alterations in endocrine balance can infuence bone
bridged and stabilized with endosteal and periosteal callus
healing as well. Hormones such as parathormone, calci-
consisting primarily of woven bone that must be remodeled
tonin, vitamin D, and thyroid may affect bone resorption
to lamellar bone according to weight-bearing forces as
 and deposition.'° Corticosteroids and diabetes mellitus can
directed by Wolff's law. In addition, the normal blood
 have inhibitory effects on bone healing.0.2 In addition,
supply is reestablished. As the endosteal callus is gradually
there are numerous other miscellaneous factors that must
remodeled, the medullary cavity and its blood supply are
be considered with respect to fracture healing, including
restored. Similarly, as cortical bone is restored, the Haver-
patient age, fracture configuration, fracture location, and
sian system is re-created and the normal centrifugal vascu-
whether the site was grafted.10.16 Young patients heal faster
lar patterm can returm with concurrent resorption of the
than geriatric individuals. The fracture configuration is
temporary extraosseous supply.8.19
also important because highly comminuted fractures or
those with significant bone loss require more time to
Factors Affecting Healing
achieve bony union. Furthenmore, fractures closer to the
Biomechanical factors at the fracture site are important to
metaphysis in locations of high cancellous bone, or those
healing. Wolff's law has a tremendous effect on bone depo-
 pi a a   u aau e
sition and resorption. The stress placed on the bone
potential.
84
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Efforts to enhance fracture healing continue along many
and sarcoplasmic reticulum result in different types of
pathways. The ability to stimulate bone healing with the
fibers (slow or fast twitch) for various muscular functions
use of growth factors is a future possibility, and research
and fatigue resistance.
continues in the field of electrical stimulation. In addition,
Muscle Injury and Healing
research has demonstrated potential advantages to using
ultrasoumd and extracorporeal shockwave technology to
Injury to muscle occurs as a result of lacerations, contu-
sions, ruptures, ischemia, and strains. A strain is described
as an injury to the muscle or tendon with a tendency to
Muscle Healing
 Occur near the myotendinous junction. Strains are described
 as grade 1 through 4, with grade 1 strains being disruption
of a few muscle fibers and grade 4 being complete rupture
Muscle Structure
 Of the muscle belly.3° Often the cause of nonpenetrating
Skeletal muscle is composed of aggregations of muscle
injuries is forceful contraction of the muscle belly with
cells termed fibers (myofibers), consisting of multiple
concurrent passive extension.?8 Damage to the muscle
nuclei within each fber (Figure 6-4). Each individual
results in tearing of the muscle fibers and disruption of the
muscle belly is composed of numerous fibers bound
vascular or connective tissue support. The problem may be
together by connective tissue into multiple diffuse bundles
acute or chronic, and the severity may vary from mild
(fascicles). A dense fibrous connective tissue sheath termed
injury to complete rupture.
the epimysium surrounds the entire muscle. The perimy-
 Muscle healing progresses in the same basic pattermn as
sium is the connective tissue support surrounding each
general wound healing (Box 6-4). An initial period of 
fiber bundle within the muscle belly and the endomysium
hemostasis and inflammation precedes repair. Following
represents sheets of connective tissue surrounding each
independent muscle fiber.27.28 Capillaries, nerves, and lym-
phatics traverse to the muscle fibers through the surround-
ing connective tissue sheaths, eventually reaching the
Box 6-4
Healing Timeline: Skeletal Muscle
endomysium, where a rich capillary network highly sensi-
Inflammation
tive to sympathetic vasomotor tone is established around
Immediate to 72 hr (inflammation)
 the individual myofbers.29
 Each muscle fiber has an extensive subcellular struc-
Repair
ture. Myofibrils within the muscle fiber are composed of
both thick (myosin) and thin (actin) filaments, troponin,
collagen ratio > 6 wk
and tropomyosin, which function to provide the contractile
Remodeling/Maturation
 properties of the muscle fiber.2729 The myofbrils are sur-
Ratio of functional muscle fiber to scar tissue depends greatly
rounded closely by the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which
 on size of gap at site of injury
plays a role in storage and release of calcium for muscle
Healing/Strength Characteristics
function.9 Variations in the composition of the myofibers
Normal tissue regeneration is required for return to full 
function; occurs in minimum 4-6 wk.28 Complete muscle
lacerations near midbelly in rabbits showed final return to 50%
of tension-producing ability and 80% of normal contraction
Muscle Anatomy
shortening at 12 wk.?′ Partial tears have an improved outcome
for tensile strength; return to 60% of tensile strength and
Epimysium
normal contractile ability achieved with partial lacerations at
12 wk.7
Myofiber
(muscle cell)
Implications for Rehabilitation
Decreases in muscle contraction strength directly related to
degree of injury and ingrowth of fibrous tissue. Rehabilitation
depends on extent of injury (i.e., degree of strain, rupture). In
mild strains, brief (3-5 day) immobilization followed by active
muscle contractions in mobilization demonstrates better
penetration of muscle fibers through the scar tissue and better
muscle strength and size. For muscle tears, immobilize for a
Myofibril
minimum of 2-3 wk to protect repair, promote new collagen,
Perimysium
and sustain remobilization stresses.3.34 For rehabilitation of
complete rupture, moderate activity can begin at 4-8 wk. At
Endomysium
 8-12 wk, unrestricted activity may be allowed.73
Figure 6-4  Anatomy of muscle connective tissue.
Chapter 6
Tissue Healing: Tendons, Ligaments, Bone, Muscles, and Cartilage
85
hematoma formation, the edema and ischemia can result
Considering the normal timing associated with wound
in necrosis of adjacent ruptured muscle fibers.3l The initial
healing, recommendations have been made for 4 to 6
 inflammatory phase continues with neutrophil and macro-
weeks of protected activity before increased activity.23
phage removal of necrotic debris during the first 24 to 72
 Adequate approximation of the myofiber ends and con-
hours.23.30 A distinct relationship between macrophage pen-
trolled mobilization are extremely important to adequate
etration and myofber regeneration has been suspected;
long-term muscle healing and function.
however, the essential component is reestablishment of the
vascular supply to the injured fibers.?9 The repair phase
Tendon Healing
follows and is a competitive process involving either
regeneration of functional myofibers or production of
 Tendon Structure
fibrous scar tissue, depending on the severity of the injury
and the size of muscle gap.30 The repair by scar tissue
 Tendons, similar to ligaments, are composed primarily of
 production is not as desirable because of the higher chance
type I collagen (>95%) organized into parallel bundles
of recurrent injury and a decrease in muscle contractile
with surrounding extracellular matrix. Fibroblasts or teno-
strength of approximately 50% 30.32
cytes are the predominant cellular component of the tissue
As in general wound healing, the repair phase continues
and function in repair and maintenance of the structure.
with production of extracellular matrix by fibroblasts
The individual collagen bundles are surrounded by a loose
including proteoglycans, fibronectin, and collagen. Type
connective tissue termed endotenon. The epitenon covers
IMI collagen appears within the injured site in the first 3
the entire group of bundles, and the paratenon covers and
days and generally precedes the thicker type I collagen
separates different tendon bellies, providing the potential
fiber production.33 This extracellular matrix provides a
scaffold for myofiber regeneration across the injury site.30
either vascular (lacking synovial sheaths) or avascular
Myoblastic stem cells from the surrounding wound envi-
s a  ( s e m s)
ronment (satellite cells) and mononuclear leukocytes
vial sheaths lack the typical paratenon. The blood supply
migrate to the viable ends of myofibers and align across
to the tendon arises from three primary sources: the mus-
the gap, providing a route for myotubules to cross the
culotendinous junction, the osseous point of insertion, and
injured site and repair the myofiber.30 The altermative form
adjacent muscle and paratenon.2
of healing occurs when there is an inadequate source of
Tendon Healing
myoblasts, inadequate vascularization, inadequate innerva-
tion, or excessive stress across the injured site creating a
 The process of tendon healing follows the general course
of wound healing as previously discussed with initial fibro-
deposition and fibroblastic activity lead to formation of
plasia and collagen deposition followed by maturation and
fibrous tissue within the injured site. The result is a barrier
reorientation of the collagen fibrils (Box 6-5). The primary
to myofibers crossing the injury site and inadequate returm
variable in tendon healing is whether the tendon is a vas-
to normal muscle function.
cular paratenon-covered tendon or a synovial-sheathed
Timing of appropriate stress and motion at the injury
tendon. Paratenon-covered tendons rely less heavily on
site is important to the type of healing that occurs. For
the intrinsic blood supply, as fbroblasts and capillaries
optimal muscle fiber healing and returm to maximal func
invade the injured tendon ends from the surrounding
tion, mobility across the injury site should not begin until
tissue. This establishes the "one wound-one scar' theory.
healing is well under way, such as in the reparative or early
With synovial-lined tendons, a longer period is required
remodeling phases. During the reparative and remodeling
to achieve adequate tensile strength and healing because
phases, the muscle fibers can be aligned parallel to the line
 healing depends on the tendon's intrinsic blood supply or
 of action if appropriate stresses are allowed.3°0 If motion is 
inflammatory repair tissue infiltration. Thus immobiliza-
 excessive, gap widening occurs and the muscle heals with
tion is extremely important in the initial period to resist
more fibrous tissue.
gap fonmation at the repair site and allow adequate
Prolonged immobilization allows penetration of regen-
healing 30.36.37
 erating myofibers and decreased fbrous tissue fonmation;
Early descriptions of tendon healing involved an extrin-
however, the muscle fibers tend to orient inappropriately
sic process in which an infux of cells from the synovial
to lines of stress and tension. This decreases the tensile
 sheath, paratenon, or epitenon allowed phagocytosis, fibro-
strength of the muscle fibers, and if the fbrous tissue
elongates during the remodeling phase, significant loss
infammatory stage is seen within the first 3 days and is
of muscle power can occur.28.30 An initial immobilization
quickly followed by randomly oriented collagen deposition
period of 3 to 5 days followed by controlled mobiliza-
by the fifth day. The reparative phase follows with progres-
tion accelerates the appearance of type I collagen fiber
sively increasing collagen content through the first 4
weeks. Similar to muscle healing. the initial collagen is
86
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Box 6-5
Healing Timeline: Tendon
Occurs primarily in synovial sheathed tendons with minimal
Inflammation
damage to the synovial lining. If there is severe damage to
 Immediate to 72 hr
 the synovial sheath, the extrinsic mechanism overwhelms
Repair
the capacity for intrinsic healing. The intrinsic patterm of
 Day 5: random collagen orientation, progressively increasing
cellular proliferation and sequencing is similar to extrinsic
for 4 wk; collagen production peaks 5-12 days after injury,
healing; however, there is a balance between epitenon and
markedly decreased by day 60
endotenon contributions and there is minimal adhesion
formation.* The intrinsic healing process can be stimu-
Remodeling/Maturation
 Takes a minimum 28 days for collagen fibers to align according
lated by early controlled mobilization, decreasing the risk
to stress; tendons appear normal by 112 days
 of adhesion formation and providing greater tensile strength
as a result of proper alignment of collagen fibers along the
Healing/Strength Characteristics
lines of stress.4146 Early controlled passive motion begin-
At 6 wk, 56% normal tensile strength occurs, 79% at 1 year
ning within 21 days of repair appears to be ideal; however,
and beyond.3 Surgical repair of fresh gap required for
the duration and magnitude of motion for optimal healing
appropriate organization of scar at 6 wk. Tendons with gaps >
3 mm have lower tensile strength at 6 wk compared to those
remain unknown. In addition, patient compliance in veteri-
with smaller gaps.74 Synovial (avascular) tendons require longer
nary medicine is a problem and must be considered to
healing times than vascular tendons.
Implications for Rehabilitation
Tendon Repair
01 dn 1oy pepoou aq Aeu suopuol 1oiel 1oy loddns 1iedei-isod
The goal of treatment is to minimize adhesion formation
6 wk. Method and extent varies depending on surgeon
 and retum to maximum function. The appropriate treat-
preference, location of the injury and patient behavior.34
Prolonged immobilization may be detrimental. Complete
ment is surgical apposition of the transected or injured
immobilization for longer than 21 days results in reduced
tendon ends. Numerous suture patterms have been designed
vascularization at the wound site.7 with full or partial
to maximize tensile strength and attempt to minimize gap
transection and surgical repair, passive mobilization exercises
formation at the injury site. Commonly used techniques
appear to be optimal to begin at day 5 following surgery.76
include the locking-loop and three-loop pulley pat-
Early, controlled passive mobilization continuing for 21 days
terms.35.47-52 Adherence to several fundamental concepts is
appears to augment intrinsic healing, increase tensile strength
required. Meticulous hemostasis is necessary to minimize
and reduce adhesion formation.41-46 One study showed active
hematoma formation within the injury site and minimize
mobilization (cage activity) was not detrimental at 3 wk after
 adhesion formation. In addition, atraumatic technique and
injury for repaired partial flexor tendon lacerations up to 60%.
minimal handling of the tendon ends is important. Suture
 Conservative exercise with light weightbearing may begin at
materials should be monofilament to minimize reactivity
6 wk, because having 25-50% of normal tensile strength for
and nonabsorbable to allow time for the returm of adequate
tendons has been considered adequate for withstanding normal
muscle force. Minimum 12 wk for less restrained, more active
tensile strength. Monofilament suture also allows efficient
loading.78 79 Light exercise to maintain ROM and stimulate 
gliding through the tissue and even distribution of weight-
healing callus cells. Some weightbearing is required for
 bearing forces and tendon tension.28.35
maturation of callus. Sufficient tensile strength return for
normal activity load bearing may take months.
Ligament Healing
Ligament Structure
generally type Ill, which is replaced with the biomechani-
 Ligaments are dense connective tissue structures consist-
San ue a se uoo I ada ians 
ing of fbroblasts, water, collagen, proteoglycans, fibronec-
progress.840 Research has demonstrated that healing of
tendon ends by collagen deposition requires a minimum of
tend to widen at insertion points to blend with the perios-
28 days for fibers to align parallel to lines of stress. In
teum and generally provide support to the articulating sur-
addition, collagen bundles are distinguishable from normal
faces. Ligaments are primarily composed of long parallel
Sueau jo uoneneag sg Ainju rae shep zil nun suopua
or spiral collagenous fibers that are strategically arranged
of canine triceps tenotomies (a vascular tendon lacking a
in multiple directions to restrain the joint from excessive
synovial sheath) demonstrated only 56% of breaking
excursions secondary to both normal and abnormal
strength at 6 weeks and only 79% tensile strength 1 year
motions.&11 1
Histologically, the fibroblasts have elongated
following injury.36
 basophilic nuclei lying between collagen bundles.S3 The
More recently, evidence has been presented of the
cellular and collagenous densities vary with each ligament.
 potential for intrinsic repair controlled predominately by
Collagen makes up 70% to 80% of ligament dry weight
Chapter 6
Tissue Healing: Tendons, Ligaments, Bone, Muscles, and Cartilage
87
composition, with the majority being type I fbers and
edematous from perivascular leakage of fuid. This inflam-
approximately 10% being type MI fibers.33 The collagen
matory stage is characterized by an infux of infamma-
fibers are generally crimped or buckled and can be stretched
tory cells as in general wound healing. Monocytes and
out with stress to provide elasticity and the potential to
macrophages are found in the wound by 24 hours and
withstand rapid load application.53
respond by cleaning up the site and transitioning to
the next phase. This stage lasts for approximately 48 to
Ligament Healing
72 hours.'5
Currently, a great deal of information remains unanswered
 The reparative phase begins 2 to 3 days after injury and
regarding timing of ligamentous healing. especially with
persists for approximately 6 weeks." Both cellular and
respect to postoperative mobilization techniques. This is
matrix production predominate, with granulation tissue
because ligaments heal differently depending on the loca-
and vascular ingrowth filling the defect between friable
tion. For example, the healing potential of the medial col-
ligament ends. The scar in the first few weeks is highly
lateral ligament of the stife is very good,53.54 but the cranial
cellular with fbroblasts actively synthesizing primarily
cruciate ligament, which has received the most investiga-
types I and IlI collagen and other extracellular matrix com-
tion, demonstrates virtually no healing response following
 ponents.$ During this aspect of ligament healing, the scar
[ay Aerauas suauest neun seadde i raaamoh s Ainu
cross-sectional area reaches a maximum.3° Type I collagen
according to the same basic pattem of inflammation, repair,
predominates and tensile strength of the ligamentous repair
and remodeling (Box 6-6).5s.56
 tissue increases as time progresses.
Within hours of injury, the defect is flled with an
The final stage of remodeling and maturation progresses
organized hematoma and the surrounding tissue becomes
 as with normal wound healing and may take more than 12
months to complete. At that point, ligament strength is only
50% to 70% of the original tensile strength.s Part of the
Box 6-6
Healing Timeline: Ligament
 lost strength may also be a result of bone loss at the liga-
(Sprain)
ment insertion sites. In general, healing of the midsub-
stance of the ligament progresses more rapidly than the
Inflammation
insertion sites because bone turmover and recovery are
Immediate to 72 hr
slower. Fibroblast and macrophage numbers decrease, and
Repair
the collagen fibers become more densely packed and
2-3 days to 6 wk
Remodeling/Maturation
priate repair of tissue include ligament end apposition,
nutritional status, endocrine imbalances, severity of injury.
N/A
blood supply, and mechanical stresses placed across the
Healing/Strength Characteristics
healing tissue.3ss As with muscle healing, allowing the
 Occurs in several days to more than 1 yr, depending on grade
ligament to heal across a large gap results in excessive scar
(1-II1). At 1 yr, 50-70% tensile strength occurs. Healing
tissue formation that obstructs histologically normal liga-
 properties and rate of healing depend on which ligaments are
involved.80.8 Transected canine stifle medial collateral ligament
 ment from bridging the defect.30
(MCL) strength 52% of controls after 14 wk of healing,
reduced to 14% of controls when cranial cruciate ligament
Articular Cartilage Healing
(CCL) also transected. Transected canine CCL weakness
persists after 4 yr of healing (hence other methods of surgical
repair needed). Lengthening may occur because of gap
Articular Cartilage Structure and Function
formation.
Diarthrodial (synovial) joints consist of two or more
Implications for Rehabilitation
hyaline cartilage surfaces that are tightly adhered to the
Time to begin rehabilitation varies widely depending on the
underlying cortical end plates of apposing bones. Hyaline
ligament involved. When in doubt, parameters for tendon
cartilage is designed to provide a smooth, low-friction,
gliding surface for joint movement and to transmit weight-
may be slowed or decreased with joint motion during
bearing forces to the underlying bone structure.1.3-o Car-
immobilization and stress reduction. No change at 6 wk and
tilage is primarily avascular and without lymphatics. It is
67% reduction at 12 wk in repositioned canine CCL in one
approximately 70% to 80% water by weight with the
study.82 Low-duration (30 min) and high frequency (6 days/wk)
remainder composed of chondrocytes, type II collagen
exercise appears to have greatest benefit to ligament strength
(90% to 95% of the total cartilage collagen), and proteo-
from one study in horses.β Sprain-avulsion fractures at
ligament-bone interface have best prognosis for return to
to the joint surface, which is divided into three zones. The
normal tensile strength; fractures heal within 2-4 mo, which
restores ligament integrity. 4
most superficial layer, the tangential zone, has collagen
fibers aligned parallel to the joint surface, creating primary
88
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
resistance to shear and tensile stresses placed on the carti-
bearing and joint motion also improve the diffusion of
lage surface. Deeper within the cartilage, the collagen
nutrients to the chondrocytes and the removal of waste
fibers become oriented in a more oblique fashion and fonm
metabolites.
the intermediate zone. The fnal, and largest, zone is the
Cartilage Healing
radial zone in which the collagen fibers are oriented in a
Injury to articular cartilage and the subsequent healing
ded into the subchondral bone.57-61
response are directly related to the type of trauma incurred.
Chondrocytes compose less than 10% of the total car-
Similar to the basic patterm of general wound healing, the
tilage volume.61 The chondrocytes are oriented similar to
ideal response includes initial necrosis and infammation,
collagen except for an additional zone of calcification
followed by vascular ingrowth and the reparative phase
 present deep within the cartilage to provide transition to
(Box 6-7). The limiting factor for the repair of articular
the subchondral bone. Surrounding each chondrocyte is the
cartilage is its avascular nature. As a result, injury to the
cartilage matrix separated into three regions classifed as
 articular surface results in two separate responses based on
pericellular, territorial, and interterritorial. The function of
whether the injury is limited to the cartilage surface or
the chondrocyte early in life is primarily cell proliferation
extends into the subchondral bone.62.63
and matrix synthesis. As maturation proceeds, these pro-
cesses slow, with cellular density decreasing and interter-
Box 6-7
Tissue Healing: Articular Cartilage
Proteoglycan  aggregates  provide the  compressive
Partial Thickness
from the intermediate to the radial zones of the cartilage.58
Infammation
The primary constituents of the proteoglycan aggregate
 No inflammatory response—avascular
are a series of glycosaminoglycans attached to a core
Repair
protein, which in turm are linked to a backbone chain
 Mitotic activity ceases 1 wk after injury
of hyaluronic acid. The glycosaminoglycans are composed
Re modeling/Maturation
of chondroitin-6 sulfate, keratan sulfate, and some
 Local chondrocyte activity does not adequately fll the defect at
chondroitin-4 sulfate. These highly sulfated and carboxy-
 1 yr because of lack of inflammatory healing response
lated structures carry negative charges that strongly repel
each other, resulting in stiffy extended aggregates. In addi-
Healing/Strength Characteristics
N/A
tion, they are highly hydrophilic. The resulting osmotic
swelling pressure, along with the fixed anionic charges,
Implications for Rehabilitation
produces dramatic compressive resistance. These products
N/A
are synthesized by chondrocytes and provide supportive
Full Thickness (to subchondral bone)
structure to the collagen fiber network 5661
Inflammation
A capsule surrounds the joint and is created by an outer
Immediate to 3-5 days (inflammatory response from marrow
fibrous layer and an inner synovial membrane. The outer
cells)
fibrous layer, continuous with the periosteum, is composed
Repair
primarily  of  collagen  and  helps  provide mechanical
5-7 days to 2 mo
support. The inner synovial membrane is a thin layer of
Remodeling/Maturation
synovial cells closely associated with a subsynovial vascu-
Occurs in 2-6 mo; by 6 mo repair tissue changed significantly
 membrane is divided into type A synoviocytes, which are
from normal hyaline cartilage. Repaired tissue is fibrous and
inferior to hyaline catilage. At 1 yr, 20% is type II collagen.63
primarily responsible for phagocytic activity, and type B
synoviocytes, which are responsible for hyaluronic acid
Healing/Strength Characteristics
production.57s Synovial fuid is a plasma ultrafltrate from
Defect repair depends on patient age, size, and location of the
defect. Regardless, complete restoration of hyaline articular
the subsynovial plexus, which allows molecules less than
cartilage is very rare.87
12,000 daltons to permeate into the joint. To this ultrafil-
trate, the type B synoviocytes add hyaluronic acid.5758
Implications for Rehabilitation
Synovial fuid provides joint lubrication and cartilage
Continuous passive range of motion (PROM) after injury
appears to improve healing with mainly hyaline cartilage
observed in 60% of defects (adolescent) and 44% of defects
Boundary lubrication is associated with the synovial mem-
(adult) in rabbits undergoing continuous PROM, compared to 
brane, the periphery of the cartilage surface, and hya-
10% or fewer in controls (immobilization in a cast or free-
luronic acid. Hydrostatic lubrication is a process created
range in cages)." Less profound results occur in defects larger
by the weight-bearing force on the cartilage surface, which
than 3 mm in diameter.
pushes water to the surface during weight bearing. Weight
Chapter 6
Tissue Healing: Tendons, Ligaments, Bone, Muscles, and Cartilage
89
Injury limited to the cartilage surface results in a number
concept of early continuous passive motion postopera-
 of secondary responses. A traumatic laceration perpen-
tively, because prolonged immobilization impairs the bio-
dicular to the joint surface (without invasion below the
 mechanical and biochemical healing capacity of articular
calcifed cartilage layer) results in localized death of
the chondrocytes and subsequent loss of matrix support.
for electrical stimulation, cartilage grafting, and the effects
Consequently, a matrix defect occurs that is characterized
 of growth factors on cartilage healing.63
by a lack of vascular infiltration and no inflammatory
Advances for the Future
response. As a result, there is no fibroblastic response, and
the local chondrocytes must proliferate and fill the defect
Wound healing remains an area with tremendous research
with new matrix.62.63 The chondrocytes respond with an
potential. An exciting area of interest includes the potential
 initial increase in mitotic activity adjacent to the defect.64
for modulation of wound healing with the use of various
However, the chondrocytes may not completely fill the
growth factors. Growth factors are low-molecular-weight
 defect and a lesion often remains. With a lesion parallel to
 polypeptide molecules that are located throughout the body
the cartilage surface, a similar response ensues with initial
and have a powerful influence on cellular activity. Factors
limited cellular proliferation and increased proteoglycan
such as transforming growth factor alpha and beta, platelet-
and matrix synthesis to fill the injured site. The primary
derived growth factor, fibroblast growth factor, epidermal
problem is the limited durability of the repair process and
 growth factor, and insulin-like growth factor modulate cel-
the failure to completely replace the cartilage matrix. If
pan aede uo sdaoai o suug Aq e e
the defect is large, then degenerative joint disease may
cells, resulting in stimulation of specific cellular activities.
ensue. It appears that if the defect is small, such as in
These substances may have various effects, including che-
a surgical laceration, it will generally be limited in progres-
motaxis, mitogenesis, cellular activation, and stimulation
sion and not proceed to significant degenerative change
of all aspects of wound healing, with their exogenous use
within the joint.62.63.65
intended to expedite the repair of injured tissues.68-70
Full-thickness injury to the level of the subchondral
Recently, the potential for stem cell application to healing
bone allows access of marrow stem cells and vascular
tissues has generated a great deal of interest. In addition to
capillaries to the cartilage defect. As a result, the injury can
the altered cellular environment generated by the cells, the
respond similar to general wound repair with an initial
potential for stem cells to grow and differentiate into cells
debridement and inflammatory phase. Within 48 hours a
 specific to a particular tissue type is exciting.
fibrin clot forms, providing a scaffold for migration of 
fibroblasts.63.6 Fibroblasts and collagen replace the clot in
Summary
5 to 7 days and metaplasia to fibrocartilage begins. Matrix
Wound healing in most tissues involves an initial process
formation occurs with a proteoglycan-rich environment,
of hemostasis followed by inflammation. This allows for
 and defect repair takes approximately 2 months to com-
debridement of the injured region followed by chemotaxis
plete.6365 Wound healing continues with remodeling and
 of the appropriate cells for production of repair tissue. In
maturation. At 6 months, the glycosaminoglycan concen-
general, the repair process involves production of collagen,
tration decreases significantly and tends to be rich in der-
bone, or myofibrils. Maturation occurs over time, allowing
matan sulfate, which is smaller and less wear resistant than
for appropriate alignment of collagen and tissue for resis-
other glycosaminoglycans. Type I collagen predominates
tance of tensile forces. The initiation of physical rehabilita-
in the early stages but slowly decreases with time (40% at
tion in the postoperative period is important, and the
8 weeks, 20% at 1 year).6 The repair tissue remains more
techniques should be used to augment the maturation phase
fibrous and is biomechanically inferior to the normal sur-
to maximize early retum of tensile strength and function.
rounding hyaline cartilage with a gross distinction perma-
The time of initiation of various therapeutic modalities is
nently remaining 62.63.65
important, and knowledge of the basic patterms of wound
Because of the poor repair potential of articular carti-
healing is imperative.
lage, research has focused on methods of facilitating repair
REFERENCES
of hyaline cartilage. Surgical debridement continues to
play an important role in treatment of articular surface
 1. Fowler D: Principles of wound healing. In Harari J, ed: Surgi-
defects. Arthroscopic shaving of partial-thickness defects
cal complications and wound healing in the small animat
practice, Philadelphia, 1993, WB Saunders.
essentially relieves clinical signs associated with defects;
2. Mast B: Healing in other tissues, Surg Clin North Am 77:529-
however, it does not appear to dramatically alter healing
potential.6263 Recent advances have led to the concept
547, 1997.
3. Witte M, Barbul A: General principles of wound healing.
of perforation or abrasion of the calcifed cartilage
Surg Clin North Am 77:509-528, 1997.
layer and invasion to the subchondral region to elicit vas-
4. Gentty P, Downie H: Blood coagulation. In Swenson MJ, ed:
cular invasion and a local repair response.63.66 Another
Duke's physiotogy of domestic animats, ed 10, Ithaca, NY,
important approach to repair of articular defects is the
1984, Cornell University Press.
90
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
5. Kanzler M, Gorsulowsky D, Swanson N: Basic mechanisms
 27. Goll D, Robson R, Stromer M: Skeletal muscle. In Swenson
in the healing cutaneous wound, J Dermatol Surg Oncol
MJ, ed: Duke's physiology of domestic animats, ed 10,
12:1156-1164, 1986.
Ithaca, NY, 1984, Cornell University Press.
6. Barbul A et al: The effect of in vivo T helper and T suppres-
28. Killings worth C: Repair of injured peripheral nerves, tendons,
sor lymphocyte depletion on wound healing, Ann Surg
and muscles. In Harari J, ed: Surgical complications and
209:479-483, 1989.
wound healing in the small animal practice, Philadelphia,
7. Bailey A, Bazin S, Delaunay A: Changes in the nature of the
1993, WB Saunders.
collagen during development and resorption of granulation
 29. Caplan A et al: Skeletal muscle. In Woo S, Buckwalter J, eds:
tissue, Biochim Biophys Acta 328:383-390, 1978.
Injury and repair of the musculoskeletal soft tissues, Park
 8. Liu S et al: Collagen in tendon, ligament, and bone healing,
Ridge, Il, 1991, American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons
Clin Orthop 318:265-278, 1995.
Symposium.
 9. Kraus K: Healing of bone fractures. In Harari J, ed: Surgical
30. Montgomery R: Healing of muscle, ligaments, and tendons,
complications and wound heating in the small animat prac-
Semin Vet Med Surg 4:304-311, 1989.
tice, Philadelphia, 1993, WB Saunders.
 31. Nikolaou P et al: Biomechanical and histological evaluation
10. Mann F, Payne J: Bone healing, Sem Vet Med Surg 4:312-
of muscle after controlled strain injury, Am J Sports Med
321, 1989.
15:9-14, 1987.
11. Evans H, Christensen G: Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 2,
 32. Garrett W et al: Recovery of skeletal muscle after laceration 
Philadelphia, 1979, WB Saunders.
and repair, J Hand Surg 9A:683-692, 1984.
 12. Wasserman R: Bones. In Swenson MJ, ed: Duke's physiotogy
33. Lehto M, Duance, V, Restall D: Collagen and fibronectin in
of domestic animats, ed 10, Ithaca, NY, 1984, Cornell Umi-
a healing skeletal muscle injury, J Bone Joint Surg 67B:820-
versity Press.
828, 1985.
13. Styles S, Einhorn T: Fracture healing and responses to skel-
34. Piras A: Muscle and tendon injuries—diagnosis, treatment,
etal injury. In Dee R, Hurst LC, Gruber MA, Kottmeier SA,
and prognosis, North American Veterinary Conference,
eds: Principles of orthopaedic practice, New York, 1997,
2007.
McGraw-Hill.
35. Bloomberg M: Muscles and tendons. In Slatter D, ed: Text-
 14. Motoki D, Mulliken J: The healing of bone and cartilage,
book of smal animat surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993, WB
Clin Plast Surg 17:527-543, 1990.
Saunders.
15. Perren S: Primary bone healing. In Bojrab MJ, ed: Disease
36. Dueland R, Quenin J: Triceps tenotomy: biomechanical
mechanisms in small animal surgery, Philadelphia, 1993,
assessment of healing strength, JAAHA 16:507-512, 1980.
Lea and Febiger.
37. Chaplin D: The vascular anatomy within normal tendons,
16. Hulse D, Hyman B: Fracture biology and biomechanics.
divided tendons, free tendon grafts, and pedicle tendon grafts
In Slatter B, ed: Textbook of small animal surgery, ed 2,
in rabbits, J Bone Joint Surg 55B:369-389, 1973.
Philadelphia, 1993, WB Saunders.
38. Potenza A: Tendon healing within the fexor digital sheath in
17. Piemattei DL, Flo GL, DeCamp CE: Brinker, Piermattei and
the dog, J Bone Joint Surg 44A:49-64, 1962.
Flo's handbook of small animal orthopedics and fracture
 39. Spurlock G: Management of traumatic tendon lacerations,
repair, St Louis, 2006, Saunders.
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 5:575-590, 1989.
18. Brown S, Kramers P: Indirect (secondary) bone healing. In
40. Gelberman R et al: Tendon. In Woo S, Buckwalter J, eds:
Bojrab MJ, ed: Disease mechanisms in smallanimat surgery,
Injury and repair of the musculoskeletal soft tissues, Park
Philadelphia, 1993, Lea and Febiger.
Ridge, Il, 1991, American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons
19. McKibbin B: The biology of fracture healing in long bones,
Symposium.
J Bone Joint Surg 60B:150-162, 1978.
 41. Gelberman R: Flexor tendon healing and restoration of the
 20. Fox worthy M, Pringle R: Dynamization timing and its effect
gliding surface, J Bone Joint Surg 65A:70-80, 1983.
on bone healing when using the Orthofix dynamic axial
42.
 Gelberman R et al: The effects of mobilization on the vascu-
fixator, Injury 26:117-119, 1995.
larization of healing fexor tendons in dogs, Clin Orthop Ret
 21. Noordeen M et al: Cyclical movement and fracture healing,
Res 153:283-289, 1980.
J Bone Joint Surg 77B:645-648, 1995.
43. Matthews P, Richards H: The repair potential of digital Hexor
22. Aaron R, Coimbor D: Electrical stimulation of bone induc-
tendons, J Bone Joint Surg 56B:618-625, 1974.
tion and grafting. In Habal MB, Reddi AH, eds: Bone grafts
 44. Manske P et al: Intinsic flexor tendon repair, J Bone Joint 
and bone substitutes, Philadelphia, 1992, WB Saunders.
Surg 66A:385-396, 1984.
 23. Lavine L, Grodzinsky A: Current concepts review: electrical 
45. Steinberg D: Acute fHexor tendon injuries, Orthop Clin North.
stimulation of repair of bone, J Bone Joint Surg 69A:626-
Am 23:125-140, 1992.
630, 1987.
46. Lister G et al: Primary fexor tendon repair followed by
24.B
 Einhorn T: Enhancement of fracture healing, Instruct Course
immediate controlled mobilization, J Hand Surg 2:441-451,
Lect 45:401-416, 1996.
1977.
25. Loder R: The infuence of diabetes mellitus on the healing
47. Aron D: Tendons. In Bojrab MJ, ed: Current techniques in
of closed fractures, Clin Orthop 232:210-216, 1988.
small animal surgery, Philadelphia, 1990, Lea and Febiger.
26. Kristiansen T et al: Accelerated healing of distal radial frac-
 48. Berg J, Egger E: In vitro comparison of the three loop pulley
tures with the use of specifc, low intensity ultrasound: a
 and locking loop suture patterns for repair of canine weight
multicenter, prospective, randomized, double blind, placebo
bearing tendons and collateral ligaments, Vet Surg 15:107-
controlled study, J Bone Joint Surg 79A:961-973, 1997.
110, 1986.
Chapter 6
Tissue Healing: Tendons, Ligaments, Bone, Muscles, and Cartilage
91
49. Tomlinson J, Moore R: Locking loop tendon suture use in
grown in the presence of fibroblast growth factor and trans-
repair of five calcanean tendons, Vet Surg 11:105- 109, 1982.
forming growth factor beta, J Cell Physiol 138:329-337,
50. Jann H, Stein L, Good J: Strength characteristics and failure
1989.
 modes of locking loop and three loop pulley suture patterns 
70. Cook J et al: Effects of EGF, FGF, and PDGF on canine
in equine tendons, Vet Surg 19:28-33, 1990.
chondrocytes in three dimensional culture, Vet Orth Comp
51. Easley K et al: Mechanical properties of four suture patterns
Traum 10:210-213, 1997.
for transected equine tendonrepair, Vet Surg 19:102-106, 1990.
71. Garrett WE, Seaber AV, Boswick J et al: Recovery of skeletal
 52. Pennington D: The locking loop tendon suture, Plast Recon-
muscle after laceration and repait. J Hand Surg Am 9:683-
str Surg 63:648-652, 1979.
692, 1984.
 53. Tipton CM, James SL, Mergner W et al: Influence of exercise
72. Jarvinen MJ, Lehto MUK: The effects of early mobilization
on the strength of the medial collateral knee ligaments of
and immobilization on the healing process following muscle
dogs, Am J Physiol 218:894-901, 1970.
injuries, Sports Med 15:78-89, 1993.
 54. Inoue M, Woo SL, Gomez MA et al: Effects of surgical treat-
73. Roe SC: Injury and diseases of tendons. In Bloomberg MS,
ment and immobilization on the healing of the medial col-
Dee JF, Taylor RA, eds: Canine sports medicine and surgery,
lateral ligament: a long-term multi disciplinary study. Connect
Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
Tissue Res 25:13-26, 1990.
74. Lister SA, Renberg WC, Roush JK: Efficacy of immobiliza-
55. Frank C et al: Normal ligament: structure, function, and
tion of the tarsal joint to alleviate strain on the common
composition. In Woo S, Buckwalter J, eds: Injury and repair
calcaneal tendon in dogs, Am J Vet Res 70:134-140, 2009.
of the musculoskeletal soft tissues, Park Ridge, Ill, 1991,
75. Fahie MA: Healing, diagnosis, repair, and rehabilitation of
American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons Symposium.
tendon conditions,Vet Clin Smalf Anim 35:1195-1211, 2005.
56. Frank C et al: Medial collateral ligament healing: a multidis-
76. Zhao C, Amadio PC, Tanaka T et al: Short-term assessment
ciplinary assessment in rabbits, Am J Sports Med 11:379-
of optimal timing for postoperative rehabilitation after fexor
389, 1983.
digitorum profundus tendon repait in a canine model, J Hand
 57. Beale B, Goring R: Degenerative joint disease. In Bojrab
Ther 18:322-329, 2005.
MJ, ed: Disease mechanisms in small animadl surgery,
77. Grewal R, Chan Saw SR, Varitimidus S et al: Evaluation of
Philadelphia, 1993, Lea and Febiger.
 passive and active rehabilitation and of tendon repair for 
58.0
Clyne M: Pathogenesis of degenerative joint disease, Equine
partial tendon lacerations after three weeks of healing in
Vet J 19:15-18, 1987.
canines, Clin Biomech 21:804-809, 2006.
 59. Clark D: The biochemistry of degenerative joint disease and 
78. Dueland R, Quenin J: Triceps tenotomy: biomechanical
its treatment, Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 13:275-284,
assessment of healing strength, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1991.
16:507-512, 1980.
60. Mcllwraith Cw: Current concepts in equine degenerative
79. Schaaf OR, Eaton-Wells R, Mitchell RAS: Biceps brachii
joint disease, JAVMA 180:239-250, 1982.
 and brachialis tendon of insertion injuries in eleven racing
61. Buckwalter J et al: Articular cartilage: composition and
greyhounds, Vet Surg 38:825-833, 2009.
structure. In Woo S, Buckwalter J, eds: Injury and repair
 80. Inoue M, McGurk-Burleson E, Hollis JM et al: Treatment of
of the musculoskeletal soft tissues, Park Ridge, Il, 1991,
the medial collateral ligament injury. 1: The importance of
American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons Symposium.
anterior cruciate ligament on the varus-valgus knee laxity,
62. Trippel S, Mankin H: Articular cartilage healing, In Bojrab
Am J Sport Med 15:15-21, 1987.
MJ, ed: Disease mechanisms in small animal surgery,
81. O'Donoghue DH, Frank GR, Jeter GL et al: Repair and
Philadelphia, 1993, Lea and Febiger.
Teconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament in dogs,
63. Buckwalter J et al: Articular cartilage: injury and repair. In
J Bone Joint Surg Am 53A:710-718, 1971.
Woo S, Buckwalter J, eds: Injury and repair of the musculo-
 82. Yasuda K, Hayashi K: Changes in biomechanical properties
skeletat sof tissues, Park Ridge, Il, 1991, American Academy
of tendons and ligaments from joint disuse, Osteoarthritis
of Orthopedic Surgeons Symposium.
Cartitage 7:122-129, 1999.
64. Mankin H: Localization of tritiated thymidine in articular
83. Cherdchutham W, Meershoek LS, van Weeren PR et al:
cartilage of rabbits: repair in immature cartilage, J Bone J
 Effects of exercise on biomechanical properties of the super-
Surg 44:688, 1962.
ficial digital fexor tendon in foals, Am J Vet Res 62:1859-
 65. Mankin H: The reaction of articular cartilage to injury and
1864, 2001.
osteoarthritis, N Engt J Med 24:1285-1292, 1974.
 84. Johnson KA: Carpal injuries. In Bloomberg MS, Dee JF,
 66. Frisbie D et al: Arthroscopic subchondral bone plate micro-
Taylor RA, eds: Canine spors medicine and surgery,
fracture technique augments healing of large chondral defects
Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
in the radial carpal bone and medial femoral condyle of
 85. Griffon DJ: Fracture healing. In Johnson AL, Houlton JEF,
horses, Vet Surg 28:242-255, 1999.
Vannini R, eds: AO principles of fracture management in the
67.8
 Salter R et al: The effect of continuous passive motion on the
dog and cat, New York, 2005, Thieme.
healing of articular cartilage defects, J Bone Joint Surg
 86. Doyle ND: Rehabilitation of fractures in small animals:
57A:570, 1975.
maximize outcomes, minimize complications, Clin Tech.
68.
Steed D: The role of growth factors in wound healing, Surg
Small Animal Pract 19:180-191, 2004.
Clin North Am 77:575-586, 1997.
 87. O'Driscoll Sw: Current concepts review: the healing and
69. Inoue H et al: Stimulation of cartilage matrix proteoglycan
Tegeneration of articular cartilage, J Bone Joint Surg 80:1795-
synthesis by  morphologically  transformed  chondrocytes 
1812, 1998.
Responses of Musculoskeletal
Tissues to Disuse and
Remobilization
Darryl L. Millis
atients afficted with neurologic, orthopedic, meta-
function of articular cartilage is a prerequisite to under-
 bolic, and other diseases frequently have reduced
 standing the pathologic processes. The mechanical proper-
weight bearing and use of limbs. In addition, some
ties of articular cartilage arise from the complex structure
conditions may be treated with splints, casts, or other coap-
 and interactions of its biochemical constituents. The vis-
tation devices, resulting in decreased limb use. The tissues
coelastic properties of cartilage, primarily resulting from
fuid fow through the solid matrix, explain deformational
joint capsule, muscle, ligament, tendon, and bone. Knowl-
responses observed during loading. For example, cartilage
edge of how these tissues respond to disuse and immobi-
that is loaded rapidly is stiffer than the same cartilage that
lization, the types of deleterious tissue changes, and the
is loaded slowly. Degenerative processes include the break-
time frame over which these changes occur, are important
down of normal constituents of cartilage, especially the
in understanding the need for physical rehabilitation. For
collagen network and PGs, which affects the mechanics of
example, stress deprivation of joints results in proliferation
fuid fow through cartilage. Factors contributing to such
of connective tissue within the joint space, adhesions
breakdown include direct trauma, obesity, immobilization,
between synovial folds, adherence of connective tissue
and excessive repetitive loading of the cartilage. Training
to cartilage surfaces, atrophy of cartilage, reduced proteo-
activities, without traumatic injury, do not appear to be a
glycan (PG) content, ulceration at points of cartilage to
risk factor for developing osteoarthritis (OA) in normal
cartilage contact, disorganization of cellular and fibrillar 
joints, but such activity may be harmful to an abnonmal
ligament alignment, reduced collagen mass, increased liga-
joint.3
ment compliance, weakened ligament insertion sites,
Normal Articular Cartilage
reduced load-to-failure and energy-absorbing capacity of
the bone-ligament-bone complex, and osteoporosis of the
Articular cartilage covers the ends of long bones and is
involved extremity.'
composed of chondrocytes, extracellular matrix, and water.
Rehabilitation of patients with acute or chronic neuro-
Articular cartilage is avascular, aneural, and alymphatic.
logic or orthopedic conditions involves the application
Synovial fuid is present in joints and provides a near-
of controlled challenges to tissues to improve strength,
frictionless, wear-resistant, weight-bearing layer in contact
condition, and function. It is important to understand how
with articular surfaces. Articular cartilage dissipates
to safely remobilize tissues after injury and a period of
contact stresses during loading, distributing compressive
immobilization. Rehabilitation must sufficiently challenge
and shearing forces, which are transmitted through sub-
tissues to enhance and positively infuence their recovery
chondral bone to the stiffer cortical bone.
and healing. However, if tissues are overchallenged, they
Chondrocytes are metabolically active and make up less
may be damaged, ultimately delaying recovery or cause
than 5% of the cartilage volume. Metabolism of the cells
additional injury. There must be a balance between the
is modulated by their location within the cartilage, by
simultaneous demands for protection against undue stress
aging, and by biomechanical stresses. Chondrocytes
to facilitate healing, and the need for stress to attenuate
produce and maintain the extracellular matrix and pericel-
atrophy of musculoskeletal tissues.? A review of these con-
lular environment. The substrates for these processes come
cepts forms the basis for a rational approach to developing
mainly from the synovial fuid. Weight bearing results in a
rehabilitation programs.
transfer of nutrients and waste exchange by diffusion from
Cartilage
the cartilage surface.
 The extracellular matrix is composed of collagen,
Disorders of articular cartilage and joints are some of the
PGs, and water. The orientation of collagen and PGs func-
most common and debilitating diseases encountered in vet-
tions to distribute forces over the subchondral bone and
erinary practice. Understanding the normal structure and
provides a smooth surface that allows movement of joints
92
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
93
Articular
cartilage
Glycosaminoglycans
Collagen
Core protein
Aggrecan
Figure 7-1 Diagram of articular cartilage, including collagen, proteoglycans, and water.
(Figure 7-1).3 Collagen provides tensile strength to the
Chondroitin
cartilage, and structural support for the extracellular matrix.
Keratan
/sulfate
Sulfate
Type II collagen is the primary form in articular cartilage
and is unique to cartilage. Type IX collagen is also unique
to articular cartilage and links type II fibrils together, limits
Hyaluronic
the separation of collagen fibrils, limits fibril diameter, and 
acid
binds PGs to collagen. Processes resulting in articular car-
tilage loss may cause collagen degradation, either enzy-
matically, mechanically, or both. Type IX collagen is
especially susceptible to enzymatic degradation.
PGs make up most of the extracellular matrix that is not
collagen, and compose 22% to 38% of the dry weight of
Link protein
articular cartilage. PGs are highly hydrophilic, which
results in water retention, creating swelling pressure and
Core protein
turgidity that is essential to articular cartilage function. A
Figure 7-2 Proteoglycan monomer consisting of a core protein,
PG monomer consists of a core protein with one or more
glycosaminoglycans, hyaluronan backbone, and link protein.
types of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains attached. The
core protein has a hyaluronan binding region, GAG binding
regions, and a carboxy-terminal end. A link protein helps
to bind the PG chain to hyaluronan (Figure 7-2). Hyaluro-
collagen meshwork limits their ability to expand. This
nan is a nonsulfated GAG located in the extracellular
keeps cartilage turgid, resisting deformation. Water moves
 matrix and forms the backbone to which the PG monomers
slowly within the cartilage matrix during loading as a
are covalently bound. Aggrecan refers to a PG monomer
result of resistance of fow through the collagen meshwork
that combines with hyaluronan.
and the hydrophilic nature of the PGs. Water is forced
GAGs are structures with varying lengths of repeating
out of articular cartilage during loading and some water
disaccharides. Chondroitin sulfate and keratan sulfate are
weeps onto the articular surface, allowing hydrostatic
the major GAGs, composing almost 90% of total articular
lubrication. When the load ceases, water is reabsorbed.
cartilage GAGs. GAGs are negatively charged, causing
With rapid loading, cartilage is stiffer because water dis-
them to repel one another when attached to a core protein
tributes more slowly, resulting in less compression of the
and occupy a large area.
cartilage. Cartilage is more compliant with slow loading
Water composes 65-80% of total cartilage weight.3
because there is additional time for fuid movement to the
Although PGs are highly hydrophilic, enclosure in the
cartilage surface.
94
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Histologically, cartilage may be divided into various
Box 7-1
Summary of the Effects of Disuse
 p a an a   t s s
 characteristics. These zones include a relatively thin super-
and Immobilization on Articular
Cartilage
ficial layer; a middle layer with the cells arranged in verti-
cal columns;, and a tidemark, which is the upper limit of
Atrophic or degenerative changes
the zone of calcified cartilage, which in tum interdigitates
· Changes more severe and appear sooner in areas of
with the subchondral bone plate.
contact
The subchondral bone is the thin layer of bone beneath
 Decrease in matrix and cellular components
·
the calcified cartilage layer. It is 10 times more deformable
 Disorganization of cartilage and potential irreversible
than cortical bone and is important in distributing forces
damage if immobilization is prolonged
during loading. Its relatively high compliance helps to
·
 Reduced synovial fuid production
 diminish the peak load placed on the cartilage, decreasing
 Diminished nutrition to cartilage because of reduced
 synovial pumping and nutrient diffusion
damage to the articular surface. The subchondral bone
 Immobilization of joints in extension results in arthritic
becomes stiffer with OA. As the bone becomes more dense
changes to cartilage
and sclerotic, the cartilage and bone do not deform nor-
 Immobilization of stife joints in fexion results in cartilage
mally, and the chondrocytes and matrix are more likely to
atrophy in young dogs, but less atrophy in older dogs
be damaged with loading.
3 to 1l weeks of immobilization in fexion results in
13% to 60% reduction of proteoglycan content in
Cartilage Changes Caused by Disuse
young dogs
and Immobilization
 40% to 60% reduction in proteoglycan synthesis with
Clinicians who attempt to restore joint function should
immobilization in fexion
understand the effects of immobilization on articular car-
Cartilage thickness reduced 9% to 50%
tilage (Box 7-1). Disuse of cartilage may result in atrophic
·
Up to 30% decrease in chondrocytes
Atrophy of subchondral bone
or degenerative changes, and these changes are more
Elevated MMP-2 and decreased TIMP with 4 weeks of
marked and appear sooner in areas of contact.4 Immobili-
immobilization
zation leads to a decrease in matrix and cellular compo-
Up to 30% decreased stiffness of cartilage
nents, disorganization of cartilage, and potential irreversible
Active stife joint motion may be more important than
damage if immobilization is prolonged.? In addition to a
weight bearing in meniscal cartilage
reduction in synovial fuid production with immobiliza-
Joint infammation with reduced weight bearing
tion, nutrition to cartilage is diminished as a result of
following cranial cruciate ligament transection and sti fle
reduced synovial pumping and nutrient diffusion. The age
stabilization may result in decreased meniscal stiffness
of the dog, as well as the form of immobilization used, may
(30%)
affect results. Several models of joint immobilization and
Joint motion and weight bearing may improve
disuse have been studied, including casting with the limb
regeneration of tissue and maintain articular cartilage
following partial meniscectomy as compared with
in fexion or extension, extermal skeletal fixation, and non-
immobilization
weight-bearing models (such as sling application). The
 Some joint motion during immobilization (as opposed to 
 changes in mechanical behavior and biochemical composi-
 rigid immobilization) reduces deleterious effects
tion of articular cartilage appear to be less dramatic in
 If joint instability exists, such as cranial cruciate ligament
limbs immobilized in a sling than in limbs immobilized in
rupture, temporary immobilization in fexion (non-weight-
a cast. Adult greyhound dogs had stifes placed in a sling
bearing position) may result in less osteoarthritis until
at 90 degrees of fexion for 4 or 8 weeks, which allowed
stabilization procedure performed
some limited motion of the stifle but no weight bearing.
MMP-2, Metalloproteinase 2; TIMP tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases.
There were no changes in the compressive properties of
cartilage, PG content, collagen content, or cartilage thick-
ness.° This suggests that immobilization with a sling may
be less deleterious to articular cartilage as compared with
osteophytes.7α However, there was a 13% to 60% early and
other models of joint disuse in which cartilage changes are
progressive reduction of PG content following immobiliza-
 both progressive and degenerative.6 Immobilization with a
tion, with the depletion being most severe in the superficial
joint in fexion does not generally lead to arthritic changes
zones.4.&-10 Immobilization for as litte as 6 days may result
in the short term, but cartilage atrophy may occur. Immo-
in a 40% reduction in cartilage PG synthesis, and up to
bilization of a joint in extension results in increased muscle
60% for joints immobilized for 8 weeks. In addition, there
contraction against the immobilization device and changes
is a 10-20% increase in water content. The accelerated
in articular cartilage similar to those seen in OA.
 PG loss appears to be caused by a combination of decreased
The cartilage of limbs of young dogs immobilized
synthesis and increased proteolysis of PGs.!l The loss of
in fexion for 3-11 weeks was grossly normal with no
PGs is somewhat selective, with preferential loss of
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
95
chondroitin-6-sulfate. The levels of synovial fuid PG
properties of the articular surface remain relatively intact
components, including link protein, keratan sulfate, and
following a period of immobilization with a sling.
total sulfated GAG, were determined in dogs after a 3-week
 Contact forces between articulating surfaces appear to
recovery period following either 4 or 8& weeks of immobi-
be necessary to maintain normal PG content of articular
lization with the stife in fexion.12.13 The concentrations of
cartilage. The greatest depletion of GAGs (64%) occurred
keratan sulfate and sulfated GAG in the synovial fuid
at the cranial and caudal extremes of the femoral condyles
lavages were increased after disuse and after disuse with
in the stife joint cartilage of young beagle dogs following
recovery compared with controls, but the levels of link
cast immobilization for 11 weeks in 90 degrees of fexion.
protein remained low. This pattem of catabolism differs
These were locations where the immobilized cartilage lost
from that found in OA, in which link protein is elevated in
contact with the opposing cartilage.?
synovial fuid lavages, along with keratan sulfate and sul-
The biochemical changes that occur with immobiliza-
fated GAG
tion also affect the biomechanical properties of articular
After 3 weeks of immobilization, PG aggregation is
cartilage. Splint immobilization of stife joints of young
poor. These changes are reversible, however, because PG
dogs for 11 weeks caused significant softening of femoral
aggregates were normal 2 weeks after removal of a cast
and tibial cartilage with no visible changes of the cartilage
    t      
surface.'6 The rate of deformation during loading increased
with hyaluronic acid (HA) may be reduced in older dogs
42% and the average thickness of the cartilage decreased
because of an abnormality in the HA binding region of the
 9% as compared with controls. Loading of cartilage may
PG core protein, but others have shown no abnormality in
be necessary to maintain cartilage stiffness, because stiff-
aggregation in young dogs.11
 ness was maintained in the contact area between the patella
Young dogs subjected to 11 weeks of immobilization
and patellar surface of the femur as a result of sustained
by splinting had a significant reduction in hyaluronan con-
loading between the femur and the patella produced by the
centration in the tibial and femoral condyles, and the patel-
fexion of the knee joint, whereas cartilage softening was
lar surface of the femur, with a concurrent decrease in
greatest in nonloaded areas. There is correlation between
aggrecan, but the ratio of hyaluronan to aggregan was
cartilage stiffness and PG concentration. Therefore loss of
 asngsaq fpuarap puodsai Aeu ssop sunoy t:'pasueyoun
 PGs during immobilization may also affect biomechanical
there was no change in hyaluronan content in skeletally
 properties. Immobilization of stifes with a cast caused
mature dogs following 4 to 8 weeks of immobilization,
significant softening of up to 30% in the lateral femoral
 as compared with an 80% decrease during early OA.0
and tibial cartilages.17 The GAG content of the cartilage
This difference supports the concept that the mechanism
was slightly decreased after immobilization, especially in
of cartilage degradation in disuse and OA is different, and
the superficial zone of cartilage. The changes in stiffness
immature dogs may respond differently than older dogs to
correlated with alterations in GAG content of the superfi-
immobilization. It may also help explain why the changes 
cial and deep zones. This confirms the key role of PGs in
 in cartilage following immobilization may be reversible,
the regulation of cartilage stiffness. There may also be
whereas the changes in osteoarthritic cartilage are not
changes in the compressive and shear stiffness of cartilage
reversible.
from nonimmobilized contralateral limbs, possibly as a
Cartilage thickness may be reduced 30-50% with
result of increased loading.1α
immobilization, but the location of thinning within the
The changes that occur to articular cartilage during
cartilage is not consistent. In mature dogs, thinning occurs
primarily in the uncalcifed cartilage, whereas in young
decreased joint motion and reduced loading. Although both
dogs it tends to occur in the calcified cartilage under the
are important in maintaining cartilage integrity, normal
tidemark.4& Immobilization may result in 30% fewer chon-
loading is particularly important with contraction of
 muscles that span the joint and stabilize the limb during
also atrophies.
weight bearing. In a non-weight-bearing model that
Sling immobilization of the stife for 4 weeks results in
allowed joint motion of the stife joint, cartilage thickness,
elevation of gelatinase (neutral metalloproteinase 2 [MMP-
PG content, and PG synthesis were reduced, whereas water
content was increased.19 These changes were similar to
metalloproteinases (TIMP), especially in the superficial
those that occur with immobilization in a fexed position
zone, as well as reduced protein synthesis by chondro-
and suggest that weight bearing is necessary to prevent the
cytes.'s In contrast, collagenase activity is normal. The
bulk of changes.
retum of MMP-2 and TIMP levels to normal was observed
Some joint motion during immobilization is beneficial.
with a 2-week remobilization period or treatment with
Stifes immobilized for 6 weeks with a cast, allowing 8
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and pentosan polysul-
degrees to 15 degrees of motion, had less PG loss and a
fate. This suggests that cartilage is remodeling, similar
smaller decrease in PG synthesis than occurred with more
to bone remodeling in disuse atrophy, but the material
rigid fixation. The limited motion provided by casting was
96
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Box 7-2
 Summary of Effects of
Box 7-3
Considerations for Remobilization
Immobilizing Stifle Joints in
of Cartilage after Immobilization
Flexion on Articular Cartilage
The length of immobilization, condition of cartilage, and the
PG content reduced 25-60%
length and magnitude of weight bearing after immobilization
 Cartilage thickness reduced 30-50%
affect cartilage recovery.
Cells per unit area 30% fewer
 After a 6-week immobilization period, 3 weeks of free,
Water content increased 10-20%
low-intensity activity results in normal cartilage.
Net PG synthesis decreased 40-60%
 Longer periods of immobilization require longer recovery
Atrophic subchondral bone
times.
· Immobilization longer than 15 weeks may not result in
PG, Proteoglycan.
complete recovery, even with 50 weeks of remobilization,
in young dogs.
Vigorous exercise after immobilization may be deleterious
to cartilage.
 protective."' Elimination of motion by rigid fi xation induces
· Jogging young dogs 9.5 km/d at 5 km/h after
even more pronounced atrophic changes to articular carti-
immobilization for 3 weeks resulted in continued
lage. To study the effects of immobilization on the ultra-
decreases in cartilage thickness (20%) and PG content
structure and surface contour of articular cartilage, knee
(35%), even though PG synthesis increased (16%).
joints of adult dogs were immobilized with circular exter-
PG, Proteoglycan.
nal fixation for two to four weeks.20 The degree of cartilage
changes increased with the length of immobilization, and
consisted of destruction of the superficial cartilage layer,
cleft formation in the surface, and erosion of the articular
cartilage. In another study, knees of mature dogs were
hip dysplasia with secondary OA results in significant
immobilized for 6 weeks with extemal fixators. There was
reduction of blood fow, whereas immobilization in fexion
a 7% increase in water content compared with normal knee
results in the highest blood fow to the femoral head.23
cartilage, and a 28% decrease in GAG content, which was
 greater than if some motion was allowed.1 More impor-
The Effects of Remobilization on Cartilage
tantly, GAG content did not returm to normal after a 1 week 
 The response of cartilage to remobilization depends on the
remobilization period as it did in dogs that were not rigidly
biomechanical demand that the joint is exposed to, the
condition of the cartilage, and the length of the immobili-
reduced mobility and decreased joint motion, may also
zation and remobilization period (Box 7-3). If the joint is
result in cartilage thinning.21
subjected to high stresses and repeated loading immedi-
Immobilization of the stifle in fexion may be beneficial
ately after immobilization, cartilage may not be able to
when joint instability exists, such as occurs with a ruptured
resist the stresses and may become damaged because of
cranial cruciate ligament (CCL), because bearing weight
injury to the softened matrix. The duration and the degree
 On an unstable stife results in OA. Dogs undergoing tran-
of load bearing after immobilization are factors that deter-
section of the CCL had their stife joints maintained in
mine the cartilage response. Also, the ability to restore
fexion or were permitted ad libitum ambulation for 12
biomechanical properties may depend on an intact collagen
weeks.? Dogs allowed to bear weight had osteophytes,
network.
fibrillation, and decreased cartilage PG content, although
The atrophic changes of cartilage that occur with a limb
  ss   s sn 
casted in fexion are somewhat reversible. Remobilization
greater than that in cartilage from the contralateral knee.
 of a normal limb casted in fexion for 6 weeks by allowing
In contrast, osteophytes were not seen when the limb was
ambulation for 3 weeks after cast removal resulted in the
immobilized in fexion immediately after transection of the
cartilage becoming nonmal.4
ligament, and the articular surface remained intact. The
 Longer periods of immobilization in young dogs may
cartilage became atrophic, however, and PG content and
result in more long-standing effects, even with a gentle
PG synthesis were decreased compared with cartilage from
remobilization period. Skeletally immature female beagle
the contralateral knee. Knee cartilage from immobilized
dogs were immobilized in a cast for 11 weeks in 90-degree
limbs after cruciate ligament transection, therefore, resem-
fexion followed by remobilization for 15 weeks.? After
bled that from dogs whose limbs were immobilized without
remobilization, PG content remained an average 18%
ligament transection (Box 7-2)
lower than controls, with content at the minimum contact
The effect of position of the limb during immobilization
sites 33% lower. GAG concentration was restored in the
on blood fow to the joint must also be considered. For
more loaded regions of the patellofemoral region and tibial
example, forced abduction of experimentally induced
condyles, but remained lower than the control values in the
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
97
less loaded peripheral regions of the femoral condyles.24
articular cartilage biomechanical properties retum toward
Uncalcified cartilage thickness of the femoral condyles
normal during remobilization, although the recovery is not
was 15% less than in the controls, and the thickness of the
complete in all parts of the knee even after 50 weeks of
calcified zone was reduced in most regions of the remobi-
remobilization. Immobilization of joints of young dogs
lized stifes. The thinness of the calcified zone may be due
may cause long-tenm, if not permanent, alterations of
to advanced bone growth from the subchondral bone
cartilage biomechanical properties, similar to changes
during remobilization. Softening of the articular cartilage
observed in biochemical components of articular cartilage.
during immobilization may expose the calcified zone to
 s a n s as  
increased mechanical loading and result in mineralization
in life.
and thickening of subchondral bone. The changes induced
The atrophic changes seen in cartilage following immo-
by unloading are reversible to a great extent, but full res-
bilization are less reversible following immobilization with
toration of articular cartilage may not occur at all sites
a rigid extermal fixator. However, in one study, 2 to 4 weeks
following 15 weeks of remobilization. Immobilization of
of remobilization following 2 to 4 weeks of immobilization
the skeletally immature joint therefore may affect the
with an Ilizarov extemal fixator demonstrated that the
development of articular cartilage in such a way that very
longer the period of remobilization, the greater the repara-
slow recovery or permanent alterations are induced.
 tive processes.20
 Longer periods of remobilization may be more benef-
In contrast to the improvements seen with mild remo-
cial. Hindlimbs of immature dogs were immobilized for 11
bilization strategies, vigorous exercise after a period of
weeks and then remobilized for 50 weeks. 17.25.26 Immedi-
immobilization may have deleterious effects on cartilage.?8
ately after the immobilization period, cartilage GAG con-
Dogs that ran daily (9.5 km/d, 5 km/h) on a treadmill for
centration was reduced similar to that found in other
 3 weeks after cast removal had continued decreases in
studies. The amount of collagen crosslinks was also
cartilage thickness (20%) and PG content (35%), even
reduced during immobilization. After 50 weeks of remo-
though net PG synthesis was 16% greater than in cartilage
bilization, GAG concentration was restored at most sites,
from contralateral nonimmobilized stifes. Therefore vig-
but remained 9-28% lower than controls in the patella,
orous loading of the joint following a period of immobili-
medial femoral condyle, tibial condyles, and the proximal
zation may prevent reversal of cartilage damage and
femoropatellar surface. Collagen crosslinks were restored
ultimately be detrimental to cartilage. It appears that the
to control levels, indicating that collagen is resistant to
atrophic changes are more reversible with gentle spontane-
reduced joint loading and slow remobilization. Although
 ous reloading.
the articular cartilage of immobilized limbs bec ame similar
Meniscal Cartilage Changes
to control cartilage following long periods of remobiliza-
tion, full restoration of articular cartilage GAG concentra-
Various experimental models for producing atrophy of
tion was not obtained in all sites, even after remobilization
meniscal tissue have yielded contradictory results. These
      s  
models have included denervation of the stife, immobili-
young dogs can cause long-lasting articular cartilage PG
zation (both intermal and extermal), and disarticulation.
alterations.
Active motion of the stife may play a more important role
Because GAGs exert a strong infuence on the biome-
than weight bearing in preventing meniscal atrophy. In one
chanical properties of cartilage, the biochemical changes
study, intermal skeletal fixation, which did not allow motion
that occur in cartilage during remobilization may also
 of the stife joint, was applied for 12 weeks. There was
affect the biomechanical properties. The restoration of
significant atrophy of the lateral meniscus, despite the
the biomechanical properties of articular cartilage was
 opportunity for weightbearing.29 Another study evaluated
studied after 15 weeks of remobilization of the knee joint
the effect of active joint motion on the maintenance of
in mature beagles previously immobilized with a cast for
meniscus mass in a unilateral ankle disarticulation non--
 11 weeks.7 Remobilization improved the decreased stiff-
weight-bearing model of disuse. This model maintained
ness and cartilage thickness in femoral, tibial, and patellar
active knee motion without weight bearing. Despite the
cartilage created by immobilization, and approached values
loss of collagen and calcium mass in the femur and tibia
of nonimmobilized controls. However, stiffness of the
because of decreased weight bearing, there was no loss of
femoral condylar cartilage remained lower and cartilage
meniscal mass.30
permeability was higher compared with the controls. A
Although meniscal mass may be maintained when
study with the same period of immobilization but with a
motion is allowed in stifes with limited weight bearing.
remobilization period of 50 weeks resulted in restoration
there may be profound changes in biomechanical and bio-
of the biomechanical properties of cartilage in the lateral
chemical properties. Meniscal cartilage stiffness decreased
condyle of tibia, but not in the lateral condyle of femur,
by 30% 8 weeks following transection of the CCL and
where stiffness remained 15% below the control level fol-
immediate stabilization of the stifle in one study, despite
lowing remobilization.? Similar to biochemical changes,
the normal appearance of the meniscus.3 Although weight
98
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
bearing and joint motion were not restricted following
Adaptations of Cartilage to Increased
Mechanical Stress
surgery, limb use was reduced and it is possible that a
combination of infammation and decreased limb use after
 Many reports have suggested an association between the
surgery resulted in decreased stiffness. Chronic stife insta-
 biochemical and biomechanical properties of cartilage and
bility may result in further deterioration of the meniscus
the mechanical stress to which it is subjected. For example,
because clinical cases of cranial cruciate ligament rupture 
the increased weight bearing in the limb opposite a limb
(CCLR) undergoing partial meniscectomy had a 60%
casted in fexion resulted in a 19% increase in uncalcifed
decrease in meniscal stiffness.
cartilage thickness and a 25-35% increase in GAG concen-
The effect of early motion on healing meniscal repairs
tration in the intermediate, deep, and calcified zones of the
has been evaluated in humans at the time of anterior cruci-
femoral condyles.8 It appears that increased weight bearing
ate ligament (ACL) reconstruction. In one study, 80% of
augments local PG content of the articular cartilage matrix.
patients undergoing immediate postoperative range of
 a ssa a   Dd re u
motion (ROM) and early partial weight bearing had
complete meniscal healing with no deleterious effects of
areas, and contact forces help maintain normal cartilage
immediate knee motion on meniscal repairs.32 Although
matrix. In general, chondroitin sulfate predominates in
meniscal repair is not generally performed in dogs, studies
 pressure-bearing regions, whereas dermatan sulfate pre-
 of healing medial meniscal incisions demonstrated that
 dominates in tension-transmitting regions of connective
dogs with immediate limb mobilization had greater colla-
tissues.40
 gen content in the healing meniscus than those that were
The influence of static and intermittent stress on articu-
immobilized in a cast.33 There were no significant differ-
lar cartilage metabolism was ex amined in vitro using full-
ences in collagen between the repaired menisci with mobi-
thickness plugs of cartilage from femoral condyles of
lization and the control menisci. Prolonged immobilization
normal adult dogs.40 When cartilage was exposed to a static
resulted in decreased collagen formation in healing tissue.
stress equivalent to three times body weight, or to cyclic
The vascular response during meniscal healing is also
stresses at a duty cycle of 60 seconds on-60 seconds off,
affected by immobilization.34 In a study of rabbits with
net GAG synthesis was suppressed to 30-60% of that in
meniscal injury, meniscal blood fow was increased five-
controls. Protein synthesis also decreased, and water
fold in animals in which the stife was allowed motion, but
content increased. In contrast, when a duty cycle of 4
this increase was prevented by immobilization 4 weeks
seconds on-11 seconds off was used, GAG synthesis was
after injury. Furthermore, healing was diminished in immo-
increased by 34%, but protein synthesis or water content
bilized knees.
was not affected. The changes in GAG synthesis do not
Partial or complete meniscectomy is more commonly
appear to be due to changes in diffusion of nutrients during
used to treat meniscal damage in dogs. In general, meniscal
loading. These results suggest that regular, intermittent
removal results in degeneration of articular cartilage, and 
 stresses, such as those obtained with walking, are impor-
cartilage stiffness is reduced.35 Less severe changes occur
 tant to maintain normal articular cartilage.
with partial meniscal resection, but the changes are greater
Continuous strong compression or heavy-impact load-
on the tibial surface as compared with the femoral
ing to joints may cause deterioration of articular cartilage.4
surface.36.37 Early joint motion may be beneficial to these
au ui sasueuo u shnsai aeeo on padde gunen guna
 patients. In studies of bilateral medial meniscectomy in
zone of calcifed cartilage, with an increase in cellular
 dogs, one group was allowed immediate joint movement,
clones, bony bar formation in the calcifed cartilage,
and another group underwent knee joint immobilization
vascular invasion, and decreased PG content, thickness of 
with an extermal skeletal fixator (ESF) for 5 weeks imme-
the calcifed cartilage, and the number of chondrocytes.42.43
diately following meniscectomy. After removal of the
 Blunt trauma to articular cartilage causes significant altera-
fixation, the animals were allowed free movement for
tions in the deeper layers of cartilage, without disruption
21 weeks.339 The normal menisci and the regenerated
 of the articular surface.
tissue at the meniscectomy sites were examined for col-
lagen content, collagen assembly, and GAG distribution.
Effects of Training on Cartilage
Although the collagen content of the regenerated tissue
was not different from normal menisci, collagen fiber
The adaptation that occurs in functioning joints is known
development and GAGs were not normal. Movement fol-
as Leed's hypothesis, which states that cartilage becomes
Jowing meniscectomy is likely beneficial to matrix forma-
conditioned to transmit, without sustaining damage, the
tion in the regenerating tissue. Regarding articular cartilage,
stresses to which it is most regularly subjected.? Exercise
twice as much PG was present in femoral condyles of
places biomechanical and physiologic demands on articu-
meniscectomized animals encouraged to bear weight on
lar cartilage.4 Mild to moderate levels of running in dogs
joints immediately after surgery compared with controls or
may stimulate adaptation, but strenuous levels can cause
 joints immobilized after surgery.
detrimental articular cartilage changes (Box 7-4). There
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
66
Box 7-4
 Summary of Effects of Increased
 Mechanical Stress and Training
on Cartilage
 Moderate weight-bearing
 Increased weight bearing of limb contralateral to a limb
Non-weight-{
Strenuous running
maintained in a sling may result in up to 19% increase in
bearing 
Static loading
es
uncalcified cartilage thickness and 25-35% increase in PG
concentration.
 Blunt trauma to cartilage may cause changes in the zone of
calcified cartilage (deeper zone) without disruption of the
Level of activity
articular cartilage.
Figure 7-3 Adaptive responses of articular cartilage to activity.
Mild to moderate training (running 4 to 20 km/d for 15
(Based on a diagram from Hallett and Andrish.4)
weeks) has no apparent deleterious effects on cartilage, but
increases cartilage stiffness (6%), cartilage thickness
(11-23%), and PG content (28%).
·Severe training (young dogs running 40 km/d for 1 year, or
This degree of exercise had a mildly anabolic effect on
older dogs running on a treadmill at 9.6-12.8 km/h for 1 h/d
properties of cartilage. Running 20 km/d on a treadmill for
for 8 months) may have adverse effects on cartilage.
15 weeks did not further improve mechanical properties
 Decreased cartilage stiffness (12-14% in some parts of
(Figure 7-3).47
the joint)
 Decreased PG content in some parts of the joint
Severe Training
superficial cartilage
Skeletally immature dogs subjected to 15 weeks of running
 Irreversible changes in collagen of cartilage
   o        a
 Increased matrix metalloproteinases
 p/ o uunu 'aamoH ti sd o uny o
 Potential cartilage injury, indicated by biomarkers, in the
first 2 to 6 weeks of intense training, followed by repair
nearly 1 year resulted in a 6% reduction in thickness of the
 Lifelong, low-impact training apparently has no deleterious
uncalcified cartilage of the medial femoral condyle, with
effects on articular cartilage.
an 11% reduction in GAG content.4α Although tibial carti-
lage was stiffer, femoral condyle stiffness was unchanged
PG, Proteoglycan.
with this degree of training.47
In similar studies of running 40 km/d, the effects of
were investigated and found that the cartilage response to
may be activity thresholds below and above which articular
running training was site dependent.49.50 Cartilage stiffness
cartilage is maintained or destroyed. Between these thresh-
decreased 12-14% in the lateral, but not in the medial
olds, cartilage seems to adapt to the loads placed on it.
condyles of the femur and tibia, perhaps because of exces-
Intermittent compression tends to stimulate chondro-
 sive impact loading and damage to the lateral region.49
cyte biosynthesis. Joint motion without compression
GAG content was depleted in the superficial weight-
results in articular cartilage thinning, and static loading
bearing areas of the joint, including the lateral femoral
causes decreased chondrocyte biosynthesis.44 Cartilage
condyle.s? There were slight increases in the thickness of
subjected to high stress has higher PG content and is stiffer
the uncalcified and calcified cartilage, and the subchondral
than cartilage exposed to low stress levels. Most studies of
 moderate running indicate no injury to articular cartilage,
assuming there are no abnormal biomechanical stresses
tilage damage was seen, softening of the cartilage may
acting on the joints.
jeopardize the ability of cartilage to maintain its normal
structural and functional properties over time. The response 
Mild to Moderate Training
to long-tenm exercise may be different in other joints.
Young beagle dogs running 4 km/d, at a speed of 4 km/h
Although there was a decrease in GAG content and carti-
at a 15-degree incline on a treadmill for 15 weeks had no
lage thickness in the head of the humerus following train-
macroscopic damage to the cartilage surface and a 6%
 ing, cartilage stiffness was not affected.4950 The articular 
increase in mean cartilage stiffness, with most of the
cartilage of the femoral head appears to adapt very well to
increase occurring on the patellar surface of the femur and
long-tenm distance training.33
the tibial condyles.*s Cartilage thickness also increased by
Strenuous training protocols in older dogs may result in
a mean of 11%, with increases of 19-23% in the lateral
deleterious changes to cartilage. Running aged dogs on a
condyle and patella surface of the femur. In addition, there
treadmill at 9.6-12.8 km/h for 1 h/d, 6 d/week for 8 months
was a 28% increase in GAG content of the femoral con-
led to matrix degradation in the femoral head. PG content
dyles, located mainly in the intermediate and deep zones.46
was decreased, and there was irreversible destruction of
100
Section ll
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
collagen fibrils, with erosion and fibrillation of the carti-
 Forms of acute inflammatory arthritis may require periods
lage surface. Older dogs may be more vulnerable to
of physical inactivity for recovery. Observations of humans
 mechanical stress changes than younger animals.54
with rheumatoid arthritis suggest that excessive activity
A study attempted to use magnetic resonance imaging
may increase the severity of the disease.° Immobilization
(MRI) of cartilage and serum and synovial fuid markers
was chondroprotective to guinea pig stifes following an
of cartilage damage to determine if training injury to car-
intraarticular injection of iodoacetate. Animals that were
tilage could be detected and monitored in dogs training at
not immobilized had decreased GAG content and a 10-20%
different intensities." Three groups were evaluated: (1) a
reduction in the number of chondrocytes 1 week after
training group that ran on a slope of 10 degrees at a speed
injection. Three weeks after injection, cell death and loss
 of 200 m/min, (2) an intensified training group that ran on
of GAG progressed, and surface fibrillation and osteo-
a slope of 10 degrees at a speed of 300 m/min, and (3) a
phytes developed. Although the loss of GAGs was not
control group that was allowed unrestricted cage activity.
altered by immobilization after iodoacetate injection, the
Dogs in the training and intensifed groups were trained
depletion of chondrocytes was reduced. Furthermore,
daily, running for an hour in the morming and in the
neither osteophytes nor fibrillation developed.s Therefore
aftermoon for 10 weeks. Changes in the MRI examination
immobilization may be protective against exacerbation of
suggestive of early injury of articular cartilage were noted
synovitis during acute bouts of inflammatory joint disease.
 in the training and intensifed groups as early as 2 weeks
 However, isometric exercise does not appear to increase
of training. Damage was most severe at 4 to 6 weeks,
joint inflammation.f0 The effects of passive range of motion
and then gradually improved. There were no differences
and isometric exercises on experimental inflammatory
between the two training groups. Elevations of cartilage
arthritis in a rabbit model were assessed. Passive range of
oligomeric matrix protein, matrix metalloproteinases 1 and
motion significantly increased synovial leukocyte counts
3, and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 1 in
over control values of the nonexercised joints, but isomet-
serum and synovial fuid were seen in both training groups.
ric exercises across a joint with acute synovitis did not
Histologic examinations at the end of training demon-
affect synovial leukocyte count. Another factor to consider
strated cartilage damage and repair in the stife joints in
is the increased synovial cell count in joint motion as
the training and intensified groups; furthermore, the inten-
compared to the overall deleterious effects of immobiliza-
sifed group indicated more remodeling of articular carti-
tion on articular cartilage. A study of acute crystal-induced
lage. The authors concluded that high-intensity training
joint inflammation in rabbit knees compared the effects of
may induce injury, followed by a repair process. In addi-
joint movement with immobilization.61 Over 42 days,
tion, changes in biomarkers reflected pathologic changes
in the cartilage better than MRI.
malities and loss of GAGs compared with exercised joints.
Overall, joint motion enhanced the synovitis, but joint
Lifelong Training
immobilization had more adverse effects on articular car-
One study evaluated the effect of lifelong low-impact exer-
tilage. Another study of a rabbit antigen-induced synovitis
cise on articular cartilage.56 Dogs were exercised on a
model had similar findings, with less articular cartilage
treadmill at 3 km/h for 75 min, 5 d/wk for 527 weeks while
damage at the end of the 6-week study in those rabbits that
wearing jackets so that the total weight carried was 130%
 had early continuous passive range of motion as compared
of body weight. There were no ligament, meniscal, or
to those with immobilized knees.6 Therefore, it seems
cartilage injuries, or osteophytes found on necropsy. Bio-
prudent to allow active motion of infamed joints, with
 chemical, cartilage thickness, and biomechanical proper-
reasonable caution. Aquatic exercise may be appropriate to
ties were not affected by training. These results suggest
reduce weight-bearing stresses on articular cartilage while
that a lifetime of relatively low-impact weight-bearing
allowing active joint motion.
exercise in dogs with normal joints does not cause altera-
tions in the structure and mechanical properties of articular
Abnormal Biomechanical Stresses
cartilage that might lead to joint degeneration.S6
detrimental effects on articular cartilage in animals with
Effects of Exercise on Cartilage during
normal joints, training program may be deleterious to
Acute Inflammation
articular cartilage in dogs with abnormal biomechanical
 Excessive exercise during periods of acute joint inflamma-
stresses acting on joints. Transection of the CCL is a
tion may exacerbate synovitis. Passively exercising the
common model to produce OA. OA occurs as a result of
stife joints of dogs in a model of acute inflammation for
joint instability during weight bearing. Joint immobiliza-
5 seconds every 15 minutes for 4 hours resulted in a
tion may be somewhat protective against OA development.
twofold increase in the synovial fuid leukocyte count,
 In a CCL transection model, the stife joint of one group
whereas exercise for 5 minutes every 15 minutes for 4
was immobilized in a cast for 12 weeks, and the other
hours produced a ninefold increase in infamed joints.57
group had no immobilization for 12 weeks.22 Stifes of
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
101
dogs with CCL transection without immobilization had
immobilized joints, aspirin administration did not preclude
changes typical of OA, including increased water content
reversal of these changes if the dog was allowed to walk
and PG synthesis, and decreased PG content, but the car-
freely for 3 weeks after cast removal.69 However, if dogs
tilage thickness was normal. Osteophytes were not seen
ran daily on a treadmill for 3 weeks after cast removal, the
with CCL transection and immobilization, but the cartilage
decrease in GAG content of immobilized knees persisted
was atrophic (40% thinner), water content was increased,
and actually worsened in dogs receiving aspirin.
and PG content and synthesis were diminished. These data
Although high doses of aspirin may have detrimental
suggest that OA develops with cruciate ligament transec-
effects on cartilage, other NSAIDs apparently have little
tion as a result of mechanical instability. If the knee is
or no negative effects at doses that achieve expected levels
immobilized after cruciate transection so that loading is
in synovial fuid. In fact some NSAIDs may be somewhat
reduced, OA does not develop in the short term.
 chondroprotective, including carprofen,71.2 deracoxib,73.74
and etodolac.75.76
Effects of Medications on
 Treatment with corticosteroids may also have detrimen-
Immobilized Cartilage
tal effects on normal cartilage and cartilage of immobilized
Medications are commonly prescribed for dogs with joint
limbs. Prednisone given to normal dogs with immobilized
injuries. Many of these drugs may have deleterious effects
stife joints resulted in a 58% loss of GAG content in one
on articular cartilage metabolism, especially if the joint is
-pand suaaoan sop jo suot pazouuou u e spms
immobilized. For example, fuoroquinolones, such as enro-
nisone, GAG content decreased 11-31%, compared with
foxacin and ciprofoxacin, may be toxic to chondrocytes,
controls.
resulting in cellular changes that alter cell adhesion.63
 The use of HA in dogs may have some benefit to articu-
Knowledge of these effects may result in more effective
lar cartilage following immobilization. In one study, stifes
rehabilitation strategies to minimize damage to cartilage.
were immobilized for 4 weeks using transarticular extermal
Altermatively, some drugs may provide beneficial effects to
skeletal fixation.? Treated dogs received HA. The PG
immobilized cartilage.
content was reduced after immobilization in all dogs.
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such
Remobilization of the stifes was associated with damage
as aspirin, are commonly used in the management of OA.
to the surface and tangential layers of cartilage. However,
a au pu u siss  ssdns A us
remobilization with HA improved PG content and reduced
cartilage, as well as in early OA cartilage, such as that
structural damage. In another study, casts were placed on
following CCL transection.6468 Aspirin may affect GAG
the hindlimbs of dogs for 92 days. Beginning on day 56,
synthesis by inhibiting uridine diphosphate-glucose dehy-
dogs received intraarticular injections of HA. Injections
drogenase, an enzyme important in the synthesis of chon-
were repeated at 4-day intervals until the end of the study.
droitin sulfate.64 Uptake of acetylsalicylic acid increases by
Although femoral condylar articular cartilage had decreased
35% in osteoarthritic cartilage, suggesting that the drug
 PG content in all cast groups, the decrease was less in the
 permeates it more readily than in normal cartilage. The
HA-treated group. HA may inhibit infammatory media-
lower PG content of OA cartilage may be more important
tors, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and
than fibrillation or surface disruption in rendering it vulner-
Ar vh e pi a sapms ao e usfans
able to aspirin.6 In addition, aspirin suppresses GAG syn-
not be beneficial for treatment of OA, however.830
thesis in unloaded cartilage to a much greater extent in
vitro than it does in loaded cartilage707 Aspirin also mark-
Joint Capsule
edly reduces prostaglandin Ez synthesis by the cartilage,
and drug concentrations in cartilage from loaded zones are
Jower than those in cartilage from unloaded sites.
Changes in Joint Capsule
Aspirin administration aggravates the changes that
with Immobilization
occur in cartilage during limb immobilization. In one
Joint capsules are also affected by immobilization and
study, a high dose of aspirin (40 mg/kg tid) was adminis-
remobilization. The functional  and structural  conse-
tered daily for 6 weeks while one hindlimb was immobi-
quences of immobilization and remobilization of the gle-
lized in a cast.69 Whereas the cartilage of contralateral
nohumeral joint after 12 weeks of immobilization were
nonimmobilized limbs in dogs receiving aspirin had normal
studied in 10 beagle dogs.8 One forelimb was immobj-
GAG content, the decreases in GAG content and net PG
lized in a cast. The cast was removed and remobilization
synthesis were significantly greater in immobilized stifes
was allowed for 4, 8, and 12 weeks. After 12 weeks of
receiving aspirin as compared with immobilized stifes
immobilization, the passive ROM was markedly impaired,
alone. Aspirin also apparently causes synthesis of type I
 intraarticular pressure was increased during movement,
ai enne oydone Aq uaos l adn u ra
and the filling volume of the joint cavity was reduced.
during immobilization. Although these results indicate
There was synovial lining hyperplasia and vascular prolif-
that aspirin has an adverse effect on articular cartilage of
eration in the wall of the joint capsule, but there was no
102
Section ll
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
increase of fibrous collagen in the capsular wall. Both the
periarticular connective tissue was type I collagen, whereas
functional and structural changes were unaltered after 4
type II collagen, which occurs in response to inflamma-
weeks of remobilization, but after 8 weeks they began to
tion, was not present.9 The periarticular connective tissue
reverse, and they retumed to normal levels after 12 weeks.
contracture process is apparently different from the intraar-
Both functional and structural changes after 12 weeks of
ticular process in which fibrofatty connective tissue and
immobilization of a normal glenohumeral joint are revers-
ible by remobilization. The collagen composition of the
confimmed that types I and MI collagen were not increased
capsule seems unrelated to the degree of capsular contrac-
in the joint capsule following immobilization of rat knees,
tion that occurs during 12 weeks of immobilization.
suggesting that another process, such as synovial or cap-
Similar changes were observed in the carpus and elbow
sular adhesions, was responsible for joint contracture." In
in dogs in which normal forelimbs were immobilized for
addition to potential changes in collagen content, GAG and
16 weeks.?2 All dogs had a 20-30% decrease in ROM in
water content decrease in the joint capsule and synovium
the elbow and carpal joints, which retumed to normal
with immobilization.9 This may reduce the plasticity and
within 6 weeks after remobilization. In addition, all dogs
lubrication efficiency of these tissues.
were significantly lame immediately following immobili-
Changes of the joint capsule undergoing contracture
zation, but retumed to soundness within 6 weeks after
may also be related to growth factors. Joint capsule may
remobilization began. Limbs casted for 32 weeks had
produce transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-β,) and
severe joint stiffness and muscle atrophy, and recovery of
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) after immobiliza-
normal limb use was delayed by several weeks. Deficits
tion, and these growth factors may play a role in causing
were also present after only 12 weeks of immobilization,
and maintaining capsular changes. Collagen synthesis
but full function resumed much sooner.
and myoblast induction are related to TGF-β, and CTGF
It is helpful to know which tissues contribute to joint
- I ad sanu ose H ezs d-H Aq pena s
contractures following prolonged immobilization. One
lagen formation. In a fexion knee immobilization model
study evaluated contractures in a rat model by immobiliz-
 in rats, TGF-β, CTGF, and fibrotic change were greater
ing one knee in fexion.4 After 8 weeks, the animals were
in the caudal capsule and may have resulted in limited
allowed to resume unrestricted activity for 4 weeks. Inter-
motion in extension.92 Another study of joint injury fol-
estingly, 88% of the contractures remained in the immobi-
lowed by immobilization indicated similar increases in
lized group after dividing skin and muscle, suggesting an
mRNA and protein levels for collagen types I and III,
important contribution of the caudal knee capsule in limit-
matrix metalloproteinases 1 and 13, and TGF-β, were
ing knee mobility. In fact, another model in rats confinmed
significantly greater in immobilized capsules compared
the role of the joint capsule in contracture during knee joint
with controls, whereas tissue inhibitor of matrix metal-
immobilization." Joint contracture rapidly progressed
loproteinases were significantly less in experimental cap-
after joint immobilization until 8 weeks and advanced
sules.93 It may be possible to prevent joint contractures
more slowly after 8 weeks, suggesting that joint contrac-
by somehow blocking these growth factors. In another
ture develops early in immobilization and progresses over
study, although both TGF-β, and CTGF were increased
time. After releasing the caudal capsule, the immobilized
 in the joint capsule after immobilization, collagen type I
 group regained knee extension.
was not increased.93
The contribution of collagen content as a specific cause
 The specific cause of joint capsule contracture may be
of joint capsule contracture is somewhat controversial.
associated with the proliferation of myofibroblasts in the
Type I collagen composes approximately 85% of the col-
joint capsule following immobilization. In one study rabbit
lagen content of the joint capsule, and provides mechanical
 knee joints were rigidly immobilized in maximum fexion.93
strength, contributes to tissue elasticity, and is produced in
 After 8 weeks groups were allowed periods of remobiliza-
sites undergoing fibrosis.6 Collagen type Iml may be
tion for 0, 8, 16, or 32 weeks. The average fexion contrac-
 present in tissues requiring high levels of mechanical com-
s sdno ugezoau au ui aa sm saauy jo aim
pliance. It is a constituent of normal synovial tissue, and
compared with nonimmobilized controls, especially during
is also present in infamed and proliferative rheumatoid
early mobilization. Myofibroblast numbers in the posterior
synovium. Some studies have shown an increase in joint
joint capsules were elevated four- to fivefold in the knees
capsule collagen content, especially with concurrent joint
with contractures when compared with the contralateral
injury,87-89 whereas others have shown no change or even
knees, suggesting that these cells may be involved with
a decrease in collagen content with joint immobilization.
joint contracture. A follow-up study indicated that these
In a rat knee immobilization model, mRNA of type I col-
changes occur relatively soon after immobilization, and the
lagen decreased rapidly after immobilization, but the
changes persist for some time.93 Differentiated myofibro-
immunoreactivity of the capsule was not changed in the
blasts are characterized by the expression of alpha-smooth
u og suod an Aue n sdno qou au no paziou
muscle actin (o-SMA), a protein associated with the con-
another study, the collagen of control and immobilized
tractile properties of this cell.94
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
103
Mast cells and neuropeptide nerve fiber numbers may
Box 7-5
Summary of Effects of Disuse and
also be involved in joint capsule contracture because ele-
 Remobilization on Joint Capsule
vated numbers of these cells have been implicated in other
fibrotic and contracture conditions. In a posttraumatic
 Immobilization may result in reduced (20-30%) passive
contracture model in rabbits, the knee joint was immobi-
range of motion, lameness, muscle atrophy, increased
lized.% Rabbits were sacrificed 4 or 40 weeks after surgery
intraarticular pressure during joint motion, reduced filling
(including 32 weeks of remobilization). Myofbroblasts,
volume of the joint, synovial hyperplasia, and vascular
mast cells, and nerve fibers were four to five times greater
proliferation of the joint capsule.
in the contracture capsules when compared with the control
 Improvement may occur 4 to 8 weeks after remobilization.
 Contracture of joints during immobilization occurs relatively
capsules at all time points, suggesting myofibroblasts, mast
rapidly in the first 4 to 8 weeks and involves the flexor side
cells, or neuropeptide infuences may underlie some of the
of the joint capsule.
pathologic changes in the joint capsule following trauma.
The role of collagen in joint capsule contracture is
In addition, the neuropeptides substance P and calcitonin
con troversial.
 gene-related peptide can cause mast cell degranulation,
TGF-β, CTGF, and matrix metalloproteinases may be
and this may contribute to neurogenic infammation, pain,
involved in joint contracture.
 and swelling.*6
 Myofbroblasts may be the cells that result in joint capsule
contracture (may increase four- to five-fold)
 Remobilization of Joint Capsule
Changes occur relatively soon after immobilization
Immobilization
α-SMA, a protein associated with the contractile
The form of joint mobilization may be important in restor-
 properties of this cell, is expressed.
ing joint motion after a period of rehabilitation. The effect
four- to five-fold with joint capsule contracture.
of low torque-long duration stretching to increase the
Low torque, long duration stretching over time may be more
ROM and to restore the mechanical properties of con-
effective in improving joint capsule contracture.
tracted joints was studied in rat knees immobilized for
Stretching with heat application may be more effective.
40 days.97 After remobilization, the contracted knees were
 Frequent, regular therapeutic exercises are more effective in
placed in one of four treatment groups treated with repeated
improving joint mobility than free activity.
stretches of diverse torques and duration: stretching
The effects of immobilization on joint capsule may be
with low torque (0.02 Nm) and long duration (40 minutes),
improved by the use of intraarticular sodium hyaluronate,
high torque (0.045 Nm) and short duration (20 minutes),
cycloox ygenase-2 inhibitors (reduces the expression of
high torque and long duration, and low torque and short
C-SMA), and medications that inhibit mast cell
duration. Animals received three sessions a week for
degr anulati on.
4 weeks, for a total of 12 treatment sessions. Low-torque
α-SMA, Alpha-smooth muscle actin; CTGF, connective tissue growth factor:
and long-duration repeated stretching resulted in greater
TGF, transforming growth factor.
restoration of ROM with more normal mechanical pro-
perties compared with high-torque and short-duration
stretching.
Medications for Joint Capsule
Heat may be useful to improve motion in joints that
Immobilization
have contracture after immobilization. Infrared and ultra-
Although evidence exists for improving joint capsule
sonic heat therapies were compared in a rat knee fexion
stiffness using physical modalities, little is known about
contracture model.9 Six treatment sessions of stretching
pharmacologic intervention to improve joint capsule
with infrared or ultrasound over a 2-week period were
changes as a result of immobilization. However, intraar-
more effective than stretching without heat, but there was
ticular sodium hyaluronate may be of benefit. Rabbit knee
no significant differences between the two heat treatment
 joints were immobilized in one study.100 A 1% solution of
sodium HA was administered intraarticularly at a dosage
groups.
Regular therapeutic exercise is also important to recover
of 0.1 mL/kg body weight twice weekly. Changes in joint
joint motion after immobilization. Joint ROM was reduced
contracture, articular cartilage, and synovial membrane
by 46% in a 2-week ankle joint immobilization model in
were compared with a saline control group during a
rats.99 Immobilization was followed by free cage activity
6-week immobilization period. In all groups, joint contrac-
and free remobilization or treadmill running once a week,
ture and articular cartilage degeneration progressed, but
three times a week, or six times a week. Ankle joint motion
were inhibited by HA. In addition, the effects on decreas-
 sdn asiaxa an aar [ u paadu sem
ing joint contracture and articular cartilage degeneration
comparison with the free remobilization group, with
were more potent with higher-molecular-weight HA. Inhi-
running three and six times a week being more beneficial
bition of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) with NSAIDs may
for recovery of joint contracture compared with no running
 downregulate the expression of α-SMA, a protein associ-
or once-a-week running (Box 7-5).
 ated with the contractile function of myofbroblasts.?
104
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Models of joint contracture have shown an increase
Muscle
 in mast cells in fibrotic tissue, suggesting that mast cells
may be important in joint capsule stiffness. Mast cells
Canine Muscle Fiber Types
synthesize and secrete proteases, growth factors, and cyto-
kines, many of which have mitogenic effects on fibroblasts
Several types of muscle fibers exist, which perform some-
and myofibroblasts.10 Medications that inhibit mast cell
what specialized functions. Traditionally, they have been
activation, such as ketotifen fumarate, have antiallergic and
classifed as two general types: type I (slow twitch) and
antihistamine properties. In particular, ketotifen noncom-
type II (fast twitch) fibers (Table 7-1). Type I fibers are
petitively blocks the binding of histamine to its H1 receptor
more adapted for oxidative metabolism and functions, such
and inhibits calcium-dependent vesicle degranulation of
 as maintaining posture, whereas type II fbers are associ-
activated mast cells (mast cell stabilization).1o? In a rabbit
ated with glycolytic metabolism and the generation of
posttraumatic joint contracture model, animals treated with
 power and speed during muscle contraction. Fiber types
ketotifen had reductions in the severity of joint contrac.
previously identifed in immature and mature canine skel-
tures and the degree of joint capsule myofibroblast and
etal muscles include types I, IIA, and IC, with the latter
mast cell hyperplasia.12 However, contractures in the
Type IIC fibers likely represent a transitional fiber between
 compared with nonoperative controls. Substance P, a neu-
types I and II and are precursors to type IIA and IB fibers
 ropeptide that is an important mediator in the transmission
in neonatal animals. Type IIA fibers have more oxidative
of pain, is released into joints and is an important proin-
flammatory agent. Substance P is also a potent mast cell
and power. Type IIB fibers have less oxidative capacity.
 activator and is secreted in response to pain and injury. One
The presence of true type IB fibers has been debated in
study has documented elevated substance P in nerve fibers
the dog, and type IDog fibers, which are peculiar to the
in contracted joint capsules of humans and rabbits.
dog, or type IX fibers have been suggested as a fiber type
Increased expression of substance P has also been docu-
that is similar to but does not correspond exactly with clas-
mented in other models of fbrosis, suggesting that this
 may be another target to modulate capsular stiffness.° Due
fibers in the dog may only be present in the laryngeal
consideration for the potential for delayed wound healing,
muscles. The interpretation of fiber type composition
including bone healing, should be made if considering
 depends on the staining and incubation methods used.105
treatments that inhibit mast cell function.
Type IB or type IDog fibers are not found in all muscles
Table 7-1
 Canine Muscle Fiber Types
SLOW TWITCH OXIDATIVE FIBERS
Type I
Greatest oxidative capacity
FAST TWITCH GLYCOLYTIC FIBERS
Type II
Type IIA
 Greater oxidative power than IB, but function in generation of speed and power
Type IIB
Classic fiber type in other animals, least oxidative. True type IB fibers may not exist in dogs
except in the laryngeal muscles.
Type IIC
May be transitional fiber between types I and II, precursors to type IIA and IB in neonatal
animals
Type IIDog
 System that recognizes this as a peculiar fiber type to dogs, similar to type IIB in other species
Type IIX
System that recognizes this as a fber type in dogs similar to, but not exactly corresponding
with, type IB fibers in other species. Rapidly contracting, greatest cross-ssectional area,
lowest concentration of capillaries and muscle nuclei. Still has high oxidative capacity
compared to other species (intermediate between types I and IIA of other species), but is the
least oxidative muscle fiber type in dogs.
HYBRID FIBERS
Type I+IIA
Second greatest oxidative capacity
Type IIAX
Intermediate between fiber types IIA and IIX
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
105
and were biologically significant only in the semitendino-
the percentages of muscle fiber types between individuals
sus muscle in one study.104 The metabolic potential of these
of the same breed for the same muscle.1o9 Other studies
fibers is fairly similar to that of IIA fibers, but significantly
have shown that greyhounds have greater fber size and a
different to that of IB fibers in other mammals, suggesting
higher percentage of type II fibers than mixed-breed dogs,
that they may be designed to play a different role during
 presumably because of the demand for intense physical
locomotion. All canine muscle fbers have an abundant
activity.!"0 However, there were no differences in fiber
capillary supply and moderate to high oxidative capacity,
types in trained versus untrained Greyhounds, indicating
which may be related to the extraordinary athletic capabil-
that the distribution of fiber types may depend more on
ity of dogs.
breed and genetics than level of training for this breed.
Recent methods of assessing muscle fber types have
 The size of muscles may be genetically related to a
incorporated immunohistochemical analysis of myosin
negative regulator of skeletal muscle growth, myostatin, a
heavy chain content of muscle fiber types rather than
member of the TGF-β family of growth and differentiation 
relying strictly on enzymatic staining. This technology has
factors.1ll Decreased expression of myostatin as a result of 
suggested that there are several muscle fiber types in dogs,
 genetic mutation results in larger muscle mass in knockout
with some of these being hybrid muscle fiber types.10 It is
mice and double-muscled cattle. Recently, a mutation in
believed that these hybrid fibers allow fine-tuning activity
the myostatin gene was found in some whippet dogs.112
to allow for different contraction forces, contraction veloc-
 Dogs with this mutation, known as "bully” whippets, are
ities, and resistance to fatigue. The main fiber type iso-
more muscular and faster in racing events. However, some
forms are type I, IA, and IIX, which have been identified 
dogs with this trait have muscle cramping in the shoulder
 in previous studies. Hybrid fiber types include type I + IIA
and thigh and do not conform to the American Kennel Club
and HIAX. Small amounts of type IB fibers have been
 breed standards; approximately 50% of affected dogs have
found in laryngeal muscles. Type IX fibers are rapidly
 an overbite.117 The role of myostatin in resistance training
contracting fibers and have the greatest cross-sectional area
 and subsequent detraining has been studied in men.113 After
and lowest concentration of capillaries and muscle nuclei.
30 or 90 days of resistance training, followed by 3 to 90
Nevertheless, type IX fibers are more oxidative than other
days of detraining, myostatin RNA levels in muscle biop-
species, and it is this unusually high oxidative capacity that
sies significantly increased. In addition, type II muscle
is probably responsible for the high endurance ability of
fibers began to atrophy after 3 days, with half of the
dogs. Oxidative capacity decreases significantly in the
acquired fiber area lost after 10 days of detraining. Myo-
order I> I+ IIA > IIA > IIAX > IIX. Unlike other species,
statin may play a role in muscle atrophy with immobiliza-
IIX fibers appear to be intermediate betw een type I and HIA
tion. In addition, there is a different amount of myostatin
fibers regarding their contractile, metabolic, and morpho-
in different muscles. In people, the greatest amount of
logic features.107
myostatin is found in quadriceps muscle fibers containing
One study of the semitendinosus muscle found that
100% type IB fbers, whereas the soleus muscle does not
hound-type dogs had the largest muscle fibers, but the
usou io siaqy alosnu all adai aqeiaidde Xue aau
mRNA.114
breed and beagle dogs with similar activity levels.108 In
Different muscle groups have variable muscle fiber type
 general, there are no differences between the left and right
patterms that may be due to function and use (Table
7-2)10.11s In fact, muscle fiber type may change if muscle
limb muscles, but there may be significant differences in
Table 7-2
Muscle Fiber Types in Various Muscles of Adult, Mixed-Breed Dogs
Muscle
%
Muscle
Fiber
Types
1
I+ILA
ILA
IIAX
IIX
Semitendinosus
11.6
5.8
36.1
38.4
8.1
Latissimus dorsi
18.1
2.3
31.4
32.9
15.2
Gluteus medius
19.9
3.8
48.1
22.9
5.3
Triceps brachii
27.1
4.2
48.3
20.3
0
Longissimus lumborum
38.4
5.1
46.5
10.1
0
Rectus femoris
48.1
2.6
32.5
16.9
0
Vastus intermedius
65.3
1.0
31.6
2.0
0
All muscles
27.1
3.1
37.1
24.8
7.9
Adapted from Acevedo LM, Rivero JL: New insights into skeletal muscle fibre types in the dog with particular focus towards hybrid myosin phenotypes. Cell Tissue Res
323:283-303, 2006.
106
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
function is altered by transposing muscles. In one study,
humans may attain levels of capillarity comparable to
the fibularis longus tendon was severed and surgically
their active young counterparts, even when performing
transferred to the tendon of the cranial tibial muscle, a
considerably less exercise.1?3 In addition, there were no
functionally different muscle.11s Later muscle biopsies
age-related effects on blood fow to the triceps, deltoideus,
demonstrated an increase in type I and type IB fibers,
fexor carpi ulnaris, superficial digital fexor, gastrocne-
which was similar to the fiber composition of the cranial
mius, gracilis, semimembranosus, and semitendinosus
tibial muscle. These findings indicate that muscle fber
muscles of dogs during maximal exercise on a treadmill.123
remodeling may occur and suggests that changes in muscle
Skeletal Muscle Oxidative Capacity
fiber type are manifestations of functional adaptation.
Muscle biopsy technique may affect the results of
The ability of muscles to function depends on oxygen
muscle fber typing.1o9.16 For example, the percentage of
 delivery and utilization by muscles. Oxygen uptake by the 
type I fibers in the cranial tibial and semitendinosus
gastrocnemius muscle group of dogs appears to be linearly
 muscles progressively increases from the superficial and
related to extermal work rate and to the load against which
middle regions to the deepest portion. Although the dis-
the muscles shorten.123 The major contribution to oxygen
tance of the section from the origin of the muscle does not
uptake during contraction appears to be the number of
significantly affect the mean percentage of fiber types, the
contracting muscle fibers. Oxygen uptake of muscle also
variation in fiber types varies less deeper within the muscle,
increases with stimulation frequency, reaching a peak at
s0 a needle biopsy taken from deep within muscle should
five twitches per second.124 Further increases in stimulation
 provide a more consistent and reliable estimate of fiber 
frequency result in lower oxygen uptake, perhaps second-
type proportion than a superficial specimen.
 ary to mechanical restraints imposed by contraction duty
cycle and vascular compression. However, muscle contrac-
Factors Affecting Muscle Contraction
tions may have only a small direct effect on muscle blood
Skeletal Muscle Blood Flow
fow. Their main effect may be to reduce venous pres-
The ability of muscles to contract depends on blood flow
sures.12s The limiting factors for skeletal muscle oxygen
to the muscle, primarily because of the oxygen delivered
uptake vary according to the intensity of muscle contrac-
to the working muscle from the red blood cells. Small
tions.126 During transitions from rest to contractions of dog
decreases in blood fow are associated with reduced con-
gastrocnemius muscles with 70% of peak oxygen uptake,
traction strength. When muscles contract, muscle blood
 Oxygen delivery to muscle, intramuscular blood fow, and
fow typically increases, depending on the metabolic rate
peripheral oxygen diffusion are not limiting factors for
that is established by the contraction patterm and frequency.
skeletal muscle oxygen uptake kinetics. An increase in
The ability of canine oxidative skeletal muscle to maintain
capillary density (refecting a reduced diffusion distance
isometric force is limited by blood fow.117 This limitation 
caused by reduced fber size) also may not increase the
implies a mismatching of blood fow and the metabolic
muscle oxygen diffusing capacity, suggesting that diffu-
rate. The blood fow past a muscle cell is determined by
sion distance is not a primary determinant of muscle
the number of capillaries per fiber, the vascular conduc-
 Oxy gen diffusing capacity.127 Therefore oxygen uptake may
tance, the capillaries perfused, and vascular autoregulation.
be mainly determined by intrinsic skeletal muscle oxida-
The resulting mismatching of fow and metabolism accel-
tive metabolism.
erates the fatigue process.
 Maximum oxygen uptake is limited by oxygen delivery
The frequency of muscle contraction and tension devel-
as a result of a limited and uneven distribution of muscle
opment affects blood fow during muscle contractions.118
blood fow. When oxygen delivery is reduced, hypoxia
The magnitude of the blood fow response to maximal
results in reduction of muscle performance. Endurance
exercise in different muscles is extremely varied. For
 training results in an increased number of capillaries in
example, skeletal muscle blood fow increased progres-
muscle over time. Hypoxia enhances angiogenesis in
sively up to maximal oxygen uptake in the gracilis, semi-
canine skeletal muscle after endurance exercise, whereas
tendinosus, and semimembranosus muscles of dogs in one
lactic acid appears to inhibit vascular endothelial cells.178
study.l19 However, the blood fow response to maximal
Increased oxygen delivery to muscle may decrease fatigue.
exercise leveled off during submaximal exercise in the
Metabolic rates can be increased by increasing oxygen
gastrocnemius muscle. In addition, there are species differ-
supply.21 During high metabolic rate isotonic tetanic
ences in skeletal muscle blood fow.120 Muscle blood fow
contractions, muscle fatigue was diminished by polycy-
can reach 300-400 mL/100 g of tissue/min in dogs, ponies,
themia, but the effect appeared to be transient.1? Norepi-
and rats, whereas it reaches only 75 mL/100 g of tissue/
ao aos ui sas a d u arda
min in a 75-kg man. The role of the diffusion gradient of
oxygen consumption, whereas β-blockers, such as pro-
 Oxygen from the blood to muscle cells is also important in
pranolol, reduce the rate of oxygen uptake during exercise
 exercising muscle.121
 a t s oe aaorai sraxasd p
Muscle capillarity decreases in aged dogs.122 Endurance 
 significant contribution to postexercise recovery oxygen
training, however, enhances capillarity, and old rats and
consumption.
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
107
Oxidative capacity may decline in many muscles of
chronic heart failure. Dogs with chronic heart failure have
sedentary individuals. Endurance training can greatly
changes in skeletal muscle fiber type, fiber size, and fiber
improve endurance in old age with an increase in muscle
Oxidative capacity.131 With endurance training, old indi-
muscle fiber area, and the percentage of skeletal muscle
viduals may attain levels of muscle oxidative capacity
type I fibers may be reduced, whereas the percentage of
similar to those in identically training young individuals.
skeletal muscle type II fibers may be increased with heart
failure. There are apparently no ultrastructural abnormali-
Skeletal Muscle Carbohydrate Metabolism
ties, no differences in developed tension per gram muscle
Muscle fatigue may be the result of several factors, with
during stimulation, maximal developed tension, muscle
the relative contribution of each dependent on the condi-
fatigability, or preferential atrophy or hypertrophy of either
tion and nature of the exercise, including the intensity,
u rm s jn a s u a rng a
duration, muscle mass, and energy substrate. Fatigue may
failure. Although skeletal muscle atrophy occurs with heart
occur as the result of accumulation of hydrogen ions, inor-
failure, the remaining muscle appears to exhibit normal
ganic phosphate, substrate depletion, and alterations in
performance and metabolism. These changes may be the
result of adaptations of skeletal muscle to anaerobic
and maintenance of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) levels
metabolism.
are critical to avoid fatigue.
An increase in muscle oxidative capacity contributes
Response of Muscle to Disuse
to reduced glycogen depletion. Muscle glucose transport
is enhanced after a bout of exercise, regardless of
and Immobilization
age.131 Muscle glycogen depletion, creatine phosphate
The muscles most vulnerable to disuse atrophy are the
depletion, and lactate accumulation during contractile
postural muscles that contain a relatively large proportion
activity are exaggerated in older animals, apparently
 of type I (slow-twitch) muscle fibers, extensor muscles,
secondary to reduced muscle oxidative capacity and
and muscles that cross a single joint (Box 7-6). Conversely,
blood fow. Resting muscle glycogen concentration is
those least susceptible to atrophy are those not used as
diminished in older humans, probably in part because of a
postural muscles (antagonist muscles), fexor muscles,
more sedentary lifestyle. Although several months of
muscles that cross multiple joints, and muscles that are
endurance training raise muscle glycogen concentration in
predominantly composed of type II (fast-twitch) muscle
older people, levels still remain below those of younger
fibers.58.13s Immobilization reduces the chronic load on
individuals.
these muscles (Figure 7-4). Muscle strength decreases
Studies of the role of intracellular oxygen on the efflux
rapidly during the first week of immobilization, with
of lactate from skeletal muscle during graded exercise from
further losses occurring more gradually over time.136 Loss
submaximal to maximal effort indicate that a constant
of muscle force production is not entirely explained by
intracellular oxygen content is unrelated to increasing
muscle atrophy alone. There may be up to a 50% reduction
lactate effux.121 Furthermore, muscle tension development
in peak force, even when the muscle mass has been nor-
is reduced by lactate.132 This effect of the lactate ion
malized to constant muscle mass. This suggests that a
 appears to be independent of pH.
cellular component may be involved, such as an alteration
in sarcoplasmic reticulum function. In addition, there is
Aging
 decreased mitochondrial function and reduced protein syn-
Muscle mass typically declines in old age, secondary to
thesis. Interestingly, there is often an increase in capillary
muscle fiber atrophy.131 The loss of strength in old age is
 density and sometimes blood fow to muscles undergoing
 predominantly accounted for by reduced muscle mass.
Although there are no apparent effects of aging on muscle
less effect on type II muscle fibers because these do not
fiber type percentages in dogs, there is a 25% reduction
perform a major function in maintaining posture. In fact.
with reduced stress, there may be an increase in type II
The cross-sectional area of type I fibers is relatively
muscle fibers. This results in increased maximum muscle
unchanged, however, and may actually increase in some
velocity, not only in type I muscle fibers, but also in type
muscles. The mechanism for age-related atrophy is
I muscle fibers. These changes help attenuate a decline in
unknown, but may be related to a loss in the number of
power output as a result of atrophy.
alpha motoneurons.131
The length at which the muscle is immobilized also
affects the degree of atrophy, with muscles immobilized in
Heart Disease and Skeletal Muscle
a shortened position atrophying to a greater degree, with
Patients with chronic heart failure may be limited by exer-
reduced force generating capacity and oxidative activity.
tional fatigue. Changes in skeletal muscle may contribute
When a muscle is immobilized in a shortened position, the
to this fatigue, because biochemical and histologic abnor
number of sarcomeres decreases, leading to reduced
 malities of skeletal muscle may develop in patients with
muscle fiber length. If the muscle is immobilized in a
108
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Box 7-6
Summary of the Effects of Disuse and Immobilization on Skeletal Muscle
 Postural type I muscle fibers, extensor muscles, and muscles
 Inflammatory process may be present during atrophy.
that cross a single joint are at greatest risk for atrophy.
mRNA upregulation of TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, and leukocyte
Immobilization with the muscle in a shortened position
marker CD45 occurs.
results in greater atrophy.
TNF-o initiates transcription of NF-kB.
 Muscle strength decreases rapidly during the first week of
 Some NF-kB mediators (p50 and Bcl-3) increase and are
immobilization, with further losses occurring more gradually.
associated with disuse muscle atrophy, suggesting an
 Loss of muscle force production not entirely explained by
alternate, noninflammatory NF-kB.
muscle atrophy alone.
 Inhibition of NF-<B alone does not prevent muscle atrophy.
 Alteration in sarcoplasmic reticulum function occurs.
·
NF-kB activates MuRF-1.
Sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium uptake is decreased.
 Some protein kinases activated by TNF-o. or ROS, such as
·
Mitochondrial function is decreased.
hydrogen peroxide, may be associated with oxidative stress
·
 Protein synthesis is reduced.
and the generation of ROS, which also activate NF-kB and
Oxidative and glycolytic enzyme activities are reduced and
FOXO.
are associated with reduced capacity for energy production.
 The IGF- 1/PI3K/Akt pathway is an important intracellular
 Responsiveness to insulin is reduced, which affects ability
regulator of muscle hypertrophy.
of muscle to take up glucose.
·
 IGF-1 stimulates activation of PI3K.
·Ca-ATPase activity is reduced following immobilization.
·
 P13K creates a cell membrane binding site for a serine/
 Muscle atrophy is an imbalance of protein formation and
threonine kinase.
degradation, being primarily a decrease in muscle protein
 Akt (also referred to as protein kinase B) activates
synthesis.
rapamycin (mTOR) kinase.
Muscle RNA synthesis is decreased up to 50%.
 mTOR increases protein synthesis by activating p70S6
Ubiquitin-proteasome pathway of intracellular protein
kinase and eukaryotic translation factor 4E binding protein
degradation accounts for majority of nonlysosomal protein
1 (4E-BP-1), regulatory proteins involved in protein
degradation and is a complex multicomponent system that 
synthesis.
selectively targets proteins for destruction.
·Pathway uses ubiquitin, a protein that covalently binds to
ligases that are important in signaling muscle atrophy.
targeted proteins and acts as a destruction signal for the
·
The IGF-1/PI3K/Akt pathway also activates FOXO proteins,
proteins.
transcription factors that regulate target genes for
Ubiquitin-tagged proteins degraded by a large protease
metabolism, apoptosis, and cell cycles.
complex, the 26S proteasome.
 Akt phosphorylates FOxO proteins.
·Responsible for liberation of amino acids via cleavage of
·
 This prevents translocation to the cell nucleus, inhibiting
proteins such as myosin.
tran scripti on functi ons.
Ubiquitin ligases MuRF-1 and MAFbx increase more
 Blockade of FOXO by the IGF-1/PI3K/Akt pathway is
significantly.
important to prevent muscle atrophy.
Ca-ATPase, Calcium adenosine triphosphatase; FOXO, forkhead box O; IGF insulinlike growth factor; IL, interleukin; MAFbx, muscle atrophy F-box:; mTOR, mammalian
target of rapamycin; MuRF-1, muscle ring finger 1; NF-xB, nuclear factor kappa B; P3K, phosphatidyl inositol-3-OH kinase; ROS, reactive oxygen species; 7NF, tumor
necrosis factor.
stretched position, the fibers become lengthened because
for type II fibers, atrophy of the vastus medialis was equal
to vastus lateralis, and both atrophied more than the rectus
increased in atrophic muscles, which may result in
femoris. In fact, vastus medialis type I and I muscle fiber
increased muscle stiffness.
areas were only approximately one third of normal fol-
Models of reduced limb usage include hindlimb immo-
lowing immobilization. Tetanic torque also declined by
bilization (HI), hindlimb suspension (HS), denervation,
approximately 60%, and muscle fiber diameter correlated
and spacefight. There is greater muscle atrophy with HS
strongly with torque.139 The rectus femoris acts as a knee
than HI because HI muscles are able to contract against the
extensor and hip fexor and crosses two joints, which
immobilizing material. In contrast, HS muscles contract,
makes it less susceptible to atrophic changes because
but there is no load to contract against.
the hip joint was not immobilized in this model. The
The change in muscle fiber size and fiber percentage
changes in the vastus medialis suggest that this muscle
was studied in three heads of the dog quadriceps follow-
performs a greater postural function than the vastus
ing 10 weeks of rigid immobilization with an ESF.135
lateralis.A similar study with 10 weeks of immobilization
Muscle fber atrophy was greatest in the vastus medialis
indicated that there was a significant decrease in both type
and least in the rectus femoris. The atrophic response
I and type II fiber area, and muscle fiber areas recovered
for type I fibers was, in order from most to least atro-
to only approximately 70% of control values following
phied, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, and rectus femoris;
 4 weeks of remobilization.140 Tetanic torque improves
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
109
A
Figure 7-4  Photomicrographs of biceps femoris muscle. A, Normal muscle. B, Same muscle following 60 days of disuse. There is general atrophy
of both types I (light stained) and Il (dark stained) muscle fibers. (Figure 9-9 from Carlton W/w, McGavin MD: Thompson's special veterinary
pathology St Louis, 1995, Mosby.)
during remobilization, but remains below preimmobilized 
calcium uptake, and reduced Ca-ATPase activity following
levels.139
immobilization.
Ingeneral the muscles most
vulnerable
 The blood supply to the myotendinous junction is also
to
immobilization-induced atrophy are those that cross a
affected by immobilization. In one study of rats, the vascu-
 single joint and have a large proportion of type I muscle
lar density of the myotendinous junction was decreased by
fibers, such as the vastus medialis and vastus interme-
 30% after 3 weeks of immobilization.143 Vascular density
dius.13 The next most susceptible muscles are antigravity
returmed to normal after 8 weeks of cage remobilization.
 muscles that cross multiple joints and have primarily type
 Progressively increasing running resulted in greater vascu-
I muscle fibers. Examples of these muscles are the gastroc-
lar density. The effects of immobilization on peak oxygen
nemius and rectus femoris muscles. Muscles least suscep-
uptake and effective ox ygen diffusive conductance in skel-
tible to atrophy following immobilization are those that are
etal muscle were studied in dogs.144 Dogs were cage-
intermittently activated and have predominantly type II
confined for 8 weeks, with immobilization of a hindlimb
muscle fbers, including the cranial tibial, long digital
for the last 3 weeks. Gastrocnemius muscles were electri-
extensor, and biceps femoris muscles.
cally stimulated to elicit peak oxygen uptake at three levels
Biochemical changes also occur in muscles with immo-
of arterial oxygenation. Immobilization was sufficient to
bilization. The effect of immobilization on muscle carbo-
reduce muscle mass by 31% and citrate synthase activity by
 hydrate metabolism was investigated in dogs.141 Total
 68%; however, it had no effect on peak oxygen uptake or
carbohydrate and glycogen content of skeletal muscle fell
 Oxygen diffusive conductance. Immobilization also appar-
during immobilization. The glycogen-degrading enzyme
 ently does not affect muscle oxygen diffusing capacity.127
phosphorylase was activated 1 week after immobilization.
Other species have similar changes in muscle with
Thereafter, enzyme activity decreased and remained sig-
immobilization. Immobilization of a hindlimb of sheep for
nificantly lower. In contrast, muscle glucose and lactate
9 weeks resulted in an 8% reduction in thigh circumference
concentrations were unchanged. Oxidative and glycolytic
 and a slight decrease in the area of type I fibers.14 In addi-
enzyme activities may be reduced and are associated
tion, Na'-K+ pump concentration and citrate synthase
with reduced capacity for energy production. Immobiliza-
activity were reduced, which may contribute to fatigue
tion may also result in reduced glutathione content.
during activity. A modifed rat tail suspension model,
 Reduced muscle activity may reduce the responsiveness
which allows the rear limbs to remain mobile without any
of muscle to insulin, which affects the ability of muscle
weight bearing, was used to determine the atrophic response
to take up glucose. There is also increased total muscle
of muscle with unloading.146 Maximal muscle atrophy
calcium concentration, decreased sarcoplasmic reticulum
occurred within 14 to 30 days. The gastrocnemius was less
110
Section ll
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
severely affected by suspension than by other immobiliza-
mobilization, rest, and proper positioning of the limb in
tion techniques, suggesting that muscle atrophy in the sus-
rest and exercise.
pension model is different from immobilization atrophy.
One significant response was the occurrence of decreased
Mechanisms of Muscle Atrophy
blood fow, which may indicate that hypodynamic nonim-
It is believed that muscle atrophy occurs as a result of an
mobilized muscle has altered functional demands. Similar
imbalance of protein formation and degradation, and
changes occur in humans. Patients immobilized with a cast
although recent research has begun to unravel how this
after tibial fractures or ligamentous injuries had decreased
imbalance occurs, the exact mechanisms are unknown.
limb circumference immediately after removal of the
 Most studies suggest that decreased muscle protein synthe-
cast.147 These differences persisted even after 81 days of
sis is the prime cause of muscle atrophy, although there is
remobilization.
also transient muscle protein degradation in early muscle
Prolonged bed rest in people causes changes in muscle
atrophy. In people, muscle protein synthesis decreases
mass.148 In humans, 4 to 5 weeks of bed rest results in a
in the first 10 days of immobilization, and then the rate
10% loss of muscle mass in the lower limbs and 4 months
 of muscle synthesis appears to stabilize. RNA synthesis
of bed rest results in 20-30% loss of muscle mass. In
 also decreases with immobilization.133 Quadriceps muscle 
people, 10 minutes of standing per day during bed rest 
 protein turmover was assessed in men immediately after the
attenuates muscle atrophy by 25%. If some resistance exer-
end of 37 days of leg immobilization in a plaster cast after
cise is added, muscle atrophy is attenuated by up to 50%.
tibial fracture.'51 Quadriceps muscle protein synthetic rate
 In addition, there is an apparent shift in muscle fiber type 
was 0.046% per hour in the contralateral leg, but was only
with bed rest. After 35 days of bed rest in one study, there
was a slow to fast shift in muscle phenotype.149 Consis-
activity in the immobilized leg was 50% that of the nonim-
tently, fiber type distribution was shifted toward type II and
mobilized leg. Immobilization was associated with signifi-
 IAX fibers. Muscle fiber atrophy was variable among fiber
cant atrophy of type I muscle fibers, but no significant
types. Myosin concentration was significantly lower in
change occurred in type II fiber diameter. Mean quadriceps
type I and type IIA muscle fibers after bed rest than before
fiber volume was smaller in the injured leg by 10.6% and
bed rest, whereas the myosin/actin ratio did not vary, sug-
the difference in muscle thigh volume was 8.3%. Some
gesting a disproportionate loss of myosin compared with
studies have shown little evidence of increases in mRNA
fiber cross-sectional area and a proportional loss of myosin
for catabolic enzymes or increases in enzyme activity
and actin.
during this period,'52 although others suggest that such
Spaceflight may also result in significant loss of muscle
 increases occur very quickly after immobilization or spinal
 mass because of the loss of weight bearing and loading.148
cord transection.153 However, it appears most likely that the
Muscle volumes of the calf, thigh, and lower back were
process of muscle atrophy during immobilization is pri-
 determined before and after an 8-day space shuttle mission.
marily a result of decreased protein synthesis, with contin-
The soleus-gastrocnemius (-6.3%), anterior calf (-3.9%),
ued normal muscle breakdown.154
hamstrings (-8.3%), quadriceps (-6%), and intrinsic back
Recently, attention has focused on the role of the
(-10.3%) muscles were decreased 24 hours after landing
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway of intracellular protein deg-
compared with baseline. After 2 weeks, the hamstrings and
radation. It is believed that this system accounts for the
intrinsic lower back muscles were still below baseline.
majority of nonlysosomal protein degradation and is a
Refex inhibition of muscles, a situation in which
complex multicomponent system that selectively targets
sensory stimuli impede the voluntary activation of muscle,
proteins for destruction.'ss The pathway uses ubiquitin, a
may occur with joint injury and result in muscle atrophy,
protein that covalently binds to targeted proteins and acts 
and loss of strength and activation of the muscle. Refex
as a destruction signal for the proteins. Three distinct con-
 inhibition may be measured directly by electromyography,
jugating enzymes are involved in this process: an E1
or the sequelae of reflex inhibition may be measured,
ubiquitin-activating enzyme, an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating
such as thigh circumference measurement and muscle
enzyme, and an E3 ubiquitin-ligating enzyme.1s The
biopsy.'5o The most frequently cited causes of muscle
ubiquitin-tagged proteins are then degraded by a large pro-
refex inhibition in joint injury are pain, joint effusion, and
tease complex, the 26S proteasome. This pathway is
joint immobilization. Finally, there may be selectivity of
responsible for the actual liberation of amino acids via
affected muscles and muscle fbers with refex inhibition
cleavage of long-lived proteins, such as myosin. Two
following joint injury. In light of these findings, several
muscle-specific ubiquitin ligases, muscle ring fnger 1
suggestions have been offered for preventing refex inhibi-
(MuRF-1) and muscle atrophy F-box (MAFbx), increase
tion that can be applied to rehabilitate the most affected
more significantly than other components of this proteo-
muscle group, the quadriceps femoris. These include
lytic pathway in mice.114 A study of the molecular aspects
cryotherapy, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation,
of skeletal muscle atrophy demonstrated the importance of
electromyostimulation, traditional exercise training, joint
these ligases in a mouse model.157 In this model, significant
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
111
skeletal muscle atrophy occurred, with the myofiber size
activity inhibition attenuates cancer cachexia, its inhibition
of the cranial tibial muscle reduced by 36% compared with
 is not sufficient to prevent disuse muscle atrophy. Another
the untreated contralateral limb within a few days. MAFbx
potential mechanism of signaling muscle atrophy is
and MuRF-1 mRNAs were significantly upregulated by
the activation of MuRF-1 by NF-kB. Mitogen-activated
two- and sixfold, respectively. Interestingly, an early
protein kinases may also be involved in muscle atrophy.
inflammatory process was present during atrophy in this
especially when activated by TNF-α or reactive oxygen
study, characterized by the mRNA upregulation of TNFc,
species (ROS), such as hydrogen peroxide. Immobilization
interleukin (IL) 1, and IL-6 (2-, 2.4-, and 3.4-fold, respec-
of limbs is associated with oxidative stress and the genera-
tively), along with upregulation of the leukocyte marker
tion of ROS, which may also activate the NF-kB and
CD45 (6.1-fold). Muscle rapidly recovered with remobili-
 FOXO systems.114 Inhibition of both NF-kB and FOXO
zation, with increased levels of uncoupling protein-3
systems can reduce muscle atrophy as a result of immobi-
and  peroxisome proliferator-activated  receptor  gamma
lization. In one study of rat limb immobilization, control
 coactivator-1 alpha mRNA, important components of oxi-
treatment resulted in a 47% decrease in muscle fiber
dative muscle metabolism. Studies of rats in a hindlimb
cross-sectional area.159 Fibers from immobilized muscles
suspension model have also shown increased function
that had inhibition of FOXO induction had a 76% inhibi-
of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, with increased
tion of atrophy. Inhibition of both FOXO and NF-kB had
 ubiquitin mRNA levels, conjugating enzymes, and protea-
even greater inhibition (up to 95%) of muscle atrophy.
some subunits, indicating the potential importance of
These findings suggest that the combined effects
of
this pathway of muscle degradation. Manipulation of this
inhibiting immobilization-induced NF-kB and FOXO tran-
system of muscle degradation may alter the process of
scriptional activity has an additive effect on preventing
muscle atrophy and preserve muscle mass during periods
immobilization-induced   atrophy.  The  mechanisms 
of
of immobilization. However, knock-out of the MuRFland
muscle atrophy may be more complex in people than in
MAFbx genes does not completely prevent atrophy, sug-
small laboratory animals.160 For example, anabolic resis-
 gesting that other ligases are involved.114
tance may partially explain, in part, reduced muscle protein
The IGF/phosphatidyl-inositol-3-OH kinase (PI3K)/
synthesis of atrophied muscle in the postprandial state,
Akt pathway is an important intracellular regulator of
even with high levels of amino acid present. This anabolic
muscle hypertrophy. IGF-1 stimulates the activation of
resistance during immobilization could have implications
PI3K, which then creates a cell membrane binding site for
 on nutritional interventions.
a serine/threonine kinase, Akt (also referred to as protein 
Myostatin may also play a role in disuse atrophy of
kinase B). Akt activates mammalian target of rapamycin
muscle because unloading in a rat hindlimb unloading
(mTOR) kinase, which increases protein synthesis by acti-
model resulted in an upregulation of myostatin and
vation of p70S6 kinase and eukaryotic translation factor 4E
activin IB, the myostatin receptor.161.162 However, the role
binding protein 1 (4E-BP-1), regulatory proteins involved
of myostatin in muscle atrophy remains unclear because
in protein synthesis. The IGF-1/PI3K/Akt pathway also
the soleus muscle, which contains no myostatin, undergoes
suppresses the expression of ubiquitin ligases, which are
the greatest atrophy with unloading. It may be that myo-
 important in signaling muscle atrophy.114 The IGF-1/PI3K/
statin inhibits hypertrophy rather than induces atrophy.114
Akt pathway activation also activates forkhead box O
Another  study  evaluated  antibody-directed  myostatin
(FOXO) proteins, transcription factors that regulate target
 inhibition in mice during umilateral hindlimb casting.163
 genes for metabolism, apoptosis, and cell cycles. Akt phos-
Although hindlimb casting reduced muscle mass, fiber 
phorylates FOXO proteins, which prevents translocation to
size, and function of soleus and extensor digitorum longus
the cell nucleus, effectively inhibiting their transcription
muscles in control animals, antibodies directed against
functions. Thus blockade of FOXO by the IGF-1/PI3K/Akt
myostatin attenuated the loss of muscle mass, fiber size,
pathway is important in helping to prevent muscle atrophy
and function with greater effectiveness when given early
 Aydone alosnut quaaaid diay on yonoidde ue aq Aeu pue
in immobilization.
 Chronic infammation may also induce protein loss and 
 Muscle use and disuse apparently goverm the number of
 muscle atrophy through the action of infammatory media-
acetylcholine receptors that are regulated through a feed-
back mechanism. Immobilization of skeletal muscle results
TNF-o is one infammatory mediator that initiates tran-
in disuse atrophy and resistance to nondepolarizing muscle
scription of NF-kB. Although disuse atrophy does not
relaxants. Dogs undergoing cast immobilization of a
result in increased TNF-α., certain NF-kB mediators (p50
hindlimb for 3 weeks had resistance to metocurine, a
and Bcl-3) increase and are associated with disuse muscle
muscle relaxant, by the fourth day of casting.164 This resis-
atrophy, suggesting an altermate, noninfammatory NF-kB
tance persisted for 2 weeks after cast removal, but was
pathway. Furthermore, several genes associated with p50
 normal 6 weeks after cast removal. These responses suggest
and Bcl-3 and muscle atrophy have been identified in
that there may be upregulation of muscle acetylcholine
a mouse model of disuse atrophy.15s Although NF-kB
receptors as a result of immobilization.16 These changes
112
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Figure 7-5 Neurogenic muscle atrophy. A, Early denervation atrophy as indicated by small angular fibers (arrows). B, Atrophic angular fibers
of both type I (light) and type Il (dark) muscle fibers. (From Carlton W/w, McGavin MD: Thompson's special veterinary pathology, St Louis, 1995,
Mosby.)
may also occur in patients with muscle weakness who are
motoneurons result in inadequate sprouting and incom-
in the intensive care unit. A canine intensive care model
plete recovery. Motoneurons may increase the number of
that involved 3 weeks of anesthesia with pentobarbital and
 muscle fbers they normally supply by fivefold with sprout-
positive-pressure ventilation indicated that the absence of
ing. However, the distance over which sprouting occurs is
muscle tone and reflex responsiveness for 3 weeks was also
limited and with extensive denervation, nerve sprouts may
associated with exaggerated resistance to neuromuscular
not grow far enough to reinmervate muscle. The extent of
blockade.166
 muscle atrophy is related to a number of factors, including
the distance through which the nerve must regenerate; the
Neurogenic Muscle Atrophy
age of the patient; and the type of nerve injury and other
 Muscles undergo denervation atrophy with damage to the
associated tendon, soft tissue, and bony damage. In animals
spinal motoneurons or to the motor nerves in the ventral
with spinal cord injuries, the capacity of paralyzed muscles
roots.167 It has been well documented that there is an early
to sustain contractions is reduced, therefore reducing
rapid loss, followed by stabilization, of muscle mass with
muscle endurance. Adequate nursing care of paraplegic or
 neurogenic muscle atrophy (Figure 7-5).167.168 On the other
tetraplegic animals is necessary to prevent muscle atrophy
hand, disuse atrophy occurs with damage to the central
from disuse.170 Secondary conditions, such as disuse oste0-
nervous system. Neural activity is generally reduced with
porosis of bones and contracture of joints, must also be
spinal cord lesions, but varies with the type of lesion and
considered in dealing with patients having neurogenic
the level of spasticity.
muscle atrophy.
Structural and biochemical changes occur with neuro-
 Computed tomography was used to evaluate neurogenic
genic atrophy, including changes in glycolytic and oxida-
muscle atrophy in dogs with induced sciatic nerve injury.
171
tive metabolic enzymes. Functional recovery following
The cross-sectional area of muscles decreased 1 to 2 weeks
nerve injury and repair is directly related to the degree of
after denervation, and the differences were significant after
muscle atrophy that takes place during the period of nerve
 3 weeks. Additional decreases were minimal after 28 days,
regeneration and the ability of surviving motoneurons to
after which time there was significant infiltration of adipose
tissue into the muscle. The cross-sectional areas of the
For injuries with 85% of the motor supply to a partially
biceps femoris, semimembranosus, and semitendinosus
denervated muscle intact, all denervated muscle fibers are
muscles decreased by approximately 30% by 60 days, with
reinnervated and the partially denervated muscle recovers
most of the changes occurring in the first 2 to 3 weeks. In
completely. Conversely, lesions with injury to 85% of the
another study of denervated latissimus dorsi muscle, there
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
113
was a 20% loss of lean muscle mass after 6 six weeks, 45%
muscle fiber number and size, resulting in reduced muscle
loss at 6 months, and 55% loss at 9 months.168 Histologic
function and strength.179 Aging results in reduced maximal
examination found atrophy of individual muscle fibers.
motoneuron firing frequency and muscle activation. There
With denervation atrophy, there is preferential atrophy of
is some thought that muscle atrophy with aging results, in
type II muscle fibers which is the opposite of what is seen
part, from neuropathic changes that lead to motoneuron
with immobilization of innervated muscles.138
death, which leads to a decrease in the number of muscle
 Denervated dog gastrocnemius muscle has a progressive
fibers. In addition, motor unit recruitment and firing fre-
decrease in total protein content, alanine aminotransferase,
quency are reduced in older adults 180.131
aspartate aminotransferase, and glutamate dehydrogenase
Interestingly, unloading skeletal muscle in older animals
activity, and elevation in free amino acid, ammonia, urea,
leads to less disuse muscle atrophy compared with that of
glutamine contents, and AMP deaminase activity levels
young animals, but skeletal muscle regrowth is slowed
and less complete in older animals as compared with
50% by 4 weeks after muscle denervation. Catabolism of
muscle protein may result in increased metabolites, includ-
humans.183 One reason for altered recovery of muscle mass 
ing ammonia, urea, and glutamine.
in young versus older animals after limb immobilization
Serum carbohydrate metabolism was evaluated  in
may be related to differences in gene expression. In one
denervation atrophied and denervation electrical-stimulated 
study, HI of rats resulted in a 27-37% loss in soleus muscle
 dogs.173 Neuromuscular electrical stimulation was applied 
mass. The atrophied soleus muscle of young but not old
    o sas ss  
rats recovered to the same mass as before treatment.134 The
30 min/d for 15 days, using biphasic pulses of 10 V, 100
 mRNA levels of muscle growth potentiating factors were
ms duration and 2 Hz. Denervation atrophy may result in
differentially expressed between young and older animals,
 hyperglycemia possibly resulting from the lack of uptake
and may modulate muscle growth that could explain the
by the muscle. Electrical stimulation applied to denervated
failure of muscles of older animals to recover lost muscle
muscle may reverse the hyperglycemia, indicating that
mass. In addition to changes in muscle and the nervous
muscular work may be important in modulating serum
system with aging, tendon changes also contribute to
carbohydrate metabolism.
muscle weakness with aging. The interplay between these
Continuous electrical stimulation of denervated muscles
muscle and tendon changes has an effect on the length-
da o seade unauaau aarau jo poad a sunp
force and force-velocity relationships of the muscle and is
maintain the integrity of the muscle fibers and their poten-
likely to affect the ROM, rate of force development,
tial functional capacity.169 In addition, electrical stimula-
maximum force development, and speed of movement of
tion may be applied for extended periods with little
 the older individual.185
evidence of discomfort. This modality may be useful in
 Recently, it has been shown that resistance training may
patients with the potential for partial or complete recovery
 attenuate the decline in muscle performance with aging. In
from nerve injury.
people, strength training programs of 3 months’ duration
may increase muscle cross-sectional area by 5-17%, which
Changes in Muscle with Aging
Changes in muscle as people and animals age include
 Exercise can induce the expansion of satellite cells in
decreased muscle mass, fiber size, and fiber number. These
skeletal muscle of older people, as well as younger
changes, along with increased intramuscular fat and con-
people.176 In addition to muscle hypertrophy as a result of
nective tissue, result in reduced ability to generate muscle
strength training in older people, there also appear to be
force. 174.175
significant changes in neuromuscular function, leading to
Muscle satellite cells also decrease by the age of 70 in
improved function.179
Muscle Changes with Orthopedic Conditions
function may result from diminished regenerative capacity
 of muscle, increased preprogrammed cell death activity
Hip Conditions
(apoptosis), anabolic resistance, protein degradation, and
Hip conditions are common in dogs and may affect muscle
 autophagocytosis occurring in skeletal muscle.177 Although 
mass. In some conditions, such as hip dysplasia, lameness
muscle mass declines with aging, the loss of muscle
 and reluctance to exercise may result in pelvic limb muscle
strength occurs at a greater rate than the loss of muscle
atrophy with compensatory shoulder muscle hypertro-
mass in older people, suggesting that atrophy alone is not
phy.1* Excision of the femoral head and neck is sometimes
the cause of strength loss.
performed as a treatment for severe hip dysplasia or frac.
Neuromuscular changes may contribute to the loss of
tures of the acetabulum. Although fewer dogs have obvious
muscle strength, including reduced muscle activation and
lameness or pain in the operated hip after recovery from
contractile rate.17α In fact, there is a loss of spinal motor
surgery, muscle atrophy is noted in approximately 50% of
neurons with aging, which is paralleled by a reduction in
dogs following femoral head and neck excision, even after
114
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
 8 years.1s9 Moderate or marked muscle atrophy is most
30
(cm)
29
and in climbing stairs may be noted postoperatively in
28
larger breeds of dog and may be related to the loss of power
girth
27
Affected
needed for jumping and hip extension following femoral
26
 Unaffected
Thigh
head and neck excision. Legg-Calve-Perthes disease, or
25
24
aseptic necrosis of the femoral head, is a condition affect-
23
ing small breeds of dogs that is also treated with a femoral
0
2
10
head and neck excision. In a clinical study of dogs with
Weeks after sugery
 avascular necrosis of the femoral head, muscle atrophy was
Figure 7-6  Rate of muscle atrophy following canial cruciate liga-
 present in 25 of 35 dogs at the time of diagnosis as a result
 ment transection and immediate stifle stabilization with no postop-
 of pain and lameness.190
er ative rehabilitation.
Cranial Cruciate Ligament Injury
Changes in muscle mass are common in dogs with CCLR
and following surgical treatment of the injury. In an experi-
transection of a CCL and immediate stife stabilization
mental study, dogs had a CCL transected, followed by
using a modifed retinacular imbrication technique.194
 immediate stabilization with an extracapsular procedure.19
Thigh circumference and body composition measured by
Results of this study revealed muscle atrophy of the surgi-
dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) were used to
cal leg by 2 weeks, with muscle mass beginning to returm
estimate limb muscle mass before surgery, and 2, 5, and
between 4 and 8 weeks, but significant atrophy was still
10 weeks after surgery. Actual mass of rear limb muscles
 present 8 weeks after surgery. In addition, the contralateral
was determined at 10 weeks. Muscle mass decreased with
nonsurgical limb underwent hypertrophy, possibly because
transection of the CCL, despite immediate stife stabiliza-
 of the increased loading on that limb during recovery.
tion (Figure 7-6). The changes were evident by 2 weeks,
A study of dogs with naturally occurring CCL defi-
 and continued until 5 weeks, followed by a slight recovery
ciency evaluated patients before surgical treatment and 1.5,
at 10 weeks. The muscles most affected at 10 weeks were
7, and 13 months after surgery.192 The degree of quadriceps
the quadriceps, biceps femoris, and semimembranosus,
 muscle atrophy present prior to surgery correlated signifi-
and these muscles weighed only 60% of the intact contra-
cantly with the degree of cartilage fibrillation, indicating a
lateral side (Figure 7-7). The muscles of the crus are simi-
relationship with the severity of the condition. Although
larly affected (Figure 7-8).
there was slightly greater muscle atrophy 6 weeks after
Changes in thigh girth and DEXA lean tissue mass were
surgery, muscle mass improved 7 and 13 months after
 similar over time and indicated significant muscle atrophy
surgery, but significant residual muscle atrophy remained
following cruciate transection and repair. The quadriceps
in many dogs even after l year. A measure of quadriceps
and biceps femoris muscles are important in supporting
atrophy may be a useful tool for assessing long-tenm
weight during stance, and should be targeted during reha-
outcome.
bilitation to improve muscle mass and strength. The time
A long-term outcome of thigh circumference of 29
course of changes suggest that postoperative physical reha-
clinical patients with CCLR and stabilization with tibial
 bilitation should continue for at least 5 weeks after surgery.
plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO) was recently reported.193
Another study evaluated morphometric characteristics
Standing mid-thigh circumference measurements were
of hindlimb muscles in Labrador retrievers with and
made in triplicate. Clinical lameness was graded blindly.
without CCL deficiency and found that atrophy associated
Although the mean thigh circumference for the operated
with CCL deficiency predominantly affected the quadri-
limb was 98.5% of the contralateral limb, a significant dif-
 ceps muscle .19 The authors also suggested that dominance
ference existed between the limbs. Time after surgery had
of the gastrocnemius muscle over active restraints to
no apparent effect on outcome. Four dogs (14%) ex hibited
cranial tibial thrust might be associated with predisposition
some lameness in the TLPO limb during evaluation (one
to CCL deficiency in Labrador retrievers. This dynamic
dog was 1 to 2 years postoperative and three dogs were 2
imbalance between muscle groups of the rear limbs could
to 3 years postoperative). The source of the lameness was
serve as a basis for screening programs and preventive
not identified, and there was no difference in thigh circum-
rehabilitation, especially considering that targeted training
ference between dogs with lameness and those without
 programs, such as plyometric training, may reduce the risk
lameness.
 of injury 3.6 times in women.1%
 Information regarding changes in specific muscles fol-
 Muscle atrophy also occurs in people following surgery
lowing CCLR and stife stabilization surgery may be useful
for tom ACLs. Thigh and calf girth measurements of
to target specific muscles for rehabilitation. Muscle atrophy
involved and noninvolved extremities were determined
was studied in a group of dogs undergoing surgical
prior to and following knee surgery for acute and chronic
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
115
一
100
contr
80
as
60
40
Figure 7-7 Mass of thigh muscle mass 10 weeks
after cranial cuciate ligament transection and
20
stifle stabilization with no rehabilitation. Values are
=
 percentage of the mass of the unaffected contralat-
eral limb.
100
cor
80
as
60
40
Figure 7-8 Mass of crus muscle mass 10 weeks after cranial
20
 cruciate ligament transection and stifle stabilization with no
cle
rehabilitation. Values are percentage of the mass of the unaf-
fected contralateral limb.
亏
elc
nemi
tib
x
Cranial
Fle
 strength.200 Patients were evaluated 48 months after surgery.
differences existed between the involved and noninvolved
There was a significant 1.8% decrease in thigh circumfer-
 extremities prior to and after surgery, the bulk of the girth
ence, a 10% decrease in average quadriceps torque, and an
measurement differences existed prior to surgery for both
8.6% decrease in quadriceps cross-sectional area by MRI
groups. The differences between involved and noninvolved
in the involved extremities compared with the uninvolved
limbs were in the 2-6% range, which were similar to dif-
extremities. Persistent quadriceps weakness and decreased
ferences observed in another study.198 They concluded that
cross-sectional area 48 months postsurgery and rehabilita-
altered gait and refex inhibition contributed to muscle
atrophy following injury and surgery. Muscular changes
from surgery, despite aggressive therapy. Strength deficits
more than 5 years following ACL injury were evaluated to
may persist for long periods, even with less severe injuries,
determine if there were differences between patients with
such as partial tears of the medial collateral ligament
ACL reconstruction and conservative treatment.1'9 Thigh
(MCL).2o Muscle atrophy that occurs following cruciate
circumference was measured and  the relationship  of
injury and surgery may result in early muscle fatigue,
strength to electrical activity and muscle size was ana-
which also affects EMG patterms of quadriceps and ham-
lyzed. Only minimal differences in thigh circumference
string muscles.2 As litte as 10 minutes walking may
were found between the uninjured and injured limb of both
affect the gait patterm, particularly the activity of the ham-
 groups; however, isokinetic torque and electromyogram
string muscles. This suggests that endurance training, in
(EMG) values showed significant differences. These
addition to strength and stabilization training, should be
changes may be due to modifed use of muscle fibers and
emphasized during rehabilitation.
 altered joint receptor afferent signaling following injury.
Various specific techniques can be used for strengthen-
These changes may result in chronic loss of quadriceps
ing of the hamstring and quadriceps muscles in people
femoris strength in humans following ACL surgery despite
following surgery for ACL repair, with or without resistive
aggressive rehabilitation. One study evaluated the correla-
 equipment.203 In addition, electrical stimulation may help 
tion of thigh muscle size and strength with thigh circumfer-
 prevent muscle wasting caused by immobilization. People
ence, muscle cross-sectional area by MRI, and isokinetic
 are generally able to returm to full activity and competitive
116
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
sports after 6 to 12 months. An intense rehabilitation
activity and possibly contribute to further joint deteriora-
program following TPLO surgery for stabilization of a
 tion. The ratio of quadriceps to hamstrings muscle strength
CCLR may improve muscle mass significantly more than
is important in people for knee stability and for protection
standard home care. In one study, dogs with cruciate-
from excessive stress.208 People with knee OA have weak
deficient limbs had significantly reduced thigh circumfer-
knee fexor and extensor strength, with relatively greater
ence before surgery as compared with values for the
weakness in the quadriceps muscles. The mean quadriceps
contralateral limb.24 The rehabilitation group had signifi-
to hamstring strength ratio of 1.4 is less than ratios reported
cantly larger thigh circumference than the home-exercise
for young healthy adults of 2. The low ratio might be
 group 6 weeks after TPLO, with no difference between the
explained by refex inhibition resulting from pain associ-
 affected and nonaffected limbs.
ated with disease, because the quadriceps muscle can be
selectively inhibited by pain and effusion in the joint,
Fractures
leading to decreased production of muscle tension. In fact,
Muscle atrophy may occur following fractures, particularly
joint enlargement had a negative correlation with the ratio
those with severe comminution. A stable repair with ana-
 of quadriceps to hamstring muscle strength in one study.209
tomic reduction is vital to encourage early weight bearing.
The severity of the arthritis may also affect muscle
joint motion, and use of the limb. Distal femoral fractures
mass. The strength and bulk of the quadriceps muscle of
treated with limb immobilization in extension for 3 to 7
children with juvenile chronic arthritis were studied over
weeks resulted in limb hyperextension, generalized muscle
a 2-year period.210 Children with high OA severity scores
 atrophy, abducted gait, and limited range of joint motion.20s
had the least strength and muscle bulk. As the arthritis
Lesions in muscle biopsies included fber size variability.
 progressed and the severity score worsened, there was a
increased fibrosis, and focal necrosis. Histochemical and
corresponding reduction in muscle strength and bulk. The
morphometric studies showed significant type I fiber
presence and intensity of local arthritis may be one impor-
atrophy in the vastus lateralis muscle, with a reduction of
tant factor affecting muscle function in dogs with chronic
the number of type I fbers. Atrophic changes in the gas-
arthritis.
trocnemius and biceps femoris muscles were not signif-
Patients with knee OA had significantly weaker quadri-
cant. The atrophy seen in the vastus lateralis muscle may
ceps strength, larger voluntary muscle activation deficits,
be a result of immobilizing the limb in extension, which
and smaller lean muscle cross-sectional area compared
results in shortening of this muscle group. Immobilization
with contralateral, nondiseased limbs. 17& Muscle activation
of a muscle in a shortened position results in preferential 
deficits accounted for most of the variance in quadriceps
atrophy caused by a reduced number of sarcomeres in
strength of the OA limb, whereas lean muscle cross-
series and reduced protein synthesis. In contrast, passive
sectional area explained the majority of variance in strength
stretch of muscles in a lengthened state promotes muscle
of the nondiseased limb. These findings suggest that small
growth and may explain the relative sparing to the biceps
changes in muscle activation may have a profound effect
femoris and gastrocnemius muscles.
on quadriceps strength in OA limbs.
A follow-up experimental study evaluated the effect of
Knee joint pain as a result of inflammation may also
splinting in extension for 2 weeks following trauma to the
result in muscle atrophy. In one study, complete Freund's
distal portion of the quadriceps femoris muscle in dogs.206
adjuvant was injected in rat knee joints to induce inflam-
Flexion of the stifle joint was limited after splinting. A
 mation and pain.?1l One week after injection, muscle
reversible type I fiber atrophy of the vastus lateralis, biceps
atrophy occurred only on the injected side. Weight of the
femoris, and gastrocnemius muscles occurred. Early type
rectus femoris and soleus muscles was decreased by 20%.
II fiber atrophy was seen in a few muscles. Multifocal fiber
The reduction in cross-sectional areas was similar for fast
necrosis was the only irreversible change seen. Relative
and slow muscle fibers. The authors suggested that early
fiber percentages did not change appreciably during splint-
treatment to inhibit joint pain and infammation may
ing or recovery.206
prevent muscle atrophy.
Arthritis
Response of Muscle to Remobilization
The relationship between arthritis and muscle mass is
Mechanical loading is essential for muscle regeneration
unknown in dogs, but we suspect that muscle mass and
(Box 7-7). Therefore following immobilization to protect
strength decline with the progression of OA and the sub-
healing muscle, early remobilization is required to induce
sequent reduction in activity. Muscle weakness may pre-
 dispose to OA and its clinical signs in people.207 Reduced
Fortunately, most of the changes that occur in skeletal
ad un sis ns a  a s  sa
muscle during immobilization are reversible. One rule of
with knee OA, and the degree of strength loss has associa-
thumb regarding humans states that a remobilization period
tion with the severity of OA.17 Muscle weakness may lead
of twice the duration of the immobilization period is neces-
to functional deficits in joint stability and reduced physical
 sary for a retum of limb circumference to normal values.147
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
117
 period.139 The diameters of type 1 and type 2 fbers mea-
Box 7-7
Considerations for Remobilization
sured from the vastus lateralis muscle followed the same
of Muscle after Immobilization
trend.
 Mechanical loading is essential for muscle regeneration.
Similar improvements occur with remobilization in
Regaining muscle mass during remobilization takes at least
 humans and other animals. Changes in limb circumference
twice as long as the period of immobilization.
and passive resistance of the human knee caused by immo-
 There is decreased potential for muscle regeneration in older
bilization were studied during remobilization.147 Patients 
animals.
immobilized with a long leg cast after tibial fractures or
· Loss of muscle strength also occurs during immobilization.
ligamentous injuries were evaluated immediately after cast
 Hindlimb immobilization for 10 weeks caused a 60%
removal and after 18, 36, and 81 days of remobilization.
decline in tetanic torque that improved with 5 weeks of
Although improved, differences in midthigh circumference
remobili zati on.
· Training, especially more intense training, results in more
were still present after 81 days of remobilization. During
rapid muscle mass recovery.
remobilization, the increased resistance to fexion found
 immediately after removal of the cast resolved. This may
· Treadmill training and swimming are useful.
· An adaptation period may be necessary in
indicate a rapid readaptation of muscle length (shortened
remobilized muscle to be able to withstand moderate
because of immobilization in a shortened position) to
training and avoid damage during early exercise.
almost normal values. After cast immobilization for 3
·
 Decline treadmill training may be more effective for
weeks, rat limbs were remobilized by free cage activity or
some muscle groups.
treadmill running.213 Typical changes of muscle atrophy
occurred during the immobilization period. Remobiliza-
more beneficial for muscle recovery compared with
tion, especially treadmill running, resulted in retum of
no running or running once per week.
Resistance exercise stimulates muscle protein
muscle toward normal, particularly the fiber size, capillary
synthesis and activation of muscle satellite cells.
number, and fiber type distribution. Another study of the
Eccentric muscle contractions causes greater
same model that compared low and high intensity treadmill
satellite cell activation and muscle mass gains
training after immobilization found that high-intensity
compared with concentric muscle contractions.
activity was more effective in restoring muscles to normal
·Satellite cell activation involves an initial
than was low-intensity exercise.214 Sheep hindlimbs were
inflammatory response.
immobilized in a plaster splint for 9 weeks, followed by
·Possible that NSAIDs may reduce postexercise
remobilization for 9 weeks.145 There was a slight decrease 
muscle protein synthesis, but NSAIDs also
 in type I fiber area at 9 weeks, and a slight increase at 18
decrease discomfort and muscle soreness.
weeks. The Na(+)-K+ pump density and citrate synthase
· Training before immobilization and remobilization
activity were reduced by 39% and 30%, respectively, after
has a positive effect on muscle mechanical behavior
9 weeks of immobilization. During remobilization both
compared to being sedentar y.
increased to the same level as in the control animals.
d   s   
synthesis, and myostatin is rapidly suppressed with
 Physical condition prior to immobilization and remobi-
postimmobilization training.
 lization may have an effect on muscle. One study evaluated
 training versus being sedentary before immobilization, and
then rehabilitation. Rats were divided into seven groups:
'finp
control (C); trained (T); sedentary (S); trained and immo-
bilized (TI); sedentary and immobilized (SI); trained,
immobilized, and rehabilitated (TIR); sedentary, immobi-
There appears to be an age-dependent decline in muscle
lized, and rehabilitated (SIR). Swimming was used for 
regeneration potential, so remobilization and loading of
training whereas sedentary animals were kept in cages of
muscle may be especially important in older animals.
reduced size. Cast immobilization on a pelvic limb was
The effect of remobilization following splinting the
used for limb immobilization, and rehabilitation was per-
stifle joint of young dogs with and without muscle injury
formed in water. Training improved all mechanical proper-
was studied.206 A rear limb was splinted in extension for 3
 ties of muscle when compared with sedentarism. Training
weeks and the biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, and gastroc-
before immobilization and rehabilitation had a positive
nemius muscles were studied after splint removal and fol-
effect on muscle mechanical behavior compared with sed-
lowing 6 weeks of free activity. A reversible type I fiber
entarism.21s Other studies have reported similar findings,
atrophy occurred in most splinted muscles. Relative fiber
and have suggested that training after immobilization
should be carefully undertaken to avoid damage to
or recovery. Beagle dogs undergoing HI by extermal fixa-
muscle.?16 Remobilized muscle may not be able to with-
tion for 10 weeks had a 60% decline in tetanic torque,
stand moderate training exercise before an adaptation
which improved somewhat during a 5-week remobilization
 period has occurred to avoid repeated damage during early
118
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
exercise. Another study also evaluated the effects of swim-
stimulates muscle protein synthesis, and the acute increase
 ming training prior to and after a period of limb immobj-
in muscle protein synthesis with exercise is greater and
lization in rats. Treatment groups included C, 6 weeks
longer lasting than changes after eating.19 Eccentric
under baseline conditions; T, swimming training for 6
muscle contractions appear to cause greater satellite cell
weeks; TI, swimming training for 6 weeks and then immo-
activation and muscle mass gains as compared with con-
bilized for 1 week; and TIR, swimming training for 6
centric muscle contractions.16o Nerve activity is also
weeks, immobilized for 1 week, and then remobilized with
required to support the growth of regenerated myofibers
swimming for 2 weeks. Regenerative characteristics of the
and the development into various muscle fiber types.
Satellite cell activation also involves an initial infam-
ted to swimming.217
-Aooseud ui paafoau ane sarydoioe ziz'asuodsai Aiout
Land-based remobilization may also be important in
tosis of necrotic debris, and they promote myogenic
muscle recovery. A study evaluated different remobiliza-
differentiation by activating satellite cells and causing dif-
tion protocols in muscles following HS of rats. Treatment
ferentiation. During eccentric exercise, sarcomere struc-
 groups included controls, suspended, suspended followed
ture is damaged and infammatory cytokines are produced,
by free activity, suspended followed by training on a
especially IL-6220 In addition, the NF-KB inflammatory
declined treadmill, and suspended followed by training on
signaling cascade is activated during early rehabilitation
a fat treadmill. The soleus and anterior tibialis muscles 
following immobilization.221 Because infammation and
were evaluated. The suspended soleus muscle showed a
perhaps prostaglandins may stimulate satellite cell prolif-
significant increase in the proportion of intermediate and 
eration, it is possible that NSAIDs may reduce postexercise
hybrid fibers and a decrease in the number of type I fibers.
muscle protein synthesis.160 However, NSAIDs also
Some of these changes were reversible after remobiliza-
decrease the discomfort and inflammation of muscle
tion. The three remobilization programs led to the recovery
soreness.
of both the proportional number of fibers and their size.
The anterior tibialis muscle had a significant increase in
tion factors that induce the transcription of skeletal muscle
the number and size of type I fibers and a cell size reduc-
proteins and coordinate satellite cell differentiation.160
tion of type IB fibers after suspension, which recovered
Although further research on the mec hanisms of signaling
after training on a declined treadmill and free movement.
muscle protein synthesis is needed, it is known that the
Especially regarding the soleus, the findings indicated that
rapamycin (mTOR)-S6 kinase pathway is involved with
training on a declined treadmill induced greater tissue
tuming on muscle protein synthesis. During rehabilitation
restructuring after suspension.218
from immobilization-induced atrophy in humans, myo-
 The frequency of training may also be important regard-
 statin is rapidly suppressed and remains at a relatively low
ing the recovery of muscle mass after immobilization.
 level throughout rehabilitation and muscle recovery, sug-
Following 2 weeks of limb immobilization of rats, 6 weeks
gesting that myostatin also plays a key role in the regen-
of exercise was instituted under different conditions: free
erative processl6o (Box 7-7).
cage activity and free remobilization, one time/week
Adaptations of Muscle to Increased
treadmill running, three times/week running, or six times/
week running. Immobilization significantly reduced the
Mechanical Stress
cross-sectional area of soleus and gastrocnemius type I
Mec hanical stress may be induced by endurance or strength
and type II muscle fbers. Immobilization also increased 
training. Endurance training consists of repetitive, low-
the ratio of type II to total fiber numbers in the muscles
intensity contractions that result in changes in oxidative
and induced pathologic changes in muscle fibers. Some of
metabolism. Strength training is characterized by a limited
these changes were not corrected with free remobilization.
number of contractions that occur against a high (often
Training one, three, and six times per week resulted in
maximal) mechanical load.
recovery toward normal levels. However, running three and
Endurance Training
six times per week was more beneficial for recovery of
 muscle atrophy compared with no running or rumning once 
Endurance training does not affect muscle fiber number or
per week.9
cross-sectional area, but it alters metabolic responses.
Skeletal muscle regeneration is mediated by muscle
There is a twofold increase in oxidative capacity of all
stem cells, or satellite cells. Injury or stress results in acti-
muscle fiber types with endurance training. There is an
vation of satellite cells, with migration to these sites and
 increase in muscle mitochondrial density, oxidative enzyme
differentiation into multinucleated myofibers. Satellite
cells are activated if muscle contractions are of sufficient
acid use increases while reliance on carbohydrate metabo-
intensity and duration. However, there are significant
lism is reduced. Muscles become more fatigue-resistant
species differences in the magnitude of change and time
with training. Endurance training also elevates the antioxi-
of muscle protein synthesis patterms. Resistance exercise
dant and detoxicant status of muscle.147 For example, total
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
119
glutathione, glutathione peroxidase, glutathione reductase,
Although endurance training brings about changes in
and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase increased in the leg
muscle metabolic properties, muscle mass may not be
muscles of beagle dogs treadmill trained for 40 km/day at
affected.24 Young beagle dogs trained on a treadmill for
5.5-6.8 km/h, 15% upgrade, 5 days/wk for 55 weeks.
1 year, gradually increasing running to 40 km/day at a
Training also results in augmentation of muscle capil-
speed of 5.5-6.8 km/hour with a 15-degree inclination
larity by new capillary formation, which may increase the
during the last 15 weeks, while control dogs were kept in
available surface area for oxygen diffusion and decrease
their cages. There was no difference in mass of cranial
the distance over which oxygen must diffuse to reach
tibial and semitendinosus muscles between trained and
 cells.44 Training also appears to improve the functional
control dogs.
 blood-tissue gas exchange properties of muscle. The effects
Strength Training
 of exercise training on peak oxygen uptake and effective
 oxygen diffusive conductance in skeletal muscle were
Strength training uses brief, maximal contractions and
"pu I lpan e uo pasiaxa shop u pnsa
-npid araua igoraue jo aei yu Aaanean n sanba
5 d/wk for 8 weeks.144 Peak oxygen uptake by gastrocne-
tion. In addition to increased enzyme activity for glycolysis
mius muscles was 38%, 33%, and 19% greater and oxygen
and glycogenolysis, there is an increase in muscle strength
diffusive conductance was 71%, 75%, and 68% greater
and size. Muscle fber cross-sectional area is directly
during normal levels of oxygen, moderate hypoxia, and
related to the tension the muscle is capable of exerting.225
severe hypoxia, respectively, in exercised dogs as com-
Strength training by overloading muscle increases the
 pared with controls.
cross-sectional area of all fiber types, especially the fast
 Endurance training can induce changes in muscle fiber
twitch fibers. New myofibrils are synthesized, and there
types. The alterations initiated by long-distance running on
may also be hyperplasia of muscle fbers. There is also
muscle fiber type distribution was studied in young dogs
improved synchronization of motor units.146 This may
rum on a treadmill for 55 weeks, 5 days a week.?22 The daily
help explain why the changes in muscle cross-sectional
running distance was gradually increased to 40 km and
area are smaller than the changes in maximal voluntary
maintained at that level for the final 15 weeks. In the
force production.226 Resistance training may especially
triceps brachi muscle, there was a shift from type II to
 result in increased cross-sectional area of type IIfbers.131
type I fibers, which was also observed in the thoracic and
The contraction time is increased with muscle hypertro-
cervical spinal muscles. In addition, there was also a
 phy because of the greater distance that must be traveled
shift toward a higher oxidative capacity of type II fibers.
 in the sarcoplasmic reticulum during contraction.2s The
However, in the lumbar muscles, the percentage of type II
a hun juandde aonaq nu  yuans ui sasai
 muscle fibers increased significantly in the running group.
 training program is well under way.26 There is little effect
 Training can induce changes in fiber type composition not
on oxidative metabolism by muscle cells compared with
 only in limb muscles but also in the stabilizing spinal
endurance training. In fact, mitochondrial density may
muscles.
decline with strength training because of a dilutional effect
Although the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway has been
by the larger quantity of myofibrils, although the absolute
aos u gzpauun ae epuy jo nnoa
atrophy, this system is also apparently involved in the
 instances, there may be a mild increase in oxidative capac-
response to training and conditioning. It is possible
ity, suggested by the increase in type Ia muscle fibers with
that increased proteolysis of muscle is required to repair
strength training seen in some studies.7 In models of
exercise-induced damaged protein, or the general tumover
muscle hypertrophy, collagen content increases, with
of muscle proteins is increased. A feld study of 44
changes in collagen metabolism beginning as early as 3
English pointers and Labrador retrievers used for bird
days after increased loading." Muscle fiber damage may
 hunting and retrieving was conducted to examine changes 
also occur during vigorous strength training. The increased
in the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Muscle biopsy
 collagen content may prevent skeletal muscles from con-
samples were collected from all dogs preseason and
tracting against excessive loads. Lactate accumulation in
at peak season. There was pronounced up-regulation of
 Overworked muscles may contribute to increased collagen
ubiquitinated conjugates and the p3l subunit during the
synthesis by stimulating proline hydroxylase.
peak hunting period compared with the preseason period.
 Compensatory hypertrophy of muscles may be induced
The catalytic core of the proteasome (b-subunits) showed
 by removal of one or more muscles of a synergistic group
 nO apparent up-regulation with training, however. Increased 
 of muscles.22s This results in overloading of the remaining
training also resulted in increased muscle glycogen levels
muscle or muscles, with increased muscle weight and
enlargement of remaining muscle fibers. In addition, there
cifc components of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway
may be an increase in the number of fbers as a result of
was an indication that it plays a role in skeletal muscle
muscle fiber splitting. Weight training results in muscle
fiber splitting of cats trained to lift weights.25 The degree
120
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
of fiber splitting is related to the intensity of exercise, and
In people, resistance training may, both alone and in
all muscle fiber types may be affected.
combination with feeding, be a marked stimulator of
Unfortunately, there is relatively little information
 human muscle protein synthesis and, in the absence of
regarding the effect of strength training on muscles in
nutrition, sometimes muscle protein breakdown.219 When
dogs, perhaps because of the difficulty in having them
feeding is superimposed on the postexercise stimulus,
 perfonm strength training activities and the difficulty in
there is usually a net positive protein balance and protein
measuring changes in strength. A study of cats trained to
synthesis occurs. The question of how much loading
move a bar and lift weights for a food reward resulted
results in muscle gain often arises regarding the practice
in muscle hypertrophy of 7% to 34% after 40 weeks.228
of lifting heavier loads to induce hypertrophy and strength.
A variety of studies have evaluated strength training in
Acute studies in people indicate that increased muscle
humans. Men participating in an exercise program designed
protein synthesis only occurs when intensities of load
to strengthen the quadriceps muscles had increased thigh
lifted exceed 60% of a single repetition maximum,23s but 
 girth, and muscle strength increased 40% with training.229
at intensities beyond 60% and up to 90% of a single repeti-
In addition, endurance and time to exhaustion while
tion maximum, there is a similar stimulation of muscle
cycling and running increased, indicating some benefit
protein synthesis. Therefore it may be that resistance exer-
to endurance exercise. The effect of adding heavy-
cise at higher intensities has little additional value in
resistance training to increase leg-muscle strength was
stimulating muscle hypertrophy. However, low-intensity
further studied in humans undergoing endurance train-
exercise (20% of single repetition max imum) with concur-
ing.230 After 10 weeks, leg strength increased an average
rent blood fow occlusion may stimulate muscle protein
of 30%, but thigh girth, muscle fiber areas, and oxidative
synthesis,236 with an accompanying rise in S6K1 phos-
activities were unchanged. Short-term endurance was
phorylation. Other studies have also shown that blood fow
increased by 12%. Exercise to exhaustion also increased
occlusion, when practiced chronically and with low lifting
after strength training, indicating that certain types of
intensities (30% to 40% of single repetition maximum),
endurance performance, particularly those requiring fast-
can result in muscle hypertrophy and strength gains.237 It
twitch fiber recruitment, can be improved by strength-
is possible that venous occlusion results in local fatigue
training supplementation.
and the recruitment of type II muscle fibers, which are not
Muscle strengthening may occur, even in older indi-
normally recruited at low intensities. Recruitment of type
viduals. For ex ample, one study of geriatric men compared 
 II fbers results in activation of many signaling proteins,
the training effects of voluntary isometric contraction on
such as S6K1, ribosomal protein S6, extracellular signal-
the quadriceps femoris to determine if exercise changes
regulated kinase, and p38 mitogen-activated protein
age-related muscle weakness.?31 Maximal voluntary iso-
kinase, which are involved in regulating muscle protein
metric contraction torque increased with even low training
synthesis.238
loads during 12 training sessions over 4 weeks. Altering
The Effects of Medications and Nutrition on
dietary intake to achieve carbohydrate loading has been
Immobilized Muscles
used to enhance muscle mass prior to competitions in
humans, but one study indicated there was no advantage
Steroids
to carbohydrate loading to enhance muscle girth over
Naturally occurring or iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
weight-lifting alone .232
saop iso se'saop u Ayedout ym paooss uaaq sey
Although gender differences associated with strength
have muscle stiffness, proximal appendicular muscle
training are unknown in dogs, female cats had greater
 enlargement, and myotonic discharges on electromyogra-
muscle hypertrophy following weight training than male
phy. Muscle weakness and muscle atrophy may be present
cats.?33 Gender differences also exist regarding skeletal
in some dogs. Histologic changes are characteristic of non-
muscle hypertrophy subsequent to heavy-resistance train-
inflammatory degenerative myopathy. Clinical signs of the
ing in humans. Absolute changes in muscle mass are gener-
 myopathy may improve to varying degrees following treat-
ally greater in men than women, but the percentage changes
ment of hyperadrenocorticism. Steroids have a catabolic
may not be significantly different.234 For example, women
effect on muscle proteins, reduce protein synthesis, and
  s  e 
alter the insulin responsiveness of muscle that is immobi-
 program for the lower extremity consisting of squats, verti-
lized.133 During treatment with corticosteroids or during
cal leg presses, leg extensions, and leg curls twice a week
catabolic conditions, glutamine synthetase increases and
had a significant increase in maximal isotonic strength and
glutamine, the most abundant amino acid in muscle, is
hypertrophy of muscle fiber types I (15%), IIA (45%), and
released at a high rate. On the other hand, endurance exer-
IIA + IB (57%).27 These data are similar to those in men
 cise reduces basal levels of glutamine synthetase.240 In
and suggest considerable hypertrophy of muscle fiber types
addition, there is increased susceptibility of type II fibers
occurs in women if exercise intensity and duration are
to atrophy, and type HIb fibers are more susceptible to
sufficient.232
atrophy than type IIa fibers.
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
121
Resistance exercise training may help attenuate the
satellite cell proliferation, there appear to be only limited
muscle loss associated with glucocorticoid administration
effects on gene expression and on postexercise protein
juaand ose Aeu suuen auenpug o %ot on dn Aq
 synthesis. However, COX-2 specific inhibitors apparently
glucocorticoid-induced muscle atrophy. Running attenu-
 have little effect on muscle protein synthesis or satellite
ated muscle loss by 25-50% in rats receiving corticoste-
 cells in people.243.244
roids concurrently with the start of training. Prior endurance
Muscle soreness may or may not be alleviated with
NSAIDs or COX-2 specific inhibitors. The effects of two
ing atrophy associated with corticosteroid administration
different NSAIDs and physiotherapy modalities on the
compared with beginning training at the same time of
healing of acute hamstring muscle tears of humans were
steroid administration. Initiation of endurance exercise
 studied.24s Patients received meclofenamate, diclofenac,
shortly after the onset of steroid treatment helps to prevent
or a placebo. All patients received the same intensive
further muscle atrophy from that time forward, but does
physiotherapy treatment, including rest, ice, compression,
not prevent the atrophy that has already occurred. Atrophy
elevation, therapeutic ultrasound, deep transverse friction
sparing seems to occur to a greater extent in muscle types
massage, stretching, and exercise over a 7-day treatment
that are highly recruited during endurance training.
period. Pain, swelling at the site of the muscle tear, and
Androgens and synthetic anabolic steroids have been
isokinetic muscle strength were improved in all groups,
recommended to help attenuate loss of muscle mass
 but there was no difference among groups. In fact, the
because of their ability to increase protein synthesis and
pain score of the more severe injuries was significantly
 promote muscle growth.240 Although the effects of anabolic 
lower in the physiotherapy group than in those receiving
steroids on athletes and athletic perfonmance are contro-
NSAIDs and physiotherapy at day 7. Therefore there may
versial, they do not appear to enhance aerobic metabolism.
not be an additive effect on the healing of acute muscle
Anabolic steroids do seem to be beneficial in patients in
injuries when NSAIDs are added to standard physiothera-
negative nitrogen balance, such as those patients who are
peutic modalities.
undemourished. The infuence of oral anabolic steroids on
Growth Hormone
body mass index (BMI), lean body mass, anthropometric
 measures, and functional exercise capacity among humans
Growth hormone (GH) may help to improve muscle
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was evalu-
atrophy as a result of immobilization or denervation.13 The
 ated.?41 A group receiving testosterone and daily oral stano-
actions of GH are mediated by complex interactions among
zol for 27 weeks had increased weight, whereas the control
several hormones, receptors, and binding proteins.246 GH
group lost weight. Lean body mass, BMI, arm muscle
results in stimulation of protein synthesis. In addition,
circumference, and thigh circumference increased in the
amino acid and glucose uptake are increased, and lipolysis
treated group, but there were no changes in endurance
is increased. Treatment with GH results in an increase in
exercise capacity. Anecdotally, there may be some benefit
lean body mass in humans and rats, although strength is
to administration of anabolic steroids to dogs with chronic
 probably not improved. One of the primary effects of GH
 medical conditions that may result in muscle atrophy.
is the production of IGF-1 by the liver, which in turm also
affects muscle tissue. IGF-1 may be a mediator of the
Antinflammatory Drugs
response of GH because it also results in increased amino
The exact role of NSAIDs in the treatment of acute muscle
acid uptake and protein synthesis.247 IGF-1 stimulates
 injuries is unknown, but it has been suggested that these 
muscle satellite cells to enter the cell cycle and proliferate,
agents may be contraindicated, perhaps because NSAIDs
with some differentiating and fusing with myofibers.
may delay muscle regeneration following injury and inhibit
However, most studies indicate that IGF-1 has minimal
exercise-induced satellite cell proliferation in humans. The
effect on the adaptation of muscle to changes in loading.
cellular mechanisms by which NSAIDs may negatively
The GH response to acute aerobic exercise may be aug-
affect muscle regeneration and inhibit the exercise-induced
 mented with repeated bouts of exercise.24s During pro-
satellite cell proliferation are unknown. In one study, eight
 longed administration, resistance to the anabolic effects of
healthy male volunteers performed 200 maximal eccentric
GH may occur.
contractions with each leg.242 Indomethacin, an NSAID,
Administration of GH during periods of non-weight-
was infused into the vastus lateralis muscle of one leg to
bearing activity may not result in maintenance of muscle
block local prostaglandin synthesis. Protein synthesis was
determined from 24 to 28 hours following exercise. Myo-
beneficial. Beagle dogs receiving a GH secretagogue
fibrillar and collagen protein synthesis were unaffected by
during a 10-week immobilization and 5-week remobiliza-
local NSAID infusion. The expression of growth factors,
tion period had a 60% decrease in tetanic torque during
such as TGF-β and IGF-1, and matrix-related genes
immobilization, which was similar to untreated dogs, but
increased after exercise and were unaffected by NSAIDs.
had a threefold increase in tetanic torque in the treated
Although NSAIDs  seem  to inhibit  exercise-induced
group compared with controls during remobilization.139
122
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
The diameters of type I and type II fibers measured from
seem to have greater ability to synthesize muscle protein
the vastus lateralis muscle followed the same trend. These
than older people with the same level of amino acids avail-
data suggest that the GH secretagogue increased the size
able, suggesting a potential reduced signaling response for
and strength of the quadriceps muscle during remobiliza-
muscle synthesis in older people.
tion. GH may also attenuate the catabolic effects of corti-
Providing appropriate  nutritional  components after 
 costeroid treatment on muscle mass.246
exercise may affect muscle protein synthesis. When
branched chain amino acids, including leucine, isoleucine,
Nutrition and Muscle
and valine were administered to people during and after
Amino acids, hormones, and physical activity appear to be
one session of quadriceps muscle resistance exercise, an
the major short-term physiologic regulators of muscle
increase in mTOR, p70 S6 kinase, and S6 phosphorylation
mass, primarily through their actions on protein synthesis,
was found in the recovery period after exercise.?53 Exercise
whereas long-term regulation involves changes in gene
without branched-chain amino acids intake led to a partial
expression. Amino acids are the main dietary components
 phosphorylation of p70 S6 kinase without activating the
that stimulate muscle protein synthesis. In people,
enzyme. These results suggest that branched-chain amino
branched-chain amino acids, especially leucine, stimulate
acids administered after exercise may stimulate muscle
protein synthesis in a dose-dependent manner. The stimu-
protein synthesis.
latory effect of leucine on protein synthesis is mediated
Although insulin has little effect on protein synthesis
through upregulation of mRNA translation.249 A number of
d     s  's  
mechanisms contribute to the effect of leucine on transla-
breakdown. In the immediate postexercise period there
tion initiation. The increase in muscle protein synthesis
 are marked increases in muscle protein breakdown.254.255
may be mediated by a key component in the signaling
When food containing protein and carbohydrate is
path way controlling these phosphorylation-induced mech-
given in the postexercise period, the increase in protein
anisms, a protein kinase called the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR). There is a limit, however, to the
 breakdown is blunted in an insulin-related effect, so there
amount of muscle protein synthesis that can occur with a
is a net increase in muscle protein synthesis.256 Whereas
single meal. Leucine, either alone or with other essential
exercise stimulates protein synthesis in muscle, disuse
amino acids, stimulates muscle protein synthesis for a
atrophy results in a marked decrease of muscle protein
short period of up to 2 hours. Muscle protein synthesis then
synthesis.152
returms to basal rates, possibly explaining why constant
 Much discussion has occurred regarding protection of 
delivery of leucine does not maintain elevated muscle
muscle from injury as a result of fatigue and excessive
 contraction in people. N-acetylcysteine has been suggested
enzymes of amino acid catabolism, particularly of the
as a possible muscle protectant from overuse injury.
branched-chain and aromatic amino acids, and this may
Repeated electrical stimulation or eccentric exercise in
partially explain why muscle mass cannot be increased
which muscle lengthens while being loaded may cause
solely by eating more protein.251 However, the effect of
injury.257 Infammation and muscle damage may result in
muscle protein breakdown by amino acid catabolism may
delayed-onset muscle soreness.?58 Muscle-derived ROS
be decreased when insulin release is stimulated, for
 may be involved in the development of muscle fatigue and
example by glucose in a meal, because insulin apparently
may result in muscle damage as a result of excessive con-
inhibits protein breakdown.
tractile activity.5 The lipoxygenase pathway may promote
Branched-chain amino acid supplementation may have
the production of ROS. Although study results of other
mild effects on muscle atrophy because of immobilization
antioxidants to prevent postexercise muscle soreness have
and help regulate protein turmover. In one study, short-term
 been mixed, N-acetylcysteine possesses antioxidant activ-
(6 days) HS of rats resulted in losses of myofibrillar pro-
ity, increases glutathione synthesis, reduces ROS during
teins, total RNA, and rRNAs and pronounced atrophy of
muscle contractions, and scavenges hydrogen peroxide and
the soleus muscle.25 Although the addition of branched-
hydroxyl free radicals. One study investigated the effects
chain amino acids to the diet did not prevent muscle
of pretreatment with N-acetylcysteine on fatiguing contrac-
 atrophy and had no apparent effect on regulators of protea-
tile activity by electrical stimulation of muscles.?59 Muscle
somal protein degradation, they reduced the loss of myo-
fatigue was delayed, tetanic force was preserved, and
fibrillar proteins and RNA, and attenuated several signal
plasma creatine kinase and lactate dehydrogenase activities
transduction proteins that act as regulators of protein syn-
were decreased in N-acetylcysteine-treated rats. The
thesis and cell growth in muscle.
content of muscle-derived ROS in both gastrocnemius and
 Leucine is especially important in the stimulation of
soleus muscles was also decreased in N-acetylcysteine-
muscle protein synthesis and can be a sole stimulus for
treated rats, suggesting that pretreatment has a protective
muscle protein synthesis, but a full complement of amino
effect against injury induced by fatiguing contractile activ-
acids are necesary for muscle synthesis 71 Younger people
ity in skeletal muscle.
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization 
123
Skeletal muscle recovery from disuse atrophy requires
monkeys. They are composed of dense connective tissue
the recruitment of insulin signaling for muscle growth,
with primarily parallel fibers of collagen, with a small
which is driven by protein synthesis. There is some belief
number of collagen fibers that run perpendicular to the
that dietary fish oil may enhance insulin signaling and
predominant direction of stress. Cross-links that fonm
protein metabolism. One study was performed to evaluate
between collagen chains are important to collagen tensile
whether dietary fish oil facilitates muscle recovery during
 strength and resistance to proteases.263 Reducible cross-
remobilization after disuse atrophy.260 Immobilization for
links are found in newly formed collagen, while nonreduc-
10 days, followed by 3 or 13 days of remobilization, was
ible cross-links are found in mature collagen and account
applied to the hindlimbs of rats fed corm oil (control group)
for stronger and stiffer collagen. The concentration of
or fish oil as a source of dietary fat. The immobilization-
cross-links and their ratio varies between species and loca-
induced reductions in soleus muscle weight and myosin
tion. For example, the rabbit CCL has three to five times
heavy-chain content were significantly restored by 3 days
more nonreducible cross-links than the patellar tendon.263
 of remobilization in the group receiving corm oil. However,
Ligaments also have more cells per mass than tendons.263
muscle recovery in the fish oil group did not significantly
Most ligaments do not function as a unit structure
change until 13 days of remobilization. Throughout the
because at a particular joint position, one portion of a liga-
remobilization period, levels of prostaglandin Fzc and
 ment may be taut while another part is relaxed.264 This is
COX-2 mRNA were significantly increased, although the 
relevant because certain joint positions may need to be
 increase of prostaglandin Fzo was less in the fish oil group
avoided to reduce stress on healing ligaments. Ligament
until day 13. These fndings suggest that dietary fish oil
insertions may be direct or indirect.264 With a direct inser-
may inhibit early muscle recovery after disuse atrophy by
tion, collagen fibrils course directly into the bone, with
suppressing signaling pathways and prostaglandin Fc.
some fibers blending with the periosteum. In contrast, indi-
synthesis.
rect insertions have a zone of fibrocartilage and mineral-
Recently, vitamin D receptors have been found in
ized fibrocartilage between the ligament and cortical bone.
muscle tissue.261 Vitamin D deficiency has been associated 
These zones are important when considering ligament
with muscle weakness and changes in EMGs, which
insertions and their responses to stress and rehabilitation
improve with vitamin D supplementation. There may also
from injury.
be atrophy of type II muscle fibers with vitamin D defi-
The biomechanical responses of ligaments and tendons
ciency. Other studies have shown a relationship between
 are nonlinear because of progressive fiber recruitment and
25-hydrox ycholecalciferol levels and various measures of
viscoelastic properties. The structural properties of the
-a  u  m n  s as
entire bone-ligament-bone complex that must be consid-
tor expression decreases with age and is unaffected by
ered depend on the mechanical properties of the ligament,
vitamin D levels. Vitamin D may have a role in transcrip-
macroscopic and microscopic ligament geometry, the
tion and regulation of IGF binding protein, which binds 
cross-sectional area and length of the ligament, and the
IGF in tissues, including muscle. Vitamin D levels also
material properties of the fibrous and ground substance
have an effect on membrane calcium channels of muscle
constituents.
 cells in numerous species.267 Because calcium is critical for
When initially loaded, ligaments and tendons stretch
skeletal muscle function, vitamin D levels may have a
with a slight increase in load. On histologic examination,
significant effect on muscle function, performance, and
the fibers change from a relaxed wavy appearance to a
injury risk.
parallel alignment as the fibers become oriented in the
direction of loading. This region on a load-deformation
Ligaments and Tendons
curve is known as the toe region (Figure 7-9). As the load
 is increased, the curve becomes more linear, corresponding
to full parallel orientation of the fibers. The linear portion
Ligament and Tendon Structure
of the curve also indicates elastic deformation, with retum
and Biomechanics
to normal structure when the load is released. If loading
Ligaments and tendons consist primarily of type I collagen
continues, the load-deformation curve exits the linear
that forms parallel fibers. Ligaments extend between bones
region and enters the region of plastic deformation. This
to stabilize joints, whereas tendons permit movement of
point is termed the yield point. From a histologic perspec.
bones by connecting muscles to bones. Both are rela-
tive, some microfailure may occur even before the yield
tively pliant and fexible to allow natural movements of the
 point is reached, resulting in damage to the ligament or
bone to which they attach. They are also strong and rela-
tendon. After the yield point is reached, gross failure of the
tively inextensible to offer resistance to applied forces,
ligament occurs and permanent structural damage occurs
especially tensile forces. Ligament and tendon structure
and remains even if the load is released. When the ligament
and chemical composition are very similar in humans
or tendon fails and can support only a negligible load, the
and many animal species, including rats, rabbits, dogs, and
ultimate failure point has been reached. It is important to
124
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Load Deformation Curve
of an ACL-hamstring rapid refex arc, which normally
helps to limit anterior motion of the tibia.264 Instead, a
Yield point
Ultimate load
at failure
slower reflex originating from the knee joint capsule limits
 anterior tibial motion. Rehabilitation techniques to help
restore ligament-muscle refexes should be considered.
 Knowledge of the blood supply to ligaments and tendons
is necessary to understand how healing and rehabilitation
may be affected. Blood fow to the proximal, middle, and
distal parts of the CCL were 3, 2.2, and 3.5 mL per 100 g
of tissue per minute, respectively in one study.268 The
respective values in the caudal cruciate ligament were 2.8,
Deformation
2.8, and 3.2 mL per 100 g of tissue per minute. The crucj-
Figure 7-9 Load-deformation curve of ligament biomechanical
ate ligaments are relatively hypovascular, with blood fow
testing. A, Toe region. Note the bottom portion of the diagram indi
only 50% of that of the synovium of the suprapatellar
cating the wavy appearance of the collagen fibers. B, Linear physi-
pouch.269 Application of a cranial stress diminishes the
ologic loading and zone of elastic deformation. The collagen fibers
blood fow to the ligament to one fifth of the baseline value,
become taut. C, Early permanent damage and zone of plastic defor-
an effect that is reversible. Division of the infrapatellar fat
mation. There is damage to some of the fibers. D, Ultimate load at 
pad causes a twofold decrease in perfusion to the ligament,
failure. There is gross disruption of the ligament.
whereas dissection of the enveloping synovium results in
a complete cessation of blood fow.
Many factors affect the ligament-bone unit response.
note that the ligament may retain continuity despite micro
and macrofailure.
Tendons also respond biochemically to the stresses placed
The mechanical properties of ligaments and tendons are
 On them.271 In compression regions of rabbit tendons, the 
a refection of their material characteristics, allowing for
G AG content is 15 times greater than in tension-transmitting
comparison between other ligaments and tendons. They
regions. Denmatan sulfate predominates in regions of
also refect the orientation and organization of the collagen
tension, whereas chondroitin sulfate is the major GAG in
fibers. High strain-rate techniques for studying knee liga-
regions of compression. The relative GAG content changes
ment failure in people have replaced the previous low
with alterations in the stresses placed on tendons induced
strain-rate methods and distinguish the failure mechanism
by transposing the tendon, and the content reverts back to
of ligaments from that of bone. For example, anterior cru-
normal when the tendon is replaced to its original position.
ciate bone-ligament-bone preparations of primates failed
Other factors affecting tendons and ligaments include the
 at a higher load and absorbed more energy at a faster rate 
amount of activity the animal undergoes and medications
of deformation than at a slower rate.265 Specimens failed
the patient may receive.
by ligament disruption at faster rates, and by tibial avulsion
Response of Ligaments and Tendons to
fractures at slower rates. Ligament function is further
defined by measuring the restraining force provided by
Disuse and Immobilization
specifc ligaments. Advances in analytic techniques and
Immobilization is commonly used to treat injuries to liga-
models permit precise analysis of joint position, motion,
ments and tendons. There are many models of ligament
and laxity.266
and tendon disuse, including intemal and extermal fixation
Recent studies have indicated that, in addition to tendon
methods, casts and slings, denervation, disarticulation,
and ligament support, neuromuscular refexes may play a
and bed rest. These models have allowed the study of
large role in joint stability.264 Impulses from mechanore-
histologic, biochemical, and biomechanical changes that
ceptors in the joint capsule, menisci, and ligaments trans-
Occur with disuse. There is an adverse decline in structural
mitted to the spinal cord result in instantaneous refex
and material properties of ligaments and tendons with
regulation of muscles acting on a joint to provide coordi-
immobilization of the joints that they cross. Even if joint
nated joint function and stability. Canine lateral collateral
motion is allowed, stress deprivation rapidly reduces the
ligaments have nerve fibers and Golgi-Mazzoni and Ruffini
mechanical properties of the tendon and ligament tissues
(Box 7-8).272 The bone-tendon/bone-ligament complex
Mechanoreceptors are more numerous at the ends than in
is especially affected by immobilization. The effects of
the middle of ligaments, and they are present in both the
stress deprivation appear to be time and dose dependent,
subsynovial and the interfascicular connective tissue and
and differences may exist in the responses of various liga-
are surrounded by vessel networks. The number of cor-
ments and tendons within the same animal because of
puscles may be related to the type of stress to which a liga-
differences in cellular, structural, and biochemical proper-
ment is subjected. ACL-deficient humans have disruption
ties. For example, the CCL may be more resistant to stress
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
125
maximum failure load and energy absorbed to failure (39%
Box 7-8
Summary of the Effects of Disuse
and 32%, respectively). There was also a 69% decrease in
 and Immobilization on Ligaments
ligament stiffness. These changes likely indicate an altera-
and Tendons
tion in the functional capacity of the ligament to resist
 Stress deprivation rapidly reduces mechanical properties of
loading and elongation, factors that relate to the ligament's
tendons and ligaments.
ability to provide joint stability. The immobilized ligament
 Bone-tendon and bone-ligament complexes are especially
units frequently failed by avulsion fractures of the bone,
affected.
which correlated with bone resorption in the cortex imme-
 Time and dose of immobilization and differences in cellular,
diately beneath the ligament insertion site. The effect of
structural, and biochemical properties affect degree of
immobility on knee ligaments depend, in part, on the his-
changes.
tologic characteristics of the ligament-bone attachment.
 Decreased cross-sectional area, disorganization of parallel
The ligament-bone junctions with zones of fibrocartilage
structure of fibrils and cells, a net decrease in collagen
were little affected. In contrast, the MCL, which inserts
mass, and reduced GAG, HA, chondroitin sulfate, dermatan
sulfate, and water content with immobilization.
directly into the tibia and periosteum without well-defined
·May have a 0.2%/week loss of ligament strength and energy
zones of cartilage, showed marked interruption after immo-
to failure with cage confinement.
bility as the result of bone resorption in the subperiosteal
·May have a 45% 1oss of 1oad to failure, and up to 75%
 and outer cortical regions. In some places the ligament was
decrease in cranial cruciate ligament stiffness with limb
 attached only to the overlying periosteum. After 5 months
immobilization for 12 weeks.
of remobilization following total body immobilization,
·Stife medial collateral stiffness may decrease 40% with 6
there was only partial recovery in ligament strength,
weeks of immobilization and take 18 weeks to return to
although ligament stiffness and compliance parameters
normal biomechanical properties after remobilization.
retumed to control values. Up to 12 months were required
 Continued joint motion during reduced weight bearing helps
for nearly complete recovery of ligament strength.
preserve ligament properties.
 Similar effects of immobilization have been noted on
Effects of immobilization on tendon are less severe
compared with ligaments.
canine ligaments. The effect of immobilization on the CCL
 Recovery of bony insertion sites is prolonged compared
of dogs was studied using a model of intermal skeletal fixa-
with ligament/tendon midsubstance, up to I year.
tion for 12 weeks.?9 Failure of the femur-ligament-tibia
·Bony resorption occurs at ligament bone interface.
complex occurred through the tibial insertion of the liga-
ment for both experimental and control limbs. The load at
GAG, Glycosaminoglycan; HA, hyaluronic acid.
failure and stiffness of the immobilized limbs were 45%
and 73%, respectively, of the nonimmobilized CCL. Even
though there was a 13% reduction in soft tissue mass, the
loss of collagen was greater in the tibia and femur than in
deprivation than the MCL .272.273 Typically, there is reduc-
the CCL, and correlated with mechanical failure at the
tion of cross-sectional area; disorganization of the parallel
bony insertion. Bone atrophy was the result of increased
structure of fibrils and cells; increased collagen turmover
resorption of bone rather than decreased bone formation.
This study demonstrated that there was significant atrophy
decrease in collagen mass; and reduced GAG, HA, chon-
of the CCL and bone in immobilized joints of dogs.
droitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, and water content.277
Other studies have confinmed the importance of bone
Remobilization returms the mechanical properties to nearly
resorption and the reduction of bone collagen resulting
normal over time, but the recovery of the bony insertion
from disuse and its relationship to strength of the medial
sites is prolonged compared with the ligament-tendon mid-
collateral and CCL complexes273276 In a similar study of
substance. Knowledge of the detrimental effects of immo-
canine stifes immobilized in a cast for 12 weeks, changes
bilization may influence the management of ligament and
in the tibial insertion of the ligament were apparent, includ-
tendon injuries.
ing the presence of many osteoclasts, numerous large fibro-
It is well recognized that a reduction of activity, such
blasts, and replacement of bone by loosely arranged fibrous
 as confinement to a cage, may affect ligament and tendon
tissue?7 Interestingly, in this study the femoral attach-
 properties.73 A study of related rhesus monkeys showed a
 ments of the medial and lateral collateral ligaments and the
 yam iad an o Aaa p yans ui ssl o
 origin of the CCL showed little bone resorption, indicating
captivity in the CCL.274 More profound effects may be
that the response to immobilization may be site-specific.
expected with complete immobilization of a limb. In a
Even so, MCL strength decreased 40% following 6 weeks
classic study, the effect of body cast immobilization on the
of immobilization.77 Restriction of activity to cage con-
biomechanical  properties of  bone-CCL-bone units 
of
finement also causes sigmificant bone atrophy of the
rhesus monkeys was studied.?73 After 8 weeks of total-body
tibial insertion sites of the collateral ligaments if adequate
plaster immobilization, there were significant decreases in
activity is not allowed. Additionally, there is decreased
126
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
thickness of ligament and tendon fiber bundles, greater
Compared with ligament, relatively less is known
extensibility per unit load, and unchanged collagen content
regarding the effects of immobilization and subsequent
after immobilization.
recovery on tendon. In a study of healthy young men, the
Although stress deprivation with immobilization appears
nondominant leg was immobilized for 2 weeks.281 Immo-
to reduce the mechanical properties of ligaments and tendons
bilization caused a 6% decrease in muscle size and 9%
in a time- and dose-dependent manner, stress deprivation
decrease in muscle strength, although Achilles tendon
with continued mobility may have different effects. Main-
size and collagen turmover were unchanged. Another study
taining joint motion and reducing the period of immobiliza-
evaluated people with ankle fractures that were immo-
tion may help preserve ligament properties. The effects of
bilized for 7 weeks.28 Achilles tendon cross-sectional
stress deprivation with joint motion on the CCL were studied 
area did not change significantly during immobilization,
in dogs by freeing the tibial insertion of the ligament and
whereas calf muscle cross-sectional area and strength
moving it caudally and securing it with a screw.272 Stife
decreased 15% and 54%, respectively. Local collagen tum-
joints were allowed complete mobility. The cross-sectional
over increased in the immobilized leg after 7 weeks of
area of the ligament was 115% larger than controls at 6
immobilization. Therefore tendon seems to be more resis-
weeks. The tensile strength was unchanged at 6 weeks, but
tant to short-term immobilization as compared with muscle.
was only 67% of control values at 12 weeks. This model of
Small animals may have some loss of tendon properties
stress deprivation with continued joint motion on the CCL
with immobilization. There is a dose-dependent effect of
suggests that there may be an increase in ligament cross-
stress shielding on the mechanical properties of rabbit
sectional area and a concurrent decrease in biomechanical
 patellar tendons.272 In addition to decreased ultimate stress
properties after a time, although the changes are less severe
of tendons with stress shielding, there is a significant
than immobilization without joint motion.272
increase in the cross-sectional area of tendons, despite
Other models of stress deprivation with joint motion for
fewer numbers of collagen fibrils per unit area. There was
relatively short periods have shown different results. The
a significant loss of ultimate stress on tendons after 1 to 3
effect of active joint motion on ligament and meniscus
weeks.272
mass in a non-weight-bearing model of disuse was studied.
 Tenascin-C, a protein with limited expression in normal
A unilateral tarsal disarticulation model of disuse that
musculoskeletal tissues, provides elasticity in mesenchy-
maintained active knee motion without weight bearing for
mal tissues subjected to heavy tensile loading. Tenascin-C
8 weeks was studied in dogs.3° A large and similar loss of
is expressed in normal rat myotendinous and myofascial
collagen and calcium mass occurred in the femur and tibia,
junctions, and the Achilles tendon, but is absent in normal 
indicating net bone resorption. No loss of tissue mass
skeletal muscle. Following cast immobilization for 3
occurred in the collateral and cruciate ligaments or menisci.
weeks, tenascin-C was decreased or was completely absent
The strength of the femur-CCL-tibia complex was not
 in the regions expressing tenascin-C normally.23
qualitatively or quantitatively different between control
 As the previously discussed studies have indicated, liga-
and experimental limbs. So although immobilization for
ments and tendons are not metabolically inert structures,
 greater than 8 weeks results in atrophy of bone, ligament,
tendon, and meniscus in some canine studies, the absence
times lower than liver tissue and 7.5 times less than skeletal
of weight bearing for 6 to 8 weeks with maintenance of
muscles. Immobilization of rat limbs causes an additional
joint motion appears to help preserve femur-ligament-tibia
36% reduction in oxygen consumption and decreased
complex mechanical strength, despite the occurrence of
aerobic enzyme activity of ligaments and tendons, suggest-
bone atrophy.
ing that the metabolic activity is further lowered with
The effects of immobilization on the biomec hanical and
 decreased levels of physical activity.284
 morphologic properties of the femur-MCL-tibia (FMT)
Response of Ligaments and Tendons
complex and its components have also been investigated
in rabbits.279 After 9 weeks of immobilization, FMT stiff-
to Remobilization
ness was significantly reduced, and the ultimate load to
Although the mechanical properties of immobilized liga-
failure and energy absorbing capacity were reduced by
ments returm to normal relatively quickly,22 the load to
69% and 82%, respectively, and an increased number of
failure of the bone-ligament-bone complex lags behind,
failures occurred by tibial avulsion. On histologic exami-
indicating that there is asynchronous healing of the bone-
nation, the femoral and tibial insertion sites showed
ligament-bone complex. After 6 weeks of immobilization
increased osteoclastic activity, resorption of bone, and dis-
of the lower limbs of dogs, 18 weeks of remobilization was
ruption of the normal attachment of the bone to the liga-
necessary for returm of the normal structural properties of
ment. The cross-sectional area of the CCL also decreased
the FMT complex .273 In fact, up to 1 year of remobilization
with immobilization of the stifle joint.?*° Diminished stress
may be required for normalization of the ligament-tibia
also results in increased collagen tumover, with formation
complex in some instances, whereas the mechanical prop-
 of immature collagen.264
    g on n n a g s
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
127
period of time, as newly synthesized collagen fbers
immobilization in the form of 8 weeks of low- and high-
gradually mature and strengthen with subsequent stress
 intensity treadmill running resulted in greater tenascin-C
resumption.
expression in myotendinous and myofascial junctions and
In the study of immobilized stifes of rhesus monkeys,
the Achilles tendon, reaching the level of normal tissues,
 5 or 12 months of remobilization was allowed after casting
suggesting that some level of increased loading is benef-
for 8 weeks.275 Following 5 months of rehabilitation, there
cial in recovery of tendon structure after immobilization.
was still a 20% deficit in load to failure and energy stored
Postoperative Healing of Tendons
at failure, but only a 7% deficit in stiffness. After 12 months
and Ligaments
of rehabilitation, there was only a 9% deficit in load to
failure and an 8% deficit in energy stored to failure.
The function of tendons and ligaments is to transmit tensile
The effects of remobilization following 9 weeks of
forces. Early studies suggested that healing ligaments
immobilization were studied in the rabbit FMT complex.279
should be immobilized for proper healing. Immobilization
With 9 weeks of remobilization, the ultimate load
of surgically repaired tendons or ligaments for 6 weeks
and energy-absorbing capabilities of the bone-ligament
results in a wound with approximately 50% the normal
 complex improved to approximately 80% of normal. Fol-
tensile strength for tendons and ligaments.?27 Recently, it
Jowing 12 weeks of immobilization, 1 year was required
has been suggested that early, controlled mobilization of
to recover the functional properties. Failure by tibial
healing tendon and ligament repairs may be beneficial.
avulsion became less frequent, and the stress-strain char-
Earlier tension across a ligament or tendon wound orients
acteristics of the MCL returmed to normal. Histologic
the healing fibers and results in stronger healing. For
examination found that the sites of insertion of the liga-
example, MCLs of canine stifes sutured with polyester
 ment also showed evidence of recovery.
suture in a locking loop patterm and immobilized for
Little is known about the effect of stretching on the
3 weeks, followed by active motion, resulted in valgus-
biochemical and morphologic features of tendons that have
varus laxity of 150% and ultimate strength of 92% com-
been immobilized. One study evaluated the response of rat
pared with intact controls. In comparison, doubling the
tendons to stretching after immobilization.2s Immobiliza-
length of the immobilization period to 6 weeks resulted
tion followed by stretching resulted in greater chondroitin
 in valgus-varus laxity of 300% and only 14% of the ulti-
sulfate at the compression region of tendons. Immobilized
mate strength of controls. Repaired canine tendons immo-
animals ex hibited the greatest disorganization of collagen
bilized for 3 to 6 weeks after surgery also apparently
bundles, which was partially recovered after stretching or
have sufficient strength to allow protected active motion.
with remobilization. Although the results of this study did
Current knowledge of healing tendons and ligaments sug-
not result in recovery with stretching to the degree that
gests that postoperative immobilization for 3 weeks will
        
allow acceptable retum to function while minimizing the
 dures, such as duration and frequency of the sessions, may
 risk of damage if appropriate suturing techniques are used.
 be beneficial in cases of immobilized tendons.
The immobilization splint should be designed to allow
In the study of healthy young men previously reviewed,
some active motion of the joints if possible, but should
the nondominant leg was immobilized for 2 weeks, fol-
limit the amount of weight bearing (Figure 7-10).238 After
lowed by a recovery period of 2 weeks. Although there was
immobilization is completed and coaptation devices are
a decrease in muscle size and mass with immobilization,
removed, the amount and type of exercise allowed should
there was no change in Achilles tendon size or collagen
be severely limited and increased gradually over time.
tumover. Remobilization resulted in increased muscle size,
Consideration should be made to protective coaptation if
but strength was unchanged. No differences in tendon size
the owner is unable to adequately restrict the animal. By 6
could be detected between the two legs after 2 weeks of 
weeks after repair, tendons have approximately 50% of
recovery, although collagen synthesis was increased in the
 tensile strength as compared with normal. It is believed that
tendons need only 25-33% of their original strength to
people with ankle fractures that were immobilized for 7
withstand the forces of normal physiologic muscle contrac-
tions, indicating that some light activity should not be
 Again, Achilles tendon cross-sectional area did not change
significantly during either immobilization or remobiliza-
Medial Collateral Ligament
tion, but calf muscle size and strength decreased during
immobilization; although there was some muscle size and
Several studies have evaluated early mobilization follow-
strength recovery after 7 weeks of remobilization, it was
ing injury to the MCL. In one study, injury to the MCL
still not complete.
was induced by making incisions through the superficial
Tenascin-C expression increased in rats with free cage
 and deep portions of the ligament, and then repair was
activity for 8 weeks following immobilization, although
performed by suturing the incision.277 Ligaments that were
not to normal levels.283 More strenuous loading after
not immobilized during the 6-week healing period were
128
Section ll
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
 The long-term effects of surgical repair and immobiliza-
tion on the healing of the transected MCL have also been
 studied in a canine model.?92 In one group, the transected
MCL of the left knee was not repaired, and the joint was
not immobilized, whereas in the other group the MCL was
repaired and the joint was immobilized for 6 weeks. Types
I and MI collagen, reducible collagen cross-links, and total
collagen concentration for both groups returmed to normal
levels by 48 weeks postoperatively. Biomechanically, the
 nonimmobilized group achieved better results than the
group that was immobilized in terms of varus-valgus knee
motion and ultimate load of the FMT complex. However,
the healing MCLs had tensile strength of only 62% and
45% of controls for the two groups at 48 weeks. These
results suggested that conservative treatment with early
mobilization might be better than surgical treatment with
immobilization for an isolated grade II MCL injury.
Healing ligaments may be less able to resist excessive
strain during the repetitive loading experienced during
Figure 7-10  Coaptation following repair of a superficial digital
daily activity. The ability of ligaments to resist repetitive
flexor laceration. Note the external skeletal fixator is configured to
low cyclic loading (<10% of the normal ligament failure
prevent flxion of the tarsus and weight bearing on the digits to limit
strength) was studied in normmal and healing rabbit MCLs.293
stress on the healing repair.
MCLs were surgically gapped in either a unilateral or
bilateral fashion with immobilization of the right hindlimb
in the bilateral group. MCL scars were allowed to heal for
stronger than those that were immobilized with a cast,
3, 6, and 14 weeks and were cyclic creep tested at increas-
suggesting that ligament strength is sensitive to physical
ing forces. The cyclic modulus of the nonimmobilized
activity. The effects of early mobilization and exercise on
scars was less than that of normal ligaments. The percent
healing of injured MCL were further studied 289-291 Tran-
increase in modulus during cycling was greater for scars
sected canine MCL were subjected to either no surgical
than for nonmal ligaments. Furthermore, immobilization
repair with 6 weeks of mobilization, surgical repair with
significantly decreased the ability of scars to resist strain,
3 weeks immobilization at 90 degrees followed by 3 weeks
with a majority of immobilized scars failing during repeti-
remobilization, or surgical repair with 6 weeks of immo-
tive loading. Failures were preceded by a reduction in
bilization. Knees were tested in tension to determine
cyclic modulus indicating damage to the healing ligaments
the structural properties of the FMT complex and the
that resulted in eventual total failure. These results suggest
mec hanical properties of the healing MCL. Laxity increased
       
in all knees, but early mobilization resulted in the best
strain in joint structures while they are under stress, poten-
joint stability. The structural properties of the FMT
tially leading to joint instability. Although immobilization
complex and the MCL substance were also improved in
could be used temporarily to maintain joint stability, remo-
the early mobilization groups. Stiffness of the MCL in
bilization would likely lead to total failure of the previ-
early mobilization groups was approximately 60% of con-
ously immobilized ligament.
trols, whereas stiffness of prolonged immobilization stifles
 e  s as a n ss
was only 36% of control stifles. The load at failure of the
 of the MCL. Although the previous studies have suggested
FMT complex was approximately 40% and 20% of normal
that during normal stife motion the functional deficit of
stifes in early mobilized versus immobilized stifes,
the MCL in valgus rotation is compensated for by the
respectively. Similarly, the tensile strength of the MCL was 
remaining structures, especially the CCL, MCL strength
approximately four times greater in stifles that underwent
was just 14% of normal after 14 weeks of healing when
early mobilization, but values of immobilized limbs were
both ligaments were transected, compared with transection
only 20% of normal stifles. These studies indicate that
of the MCL alone, which was 52% of control values.294
early mobilization (less than 3 weeks of immobilization)
There were also marked arthritic changes in the joint when
is the treatment of choice in cases with isolated MCL
both ligaments were transected.
injuries. It is important to realize that an intact CCL pro-
Thermal shrinkage has been used in other ligaments to
vides significant stability to the stifle joint and allows the
improve healing. The effects of immobilization on healing
MCL to heal. If the CCL is intact, implementation of early
motion is recommended.
investigated in a rabbit model.29s Thermal shrinkage was
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
129
performed on the medial collateral ligaments of rabbit
healing fexor tendons. These results were confirmed in a
knees. The joints were immobilized in half of the knees.
study that compared different suturing techniques in dogs
Animals were evaluated 0, 3, 6, and 9 weeks postopera-
undergoing early mobilization following repair of lacer-
tively. The failure load of shrunken ligaments was signifi-
ated deep digital fexor tendons. The mechanical and his-
cantly lower than that of the intact ligaments on the day
tologic healing of tendon repairs using early active motion
 Of operation. Shrunken ligaments reached their highest
was evaluated with three fexor tendon repair techniques
failure loads in the third week. The immobilized ligaments
Over a 21-day period.28 Adhesions 0ccurred in 15% of the
remained weaker than the mobile group, but this difference
tendon splint repairs. Smooth tendon gliding was obtained
was statistically significant only in the ninth week. Immo-
in the other specimens in which repairs were successful.
bilization seems to have negative effects on the healing
Histologic ex amination demonstrated evidence of progres-
ligament.
sive healing without surrounding adhesions in repaired
Lateral collateral ligament healing is similar to healing
tendons. Improved suture techniques have the potential to
of the MCL.264 Repaired ligaments heal faster with more
withstand the stress produced by active digital motion pro-
 Organized tissue than nonrepaired ligaments, but both are
tocols. Immobilization may also result in adhesion forma-
still weaker than control ligaments after 10 weeks of
tion, reducing the excursion of healing tendons and reduced
healing. 2%6
ROM. In one study, 10 minutes of daily passive motion,
with 1.5 to 1.7 mm of tendon excursion prevented adhe-
Cranial Cruciate Ligament
sions in a sharp transection model of the deep digital fexor
Transected ends of the CCL retract and do not join together,
tendon.301.302 Doubling the excursion resulted in no addi-
as other ligaments may. Repair of transected ligaments
tional improvement. Therefore less aggressive passive-
results in resorption of 40% of the ligament 24 months
motion exercises may be sufficient to prevent adhesion
after repair, and weakness persists after4 years of healing.297
formation. In fact, overly aggressive ROM rehabilitation
The CCL is not normally in contact with synovial fuid
 may be deleterious. Tendons undergoing excessive motion
because of an overlying synovial membrane. However,
with formation of a large gap between tendon ends are at
when the ligament is damaged, synovial fuid may bathe
risk for rupture during early healing.303 Increased rate of
the damaged ligament, which may inhibit healing because
 passive motion also has beneficial effects. In one study of
of the inhibitory effects of synovial fuid on fibroblast
healing canine digital fexor tendons, passive motion at a
 proliferation.264 In adition, there are increased levels of
rate of 12 cycles/min for 5 minutes daily resulted in similar
collagenase with cruciate ligament and meniscal injuries.
gliding function with significantly greater tensile proper-
A study of experimentally created CCL and MCL transec-
ties than dogs receiving 1 cycle/min for 60 minutes.304
tion indicated that postoperative immobilization for 6
Repair of tendons should occur within 7 days for optimum
weeks resulted in greater arthritic changes in articular car-
restoration of gliding function.3os Although repair of
tilage than in dogs undergoing early stife mobilization.298
tendons as long as 21 days after injury results in similar
Human patients undergoing rehabilitation consisting of
strength and stiffness as tendons undergoing immediate
immediate knee motion and early weight bearing do not
repair, there is significant loss of gliding function with
have an increased incidence of abnormal knee displace-
delayed repair.
ment in the early phases after undergoing bone-patellar
There may be some benefit to delaying rehabilitation
tendon-bone allograft or iliotibial band extraarticular sta-
for several days after tendon repair. One study compared
bilization of ACL injuries. Although similar studies have
the short-term outcome following fexor tendon repair and
not been conducted in dogs, our clinical impression is that
postoperative rehabilitation beginning on day 1 versus day
there is not an increased incidence of stifle instability in
S Aep ne uonezqou aanradogsod sueul gog sop u s
dogs undergoing rehabilitation, and, in fact, there may be
less displacement because of the additional  stability
tures in four of the dogs (33%) in the group subjected to
 afforded by greater muscle mass of patients undergoing
mobilization starting at day 1. There was a trend toward
rehabilitation.
lower resistance of fexion in the day 5 start group, but
there were no differences between the groups by day 10.
Flexor Tendons
Starting rehabilitation on day 5, when initial gliding resis-
Immediate immobilization of fexor tendons following
tance is lower, may have an advantage over earlier starting
repair results in diminished ultimate tensile strength in the
times, when surgical edema and other factors increase the
early postoperative period. Using an early passive motion
initial force requirements to initiate tendon gliding.
 protocol, ultimate tensile strength and ultimate load are
Rehabilitation of partial fexor tendon lacerations may
increased 2-3 times more than if the limb is immobilized.300
be different than for complete lacerations. In one study of
In addition, joint motion is significantly greater than if
partial lacerations of the deep digital fexor tendon, dogs
the joints are immobilized. Early protected passive motion
 not undergoing surgical repair had higher ultimate loads
augments biomechanical properties  and excursion  of
and stiffness than repair groups.307 In addition, passive
130
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
rehabilitation of nomrepaired tendons resulted in less gap
used to immobilize the tibiotarsal joint, and it was removed
formation than unrestricted active mobilization of repaired
 4 weeks after tenorrhaphy. Ultrasound therapy was given
tendons.
Both passive and active rehabilitation are superior to
using 0.5 W/cm? for 10 minutes daily for 10 days. The dogs
immobilization following partial tendon laceration, but few
showed significant lameness for the first 4-5 days, which
studies have directly compared the two. Gap formation,
 disappeared earlier in the ultrasound-treated dogs than the
adhesions, gliding function, and structural properties of
controls. By day 40, the echogenicity was improved in the
repaired and unrepaired tendons were evaluated following
treated group compared with controls. However, the tendon 
 3 weeks of unrestricted active rehabilitation versus passive
showed near nonmal echoic texture in both groups by day
mobilization for partial laceration of canine deep digital
120. The Achilles tendon in treated dogs showed compara-
fexor tendons.308 There were no differences in tendon
 tively fewer adhesions than in controls. Histologic features
excursion, total joint rotation, or adhesions between any
of tendon healing were improved in treated dogs through-
groups. Gap size was higher with active mobilization.
out the study, and by day 120, the tendon tissue was com-
There was no effect of rehabilitation protocol on the
paratively acellular and looked like a normal tendon.
strength or stiffness of healing tendons at 3 weeks. Tendon
repair did not affect tendon strength, but did produce
Rotator Cuff Tendons
higher stiffness in healing tendons at 3 weeks. The authors
The response of healing tendons in different areas of the
concluded that active rehabilitation appears safe for partial
body may differ from fexor tendons. In studies of animal
lacerations less than 60%. Although repair appears to
models of rotator cuff repair, immobilization may improve
weaken the tendon in the early stages of healing, it may
mechanical properties more than passive motion. The
provide some biomechanical benefit by the middle stages
effects of daily passive motion or continuous immobiliza-
of healing.
tion on joint mechanics in a rat rotator cuff repair model
Retaining vascularity does not seem to prevent signif-
following injury to the supraspinatus muscle were evalu-
cant reduction in tendon properties that occur postopera-
 ated.312 Continuous immobilization or passive motion was
tively, nor does it accelerate the retum in strength and
performed for 2 weeks before all underwent a remobiliza-
stiffness.309 The medial half of the patellar tendon was
tion protocol for 4 weeks. Total ROM was less with passive
placed as a vascularized graft to replace the ACL on one
motion than with continuous immobilization at 2 weeks
side and as a nonvascularized graft on the other in monkeys.
and remained significantly less following 4 weeks of remo-
Grafts had only 57% of control ACL stiffness and 39% of
bilization. Joint stiffness at 2 weeks was increased with
control maximum force by l year. Elastic modulus and
passive motion in comparison with continuous immobili-
maximum stress also increased over time, but at 1 year
zation. There were no differences between the groups in
were only 34% and 26% of normal values, respectively.
terms of collagen organization or mechanical properties.
Little is known about the localized changes in bone
The authors concluded that in this model, immediate post-
mass that occur following tendon or ligament injury. Inter-
operative passive motion was detrimental to passive shoul-
ruption of normal load transfer at the insertion site may
 der mechanics, perhaps because passive motion increased
lead to localized loss of bone. In a canine study, the deep
scar formation in the subacromial space, resulting in
digital fexor tendon was transected from its insertion and
decreased motion and increased joint stiffness.
either repaired or left unrepaired.310 Postoperatively, limbs
A similar study concurred with these findings. Gimbel
in the repair group were cast immobilized except for 10
and colleagues investigated the effect of short and long
minutes of daily passive mobilization rehabilitation,
durations of various activity levels on healing supraspina-
whereas the laceration-only group dogs were allowed full
tus tendon to bone insertion sites in rats.313 The post-
weight bearing. At 5-42 days postinjury, bone mineral
 operative activity level was controlled through shoulder
density (BMD) was assessed. There was significant bone
immobilization, cage activity, or moderate exercise for
loss in the distal phalanx after tendon laceration, repair,
4 or 16 weeks. Decreased activity level had a positive
and postoperative passive mobilization, with BMD
effect on stiffness and modulus of elasticity of the insertion
decreases of 20%, 40%, and 41% at 10, 21, and 42 days.
 site at 16 weeks (immobilization > cage activity = exer-
In contrast, BMD was reduced by 28% in bones subjected
cise). Collagen disorganization was decreased with a
to tendon laceration and full weight bearing. Osteoclastic
decrease in activity level at 4 weeks, but was similar
resorption occurred in both groups. Bone loss may affect
between groups at 16 weeks. Decreasing activity level
healing by impeding restoration of a strong tendon-bone
by immobilizing the shoulder improved tendon to bone
interface.
healing in this study.
Modalities, such as therapeutic ultrasound, may aid
 Thermal shrinkage of the joint capsule is occasionally
tendon healing. The Achilles tendon of five dogs was
 performed in mild cases of medial glenohumeral instabil-
severed proximal to its insertion.31l Tenorrhaphy was per-
ity. It is important to immobilize the shoulder joint after
formed using locking-loop sutures. A cortical screw was
surgery, but the optimal time of immobilization is unknown.
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
131
Ideal timing for remobilization is still controversial, and
Another study evaluated the effect of exercise on the
the length of time that the canine shoulder joint should be
structural properties of swine FMT complex. Animals were
immobilized after thermal shrinkage is unknown, but aban-
 trained on a treadmill daily for 12 months. Exercised pigs
doning immobilization protocols for longer than 3 weeks
had a significant increase in the ultimate load to failure
should be considered based on healing of stife medial col-
of their ligaments when normalized for body weight,
lateral ligaments with thermal shrinkage.795
but there were no significant changes in deformation, or
energy absorbed of ligaments. Results found in young
Adaptations of Ligaments and Tendons to
rabbits that were trained on running wheels indicated that
Increased Mechanical Stress
training increased the breaking strength of many ligaments
Much like other musculoskeletal tissue, ligaments and
 and tendons, including the tibia-CCL-femur complex.317
tendons also adapt to applied stress and motion. Ligaments
Studies in rats and mice have shown similar results and
and tendons are morphologically, biomechanically, and
have suggested a possible additive role of testosterone in
biochemically sensitive to stress deprivation as well as
enhancing ligament and tendon strength with training.58
stress enhancement. Although testing procedures vary
Studies in other species have not always demonstrated
among studies, most have consistently demonstrated that
a corresponding increase in breaking strength, fiber diam-
training increases the strength of ligaments and tendons.
 eter, and collagen content, however. For example, there
Compared with other tissues, such as muscle, the meta-
was no increase in hydroxyproline content despite an
bolic activity of ligaments and tendons is lower, probably
 increase in breaking strength in rats undergoing training.S8
because of poorer vascularity and circulation.314 The
In addition, there was an increase in collagen turmover
responses of ligaments and tendons to increased training
with training. More of the newly formed collagen may
stresses are therefore slower and less pronounced than in
be in the soluble form because of fewer cross-links.
muscles. It is also important to consider the conditions
Metabolic changes have been noted in tendons and liga-
under which laboratory animals are housed when interpret-
ments of rodents undergoing training, including increased
ing the results of experimental studies because ligaments
tendon nitrogen content; malate dehydrogenase; reduced
and tendons are very sensitive to stress deprivation, and
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide oxidase; lactate dehy-
limiting normal activity with cage confinement may affect
drogenase; isocitrate dehydrogenase; and succinate dehy-
strength of these tissues.315
 drogenase early in the training period.5 The water content
Ligaments retain 80-90% of their baseline mechanical
does not change with training, but the number of cell
 properties with minimal stimulation. The effects of exer-
nuclei per unit volume of tendon are greater in trained rats.
cise on ligaments and tendons are less profound than the
 Training results in an increase in oxygen consumption of
effects of immobilization. In a healthy patient, ligament
less than 10% in ligaments and tendons, although there is
exercise is not likely to increase the strength and stiffness
a 58% elevation in muscle tissue. It is unclear why chronic
by more than about 10-15%. Sprint training results in
exercise does not produce a greater effect.?284 Changes in
increases in ligament weight but not ligament-bone junc-
the content of an elastic extracellular matrix protein,
tion strength.315 However, endurance activity with regular
tenascin-C, have also been noted with immobilization and
mechanical loads results in increases in junction strength
remobilization of ligaments and tendons.318 Although rat 
and ligament stiffness. Low-duration (30 minutes) and
tenascin-C was present at the normal rat bone-patellar
high-frequency (6 days/week) endurance exercise appears
tendon junction, it was almost completely absent after 3
to have the most benefit to ligament strength. A program
weeks of cast immobilization. Remobilization in the fonm
of low-intensity exercise combined with short bouts of
of cage activity for 8 weeks resulted in some increase, but
high-intensity exercise in young horses resulted in thicker
not to normal levels. Tenascin-C activity around the chon-
 and stronger superficial digital fexor tendons as compared
drocytes and fibroblasts of the bone-tendon junction and
with horses that were stall rested or stall rested with a
the collagen fibers of the tendon belly was normal follow-
 single daily bout of high-intensity exercise.316
 ing remobilization with 8 weeks of treadmill training,
The effects of exercise on morphologic characteristics
however.
and mechanical properties of the canine stife medial col-
 Stretching is frequently recommended in dogs in train-
lateral ligament have been investigated 27317 Dogs under-
ing or during rehabilitation to help improve joint ROM.
 going treadmill exercise for 6 weeks had a 12% increase
In a study of rat tail tendons, stretching to 108% of
in failure load of the medial collateral ligament, and a 15%
the original length resulted in retum to 104% of the origi-
 increase in hydroxyproline content (indicative of collagen
nal length when the stretch was released.319 A second
content) of the lateral collateral ligament compared with
stretch resulted in more stretch per unit load (less stiff).
control dogs. In addition, collagen fiber diameter was
Histologic examination found evidence of damage to some
greater following training, although GAG content, water
strands of collagen. Despite the changes in stiffness, the
content, collagen concentration/dry weight or collagen
maximum breaking load was not significantly altered
concentration per weight/length unit were unchanged.
after the second stretch.
132
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Effects of Medications on Ligaments
Treatment with topical dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) has
and Tendons
been recommended for the treatment of local inflammatory
Medications are sometimes administered locally or sys-
conditions, including injuries to tendons and muscles.
temically in the treatment of musculoskeletal conditions.
However, topical treatment with DMSO of the Achilles
In particular, corticosteroids may be administered intraar-
tendons of mice indicated that the tensile strength of the
ticularly and have effects on ligaments and tendons. The
tendon decreased in relation to the length of time the mice
effect of intraarticular corticosteroid injections on the
were treated.323 The maximum decrease of 20% was seen
mec hanical properties of anterior cruciate bone-ligament-
 7 days after treatment began. These data suggest that vigor-
bone units was determined in rhesus monkeys.320 Altera-
 ous muscle activity should be avoided during treatment
tions in ligament strength and elongation properties
with DMSO.
depended on corticosteroid dosage and time after injection.
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics may contribute to tendi-
Fifteen weeks after three weekly injections of large doses
nopathies. The incidence of tendinitis and tendon rupture
 of methylprednisolone acetate (6 mg/kg), there were sig-
 in human patients treated with ciprofoxacin suggests that
nificant decreases in the maximum failure load (20%),
these antibiotics alter tendon fibroblast metabolism. There
energy absorption prior to failure (11%), and stiffness 
was a 67% decrease in cell proliferation compared with
(11%) of the ligament unit. In contrast, only minimal
control cells, and a 36% to 48% decrease in collagen
alterations occurred after 6 weeks suggesting effects on
synthesis of canine Achilles tendon, paratenon, and shoul-
the ligaments was not immediately seen but was long
der capsule fibroblasts incubated with serum levels of cip-
lasting. A third group of animals received intraarticular
rofoxacin in cell culture.324 Ciprofoxacin also caused
injections (0.6 mg/kg) spaced 2 weeks apart. Although
a 14% to 60% decrease in PG synthesis and significant
decreases occurred in maximum failure load (9%) and
increases in matrix-degrading proteolytic activity. These
energy absorption (8%) by 15 weeks, the magnitude of
changes suggest that ciprofoxacin stimulates matrix-
 changes was less. There was microscopic evidence of col-
 degrading protease activity from fbroblasts and inhibits
lagen fiber failure at multiple levels throughout the liga-
fibroblast metabolism, which may contribute to the clini-
ment. Although high and frequent doses of intraarticular
cally described tendinopathies associated with ciprofoxa-
corticosteroids produce the greatest alterations in ligament
cin therapy. In fact, there is a black box warming with the
strength and function, even low doses given infrequently
use of any fuoroquinolone antibiotics for possible tendi-
 nopathy, especially in patients older than 60 years.
tion or injections repeated at intervals of several months 
Certain pharmacologic agents may positively affect
is recommended to minimize ligament damage. Further-
ligaments and tendons. For example, treatment with bone
more, direct injection of corticosteroid into the ligament
morphogenetic protein-2 results in more extensive bone
should be avoided because fibrocyte death and alterations
formation around tendons placed through bone tunnels
in ligament strength and stiffness may occur for up to
with closer apposition of new bone to the tendon in treated
1 year.320
limbs, resulting in higher tendon pull-out strength.325 Bone 
Injection of corticosteroid inside a tendon has deleteri-
 morphogenetic protein can accelerate the healing process 
ous effects, with collagen necrosis and decreases in tensile
when a tendon graft is transplanted into a bone tunnel.
strength occurring.321 Peritendinous injections are gener-
ally safer, and with proper indications, there may be fewer
Bone
complications. Systemic administration of corticosteroids
also has fewer adverse effects on tendons than intraten-
Normal Bone
dinous injection. However, administration of very high
doses (10 mg/kg) may result in reduced breaking strength
 Bone consists of organic and inorganic components. The
of sutured canine tendons.321 In rabbits receiving cortico-
organic component consists of collagen fibers embedded
steroids, bony insertion sites became osteoporotic and
in a matrix of GAGs, among other components of ground
failure tended to occur by fracture 322 Tissues with shorter
substance. The inorganic component consists primarily of
turmover times, such as bone, tend to weaken faster than
calcium and phosphorus in the form of hydroxyapatite
tissues with longer turmover times, such tendons and liga-
crystals. These crystals are embedded within the organized
ments, when corticosteroids are administered. In fact,
collagen fibers. Bone provides the musculoskeletal tissues
tendons may initially become slightly stiffer early in
with compressive strength during weight bearing, and the
the course of steroid administration because fibroblast
organic component provides tensile strength.
proliferation and collagen production are reduced, result-
Long bones have a compact portion of lamellar bone
ing in decreased insoluble collagen. Long-term steroid
found in the outer cortex, and loosely woven trabecular
use eventually results in weakening of ligaments and
bone found in the inner medullary bone. The inner medul-
tendons because of the continued inhibition of collagen
lary bone is typically more metabolically active because of
synthesis.
the relatively large surface area, but it is also relatively
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
133
B
Figure 7-11  Radiographs of the metacarpal bones of a 10-month-old dog with fractures of the distal radius and ulna. A, At the time of fracture.
B, Four weeks after cast placement. Note thinning of the cortices and generalized bone atrophy.
weaker as compared with the more dense outer
affects the cranial and caudal cortices to a greater extent
cortical bone.
than the medial and lateral cortices.331 These changes are
consistent with those seen in other species, including
Effects of Immobilization on Bone
rats.332
 Many models exist to study the effects of immobilization
Immobilization models may produce loss of 60% of the
on the skeleton, including local or systemic immobiliza-
 trabecular bone mass.329 This level may suggest a physio-
tion. Local immobilization involves casting, splinting.
logic threshold at which basal hormonal and cellular activ-
denervation, paralysis, disarticulation, and limb suspen-
ity determined by genetics is reached in the absence of
sion, whereas systemic immobilization is accomplished
mechanical stimuli.329 During the acute phase of immobi-
with body casting, bed rest, or spacefight. Reduced stress
lization, the greatest bone loss occurs in medullary bone
on bones may also result from stress shielding following
from an increase in bone resorption and a decrease in for-
application of implants for repair of fractures. Care must
mation. During the chronic phase, bone mass plateaus and
be taken in employing the various models. They have
cellular activities may revert back to normal levels.
similar pattems of bone loss, but they respond slightly dif-
The response to cast immobilization of bone in young
ferently in the location and the amount of bone loss,
adult dogs may be divided into three stages of histologic
 depending on the degree of unloading.
response.33 In stage I, there is rapid initial loss of bone,
Models of forelimb and HI that prevent weight bearing
reaching its maximum rate of loss at 6 weeks, with rela-
on the limb induce a reduction in cortical and cancellous
tively equal contributions of the periosteal, Haversian, and
bone mass, reduce cortical bone density and stiffness, and
endosteal regions to the loss. The rate of bone loss slows
during stage II, which consists of 24 to 32 weeks of immo-
that occur following immobilization vary depending on the
bilization. The majority of the bone loss during this stage
length of immobilization and remobilization, age of the
comes from the periosteal envelope. Stage Ill, character-
animal, and the bone involved. The effects appear to be
ized by greater than 32 weeks of immobilization, results
more profound in younger dogs (Figure 7-1l). In fact,
in bone mass that has been reduced to 30% to 50% of
immobilization during growth may result in permanent
original values. This patterm is qualitatively similar in all
changes in bone mass and the relation of bone mineral
bones of the forelimb, but the distal bones are affected to
content (BMC) to body weight.323 Older animals may have
 a greater degree. Another study of immature dogs demon-
less preexisting bone mass as a result of senile osteoporo-
strated a 55% decrease in bone mass of the distal tibial
sis, and these dogs may lose less bone following immobi-
metaphysis following 4 weeks of unilateral hindlimb cast
immobilization.334
 Trabecular bone is affected to a greater degree than cortical
 The extent of resorption surface and the increase in the
bone, and the effects of immobilization are more extensive
in the more distal weight-bearing bones (Figures 7-12 to
phases of bone loss. The type of metabolic bone activity
 7-14),329.330 Diaphyseal bone loss during immobilization
also varies depending on the length of immobilization. In
134
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
120
Control
100
12 wks immob
12 wks immob +
80
Figure 7-12  Trabecular bone volume of the radius follow-
28 wks remob
ing various periods of immobilization and remobilization.
60
32wks immob
 Note the relatively greater loss of bone volume and trabecu-
%
32 wks immob +
lar bone compared with the diaphyseal bone in Figure 7-13.
40
28 wks remob
20
0
Young dogs
Old dogs
120
Control
100
12 wks immob
12 wks immob +
80
Figure 7-13  Bone volume of the diathesis of the radius
28 wks remob
after varying periods of immobilization and remobilization.
60
32 wks immob
Bone loss is greater in young dogs immobilized for long
%
32 wks immob +
 periods.
40
28 wks remob
20
0+
Young dogs
Old dogs
diaphysis. The old dogs, which began the study with 10%
+20
less bone than the younger dogs, showed smaller propor-
15
30
45
60 weeks
tional losses than younger dogs, most evident in the diaph-
20
ysis. In both age groups, the distal, weight-bearing bones
Humerus
tended to show greater losses. Following 32 weeks of
immobilization, young dogs had 54% less bone volume in
-30
Radius
the third metacarpal diaphysis, whereas older dogs had
38% less. Metacarpal trabecular bone decreased 50%
in young dogs and 47% in older dogs. Adult dogs had a
-601
3rd Metacarpal
45% decrease in bone mass of the distal radial metaphysis
Figure 7-14   Effects of immobilization on density of various bones.
following 16 weeks of cast immobilization in another
study.335
The amount of bone loss associated with the length of
 immobilization apparently has limits. Although immobili-
cast-immobilized young adult beagle dogs, the total active
zation studies have demonstrated bone loss of up to 60%
metacarpal bone surface (resorption and formation) was
 of the trabecular bone mass, there appears to be a mainte-
reduced 60% below control values during the frst 2-4
nance bone tumover level that occurs with continued
weeks, increased 50% above controls at 6 weeks, and sub-
 immobilization.329 The remaining maintenance level sug-
sequently retumed to control values at 8-12 weeks.333 The
gests a physiologic threshold at which basal hormonal and
response of bone to immobilization differs in mature dogs
cellular activity is reached in the absence of mechanical
and is related to the length of immobilization.?3 In one
stimuli. During the acute phase of immobilization, bone
study, bone volume was estimated in the third metacarpus,
loss occurs in bone adjacent to marrow, and from an
radius, ulna, and humerus at the mid-diaphysis and the
increase in bone resorption and a decrease in bone forma-
distal metaphysis of dogs with forelimb immobilization for
tion.330 There may be more erosion of the inner cortical
up to 32 weeks. In both young and mature dogs, bone
surface in older dogs. Young growing dogs also have an
volume decreased with the duration of immobilization and
interruption of periosteal bone deposition, resulting in
the types of changes were similar in the metaphysis and
smaller bone diameter. Immobilization also results in
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
135
increased regional blood fow and bone marrow pressure.
tibial insertion of the ligament. Bone atrophy was the result
The fow of the entire long bone is approximately four times
of increased resorption of bone rather than decreased bone
 greater than that of cortical bone, indicating that cancellous
formation. Preservation of active joint motion during
bone receives much of the blood fow. There is no significant
immobilization may have a protective effect on the bone-
difference in fow rate between the endosteal and periosteal
ligament-bone complex.30 A unilateral tarsal disarticula-
cortices, however. There are variations of blood fow among
tion model of disuse that maintained active knee motion
long bones, which might be due to differences in their struc-
without weight bearing for 8 weeks maintained the strength
ture and function, and which may help to explain the differ-
of the femur-CCL-tibia complex despite loss of collagen
ences in bone loss following immobilization.336 Secondary
and calcium mass in the femur and tibia, suggesting that
factors, such as low dietary calcium or fuctuating hormone
active joint motion helps to preserve the mechanical
levels may also be involved. At steady state, or chronic
strength of the femur-ligament-tibia complex.
phase, bone mass plateaus to a maintenance level with cel-
Bone loss may be reduced in paraplegic human patients
lular activities retuming back to normal levels.
who are ambulatory as compared with those who are non-
Biomechanical properties of cortical and cancellous bone
ambulatory, who develop osteoporosis of the pelvis and
are also significantly affected by immobilization. Forelimbs
limbs.5 A relatively low degree of physical training may
of dogs immobilized for 16 weeks had decreases in cortical
inhibit the development of osteoporosis. Slow oscillation
load, yield, and stiffness as well as cancellous bone failure
of bedridden human patients with intact neuromuscular
stress, yield stress, and modulus, compared with control
- s o n n sd g   ug
limbs.82 In general, immobilized limb cancellous bone
auq aaiasaid day Arut sanuu z Aiaaa uonisod umop
 mechanical properties were 28-74% of control values, and
mass. The contraction of antigravity muscles during the
cortical bone mechanical properties were 71-98% of control
downward tilt may be partially responsible for mainte-
values. Similar to the differences in bone loss that occur in
nance of bone mass by adding stress to bones during
different bones, biomechanical properties of different bones
muscle contraction. There also appears to be an association
in the same immobilized limb may also vary. Torsional stiff-
of bone mass with muscle mass, with similar degrees of
ness of radiuses and metacarpal bones immobilized for 12
bone and muscle loss with disuse. Non-weight-bearing
weeks decreased approximately 12% and 30%, respectively,
exercise of bedridden patients is relatively less effective in
as compared with controls.329.37 Increasing the length of
reducing calcium loss, but standing for 3 hours reduces
immobilization results in further deterioration of biome-
urinary excretion, suggesting that weight bearing rather
chanical properties. Metacarpal bone immobilized for 26
than physical activity is primarily responsible for reducing
weeks retained only 50% of normal stiffness.
bone atrophy during bed rest.
There is increased urinary and fecal ex cretion of calcium
 In summary, young dogs tend to lose bone more quickly
and phosphorus in people with cast immobilization of a
following immobilization as compared with older animals,
limb, and similar findings may be expected in dogs.58
even though older dogs may have less bone mass to begin
Excretion of hydroxyproline, an indicator of collagen
with. The degree of bone loss increases with the length of
content, also increases with disuse. Relatively equal pro-
immobilization, with the rate of loss slowing as the time
portions of bone matrix and bone mineral are lost during
of immobilization increases. Bone loss is greater in the
bone atrophy, suggesting that the organic and mineral
more distal weight-bearing bones as compared with proxi-
composition of bone is similar following a period of
mal minimally weight-bearing bones (Box 7-9).
immobilization. Histologic examination reveals an increase
 in osteoclast activity and vascularization with disuse, sug-
Bone Changes Resulting from
gesting an increase in bone resorption. Prostaglandin
Disease Conditions
E (PGE) may also be involved in the development of
 Bone changes may be detected after total hip replacement 
immobilization osteoporosis 34 Osteoporosis induced by
and complications of this procedure. In one study, dogs
fiberglass-cast immobilization of the hindlimb of immature
with unilateral primary cementless total hip arthroplasty
dogs for 4 weeks resulted in significant loss of bone mass
had no right-left difference in tibial BMC or cortical bone
and a twofold increase in bone PGE, suggesting that PGE
cross-sectional geometry after 6 months, but after 2 years
plays a role in immobilization osteoporosis.
there was a 5-6% difference in BMC, perhaps because of
 Bone resorption also occurs at insertion sites of liga-
subclinical disuse of the operated limb.333 In dogs with
ments as a result of disuse, and there is decreased mechani-
failed cemented prostheses, tibial BMC may be more than
cal strength and bone collagen associated with disuse.275
 20% lower in the operated limb. Successful revision of the
An intermal skeletal fixation model applied for 12 weeks
total hip replacement results in improved BMC, suggesting
resulted in significant atrophy of bone and loss of collagen
in the tibia and femur at the insertion and origin of the
result in gain of previously lost bone.
 Bone loss may also occur following knee surgery as a
of the femur-ligament-tibia complex occurred through the
result of relative disuse of the affected limb. Following
136
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Box 7-9
Summary of the Effects of Disuse and Immobilization on Bone
 Models of limb immobilization decrease cortical and
immobilization, the type and intensity of remobilization, and
cancellous bone mass and cortical bone density and stiffness
the age of the animal.
and increase turnover of cancellous bone.
· Longer periods of immobilization result in longer 
Limb immobilization results in decreases in cortical load,
recovery times.
yield, and stiffness as well as cancellous bone failure stress,
 Immobilization for 6 weeks requires 8 to 12 weeks
yield stress, and modulus.
for near full recovery of bone mass.
The changes that occur during immobilization vary
· Immobilization for 24 to 28 weeks requires longer for
depending on the length of immobilization and
near full recovery of bone mass.
remobilization, age of the animal, and the bone involved.
·
With greater than 32 weeks of immobilization, bone
· Longer periods of immobilization result in greater
mass remains at 30% to 50% of original values, despite
bone loss.
remobi lization.
 Generally no further bone loss after 32 weeks of
 Younger animals recover lost bone mass more quickly
immobilization.
than older animals.
 Effects are more pronounced in younger dogs.
Training after immobilization results in more complete
·
Immobilization during growth may result in
and rapid recovery of lost bone mass.
 permanent reduction of bone mass.
·An initial period of mild treadmill training three
 Older animals may have less preexisting bone mass.
times per week is recommended, because bone
Trabecular bone is affected to a greater degree than
biomechanical properties may initially worsen during 
cortical bone.
the initial remobilization period.
Effects of immobilization are more extensive in the more
This can be followed by a period of higher intensity
di stal weight-bearing bones.
training.
 Recovery of mechanical and morphologic properties of bone
 Jump training may result in recovery of more normal
following immobilization depends on the length and type of
trabecular bone mass.
1580T
80
76
1480
72
70
1380
68
66
ear
64
1280
-→- Non-Sx Leg + Sx Leg 
→-Non-Sx Leg ++ Sx Leg
1180-
581
0
2
4
8
2
8
Time (weeks)
Time (weeks)
Figure 7-15  Changes in mean lean tissue content over time for the
Figure 7-16
Changes in mean bone mineral content over time for 
surgical and nonsurgical legs following transection of the cranial
the surgical and nonsurgical legs following transection of the cranial
cruciate ligament and immediate stifle stabilization. (From Francis 
quciate ligament and immediate stifle stabilization. (From Francis
DA, Millis DL, Head Ll: Bone and lean tissue changes following canial
DA, Millis DL, Head Ll: Bone and lean tissue changes following cranial
cruciate ligament transaction and stifle stabilization, JAmAnim Hosp
cuciate ligament transaction and stifle stabilization, /Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 42(2):127-35, 2006. @From the Journal of the American Animal
Assoc 42(2):127-35, 2006. @From the Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association (jaaha.org) 2006. All rights reserved.)
Hospital Association (jaaha.org) 2006. All rights reserved.)
CCL transection and extracapsular stabilization, DEXA
by a rapid loss of bone mineral from 2 to 8 weeks, with no
was used to analyze BMC and lean tissue mass of the entire
apparent recovery of bone mineral during that period.
surgical and nonsurgical legs.19 Regional BMC and BMD
Regarding regional changes in bone, significant loss of
of the proximal, mid-, and distal tibia of the surgical and
BMC and BMD was detected in the tibia of the surgical
nonsurgical legs was also determined. There was signifi-
leg and was most pronounced in the metaphyseal regions
cant loss of BMC and lean tissue in the entire surgical leg
(Figure 7-17).
compared with the nonsurgical leg. Interestingly, the
 Another study of dogs with surgically created CCL
patterm of tissue loss was different. There was an immedi-
transection demonstrated that there was a dramatic
ate loss of lean tissue mass for the first 4 weeks, followed
22-34% decrease in BMD of the affected distal femur 12
by slight recovery of lean tissue mass between 4 and 8
weeks (Figure 7-15). In contrast, there was little change in
decreases in BMD of approximately 20% in the distal
BMC for the first 2 weeks (Figure 7-16). This was followed
femur, patella, and proximal tibia up to 1 year after surgery
Chapter7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
137
1.25
0.2
@1.2
1.1
Bone Miner
Bone
-→-Non-Sx Leg +- Sx Leg 
←-Non-Sx Leg ++Sx Leg
0.951
0.1
5
10
5
10
A
Time (weeks)
B
Time (weeks)
4.2
4.1
 3.6
3.4
+Non-Sx Leg +-Sx Leg
3.31
0
5
10
C
Time (weeks)
Figure 7-17
 Changes in bone mineral content over time at the proximal tibial metaphysis (A), midtibial diaphysis (B), and distal tibial metaphy
sis (C) of the surgical and nonsurgical legs.
for ACL injury.340.341 In addition, 10-11 years after surgery
Stress Protection
bone density may be decreased by 3% to 9%.342 Bone
 Stress shielding or stress protection occurs when metal
density had significant correlation with functional scores
implants, such as bone plates and screws, are used to repair 
 Of the knee in people, but not with knee stability.
Pi yanouy Arains quauaoedai guol u no samng
In addition to bone changes following ligament injury,
metal plates stabilize the fracture site, help maintain
it is possible that there may be decreased bone density
contact between bone fragments, and allow early weight
following fracture. In humans, 2% to 7% decreases in bone
bearing and patient mobility, the higher stiffness of the
density were found in the distal femur, patella, proximal
implant results in bone loss as a result of decreased physi-
tibia, and calcaneus 10 years after femur fracture.343 Rela-
ologic loading of the bone. Calculations were made of the
tive bone density had correlation with pain and functional
 alterations in cyclic bone stresses caused by the application
scores of the affected limb, but not with fracture type,
 of bone plates on canine femurs.340 The magnitude of the
fracture location, or non-weight-bearing time after injury.
reduction in the loads borme by the bone and the degree of
Similar decreases in bone density were seen 9 years after
shift in the bone stress neutral axis during the stance phase
 tibial fractures in another study.344
of gait was infuenced by plate geometry, plate stiffness,
Denervation of a limb of a growing dog results in
and plate location. Bone remodeling is very sensitive to
 decreased lengths of the humerus and radius.34s Further-
small changes in cyclic bone stresses. Changes in cyclic
more, loss of innervation to a region may result in decreased
bone stresses of less than 1% of the ultimate strength can
bone density.34 However, active muscle contraction, either 
cause measurable differences in bone remodeling after a
through refex walking or electrical stimulation, helps
 period of a few months.
attenuate loss of bone density.346 A functional neuromus-
The patterm of cortical atrophy induced by plate fixation
cular stimulation-induced knee extension exercise system
for 7 months on canine femurs was evaluated in another
was used in human patients with spinal cord injuries up to
study.348 A pronounced reduction of cortical bone (approxi-
three times per week for 36 sessions using a progressive
 mately 15% less cortical area) was observed in the diaphy-
resistance load.347 Maintenance of bone density in some
sis of the plated bone at the end of the study period. The
subjects suggests that training may retard the rate of bone
loss of cortical bone was mainly caused by endosteal
 Joss that typically occurs with spinal cord injuries.
resorption with enlargement of the medullary cavity.
138
Section ll
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Neither periosteal resorption nor formation of woven bone
recovery of bone after remobilization of 10 or 28 weeks,
under the site of the plate was observed. Osteoporosis
respectively. In fact, bone volume of third metacarpal
caused by rigid plate fixation may occur by thinning of the
trabecular bone exceeded the original control values in
cortex rather than by reduction of the mechanical proper-
some dogs.
ties of the osseous tissue.349 In addition to enlargement of
 The stages of bone loss that young adult dogs undergo
the medullary canal, there may also be decreased cortical
 in response to cast immobilization have been discussed.333
thickness under the plate as a result of endosteal resorption.
The response to remobilization may be similarly divided
The stiffer the implant and the longer the implant is in
into stages. In stage I, in which there is a rapid initial loss
place, the greater the bone loss and the lower the recovery
of bone following 6 weeks of immobilization, there is near
potential of the bone. For example, 6 weeks after screw
full recovery of bone mass within 8 to 12 weeks of cast
application, some resorption of bone is evident and by 14
removal. Radiographic evidence of periosteal stress reac-
weeks, more significant resorption occurs.
tions of the metacarpal bones, indicated by extemal bone
Implants may also interfere with blood circulation, and
fonmation in the distal metacarpal metaphysis, was present
the weakened bone can refracture after plate removal.350-352
in 60% of younger dogs, but none of the older dogs fol-
Disturbance of blood supply may be the main cause of
lowing 12 weeks of immobilization and up to 28 weeks of
osteopenia in the early stage, whereas disuse of the affected
remobilization.33 In stage II, bone loss slows, but recovery
limb may be the most important factor in later stages of
is also slower following 24 to 32 weeks of immobilization.
fracture healing. Osteopenia may be treated, in part, by
During the remobilization period, young and old dogs
active exercises and normal weight bearing before plate
immobilized for 32 weeks may have periosteal stress reac-
removal.352
tions of the metacarpal bones, indicated by extermal bone
Stress shielding may also occur following total hip
formation in the distal metacarpal metaphysis.33 Although
arthroplasty.3s3 Stiffness of the femoral stem is a design
there was no evidence of a break in bone continuity, micro-
variable that is partially responsible for femoral remodel-
 e pa a  (e o a
ing. The basic pattem of bone remodeling is characterized
sites, and periosteal stress-induced reactions may occur at
by proximal cortical atrophy, and distal cortical and medul-
sites of increased stress in the absence of actual fractures.
lary bone hypertrophy. Low-stiffness stems may alter this
 Continued stress to bones during the remobilization period
patterm, leading to reduced proximal bone loss, increased
may indeed lead to stress reactions. Immobilization for
 proximal medullary bone hypertrophy, and no distal corti-
longer than 32 weeks characterizes stage Ill, in which the
-d e sey ssauns uns pe sunsaans udoaay la
loss of bone mass remains at 30% to 50% of original
found effect on stress shielding.
values, despite remobilization.
Complete recovery of trabecular bone following immo-
bilization may be limited by changes in bony architec-
Effects of Remobilization on Bone
ture.354 Following 18 weeks of immobilization, trabecular
The recovery of mechanical and morphologic properties of
area of rat tibias increased by 42% and 51% following 10
bone following a period of immobilization depends on the
and 20 weeks of remobilization. Remobilization resulted
length and type of immobilization, the type and intensity
 in increased bone area by decreasing porosity during the
 of remobilization, and the age of the animal.354
first 10 weeks of remobilization, but little further increase
The potential for recovery of bone lost during disuse,
occurred between 10 and 20 weeks of remobilization. The
both in the diaphyseal cortical and metaphyseal cancellous
recovery of bone loss was mainly the result of an increase
 bone, was evaluated in young adult and old beagle dogs.83
in trabecular width. In fact, there was no recovery of the
Following immobilization of a forelimb for up to 32 weeks,
number of trabeculae lost during immobilization. Remobi-
there was considerable recovery of the original bone loss
lization added bone on existing surfaces, but was not ana-
during remobilization. In both age groups, the residual
bolic enough to reconnect trabeculae. This may explain
deficits increased with the duration of immobilization and
why there may be a persistent loss of bone following long
were similar in the metaphysis and in the diaphysis. In
periods of immobilization, despite a long remobilization
addition, the distal, weight-bearing bones tended to show
period.
 greater losses and also greater recovery both in diaphyseal
 Although it is clear that a simple period of free exercise
and metaphyseal bone. The older dogs had greater residual 
during the remobilization period may not result in com-
deficits, most evident in the diaphysis. Following 32 weeks
plete recovery of bone following immobilization, high-
of immobilization and 28 weeks of remobilization, a 50%
intensity training following immobilization may result in
loss in the third metacarpal diaphysis of younger dogs
more complete recovery. One study of rats undergoing
immediately following the immobilization period decreased
limb immobilization and subsequent remobilization indi-
to 15% (a 70% recovery), whereas older dogs had a 38%
cated that high-intensity treadmill running resulted in
loss that decreased to 23% (a 40% recovery). In contrast,
restored BMC and BMD of the affected limb, whereas
immobilization for 6 or 12 weeks resulted in complete
animals undergoing free activity had BMC and BMD
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
139
with loading.361 Animal models using dogs, turkeys, mice,
of osteocalcin, a marker of osteoblastic activity, corre-
rats, chickens, and pigs have demonstrated a threshold
sponded to bone formation during the remobilization
response and dose-response relationship to mechanical
 period.357 when the training period ceased, however, the 
loading of bone, either by mechanical means or exercise.
beneficial effects of training were lost. It appears that
In general, relatively low-intensity training may have no or
intensified remobilization is necessary to restore bone
 only mild effects on bone density or bone growth, whereas
mineral after disuse, but the benefits may be lost if activity
higher-intensity training results in greater bone density, but
is tenminated.
may inhibit growth in bone length and girth in growing
A period of mild treadmill activity following free remo-
animals.8
bilization may also be beneficial for dogs with immobi-
Despite much knowledge regarding the infuence of
lized limbs. Forelimb immobilization of 1- to 2-year-old
dogs for 16 weeks, followed by a remobilization period of
the type, intensity, frequency, and duration of exercise on
16 weeks of kennel confinement and 16 weeks of treadmill
bone remains elusive. The remodeling of bone is slow,
exercise administered three times per week, resulted in the
taking several months to complete. The age at which train-
retum of cortical and cancellous BMD and mechanical
ing begins is important. Initiation of activity early in life
 properties to essentially normal levels.2
appears to be the most beneficial.32 Within limits, loading
Other activities may also be beneficial after a period
of growing bone leads to a better result than loading of
of immobilization. The effects of jump exercise during
adult bone. The production of prostaglandins and growth
remobilization were examined in rats undergoing immobi-
factors may modulate the process of bone modeling.
lization by tail suspension.3s Comparisons were made
Although the optimal patterm of bone loading is unknown,
with nonsuspended controls, suspended controls, and sus-
evidence suggests that bone should be loaded with high
pended controls with spontaneous recovery. The jump
peak forces and strain rates (high impacts), create strain
exercise protocol consisted of 10 jumps/day, 5 days/week,
throughout the bony column, consist of relatively few rep-
and the jump height was 40 cm. Tail suspension induced
etitions, and be long term and progressive. In humans,
a 13.6% decrease in total femoral BMD and marked
weightlifters have the greatest bone mass, followed by
deterioration of trabecular architecture. After 5 weeks of
throwers, runners, soccer players, and swimmers. This sug-
free remobilization, femoral BMD, calf muscle weight,
gests that weight and strength training appears to provide
and body weight returmed to age-matched control levels,
the greatest effects on bone, and swimming the least,
but trabeculae remained thinner and less connected. On the
perhaps because the buoyancy of water alters the load
 Other hand, rats undergoing jump training after immobili-
 placed on bone as compared with weight lifting on land.
zation showed significant increases in trabecular thickness,
Resistance exercise training may also affect bone of
number, and connectivity compared with suspended rats
animals. Rats conditioned to press levers, facilitating full
with spontaneous recovery.
extension and full fexion of the hindlimbs while wearing
Despite the positive effects of training on bone recovery
a weighted vest, had an increase in cancellous bone area
after a period of immobilization, some caution is necessary
of the proximal tibia after 6 weeks.363 In addition, osteo-
when instituting a training program. One experiment eval-
calcin, trabecular number, thickness, and osteoid covering
uated the effects of immobilization and remobilization on
cancellous bone were greater in trained animals, suggest-
 mechanical properties of femoral shafts of rats.359 Rats had
ing that resistance training increases cancellous bone area
the right hindlimb immobilized for 3 weeks by taping and
 by stimulating bone formation. A study of rats undergoing
were compared with controls. Immobilization was fol-
exercise with or without sudden impact loading of the
lowed by 4 weeks of free remobilization. Immobilization
femur indicated that cortical wall thickness increased with
followed by remobilization resulted in lower maximum
any activity, and breaking strength of the affected bones
bending moment, yield moment, stiffness, and work to
was greater in bones undergoing impact loading as com-
failure compared with controls. Remobilization resulted in
pared with sedentary controls.364 In spite of the enhanced
worsening of properties of femora. The results suggested
biomechanical properties of impact-loaded bones, there
that the strength of bone decreases during the first period
was little difference in BMC in the exercised groups, sug-
of free remobilization and may be associated with increas-
gesting that significant improvements may occur in biome-
ing brittleness of cortical bone. Similar findings have been
chanical properties with little change in bone mass with
 obtained in another study of rats.360
impact loading.
 In dogs, mild increases in loading of bones have little
Adaptation of Bone to Increased Stress
effect on bone mass or bone density. Impact loading or
The bone response to mechanical loading is proportional
chronic moderate increases in loading result in increased
to an applied load of given magnitude and frequency of
bone mass and bone density. A study of mature beagle
application. There are also proportional increases in second
dogs with an ostectomy of a radius showed that there was
 messengers, growth factors, bone matrix, and bone strength
little change in bone mass and density of the contralateral
140
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
0.5
0.45
eun
0.4
Figure 7-18  Change in bone density of the contralateral ulna
6
0.35
following ostectomy of a radius. Compared with the situation
sity
in Figure 7-19, there is little change in bone density because
den
0.3
 both the intact radius and ulna continue to share loading.
0.25
0.5
0
4
8
12
Weeks after ostectomy of contralateral radius
with controls, although there was no change in mass of
125
cranial tibial and semitendinosus muscles. Long-distance
del
2
120
running apparently has a mild positive effect on bone mass
bor
in growing dogs.
eun
115
In contrast, another study of immature dogs with a
110
similar training regimen indicated that, although intensive
105
endurance training may increase bone mass of weight-
bearing bones, the appendicular skeleton may have reduced
6100 -
 bone density.367 Trained dogs had larger and heavier radius,
%
6
12
ulna, and hip bones, but reduced BMD of thoracic verte-
Weeks after ostectomy of ipsilateral radius
brae as compared with untrained controls. In addition,
Figure 7-19  Relative change of the bone density of the ulna fol-
trained dogs developed more osteophytes in the spines but
lowing ostectomy of the ipsilateral radius. Note the increased density
 not in the extremities. Intense aerobic training of young
as a result of the shift of weight bearing from a paired two-bone 
dogs may alter bone mass, possibly because of altered
system to the single remaining bone.
biomechanical forces placed on the bones.
High-level activity, such as racing, may affect bone to
radius and ulna (Figure 7-18).35 This model allows weight 
 a greater extent as compared with bone changes occurring
bearing on the limb undergoing ostectomy of the radius
with endurance training. One study of racing Greyhounds
because the intact ulna allows for weight bearing. However,
found that the cross-sectional and cortical areas of left
because all of the weight is borme by the intact ulna fol-
 metacarpals IV and V were greater than the right metacar-
lowing ostectomy, the load on that bone is significantly
pals.368 In addition, osteonal density was greater on the
greater as compared with the load-sharing seen with the
dorsal surface of the bones than the medial and lateral
intact radius and ulna of the contralateral limb. The
quadrants. These changes indicate site-specific adaptations
increased load results in significant increases in bone mass
to the bones as a result of asymmetric loading from running
and density in the ipsilateral ulna within a relatively short
in a counterclockwise fashion and greater loading of the
period (Figure 7-19).
inside limb.
Increasing weight bearing on bones by exercising dogs
A lifetime of weight-bearing physical exercise may
with lead-weighted jackets results in increased bone
 decrease the amount of bone lost through the normal aging
mass36 Increasing the load carried to 130% of body
Joj paspoaxa dnos pauen e u sol 6ge'ssop ui ssanoid
weight and exercising on a treadmill for 75 minutes at
90 minutes, five days/week, for 527 weeks, running an
3.3 km per hour during a 70-week period resulted in a mild
average of 3.3 km/hr on a treadmill while carrying approx-
increase in BMC of the tibia when adjusted for actual body
imately 11.5 kg. The control group had normal cage activ-
weight. This form of activity may increase bone mass and
ity in dog runs. Long-term exercise significantly reduced
 help reduce bone loss during aging.
cortical porosity and marginally increased cortical area in
The effects of long distance running training on bone
aged dogs, because of a decrease in bone resorption rather
than an increase in bone formation. The results of this
Young beagle dogs trained on a treadmill for l year,
study have implications for the role of exercise in delaying
gradually increasing running to 40 km/day at a speed of
bone loss during aging. Training appears to alter mineral
5.5-6.8 km/hour with a 15-degree inclination during the
uptake and retention by bone. For example, in one study
last 15 weeks, while control dogs were kept in their
of geriatric dogs exercising 40 min/d at 2.4 km/hr on a
cages. Ulna and radius bone mass as a ratio to body mass
15-degree grade, dogs had less calcium excretion on
exercise days.370 Similar studies of humans support these
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
141
findings and also indicate that bone deposition rate is
stiffness.326 In addition, indices of bone formation and
increased with training.$6
resorption were significantly reduced.
Although mechanical stimulation is important in pro-
 In another study, risedronate, also a potent inhibitor of
moting bone formation in normal dogs, fracture healing
osteoclastic activity, was evaluated to determine if it could
may also be enhanced with weight bearing. Dogs with
effectively prevent cancellous bone loss in middle-aged
surgically created defects in the tibial cortex that were
female beagles subjected to single forelimb immobiliza-
allowed to bear weight on the limb had significantly more
tion for 12 months.376 Age-matched, nonimmobilized dogs
woven bone in the defects as compared with dogs that were
served as controls. Half the animals from each group
not permitted to bear weight.371 This suggests that weight
received risedronate. Immobilization caused a dramatic
bearing is a permissive factor for bone formation in bony
reduction in cancellous bone mass (-71 %) of distal second
defects. In addition, training may enhance healing if a
metacarpals, characterized by decreases in trabecular width
fracture should occur after initiating training. A study of 
(-51%) and number (-41%), and fourfold increases in
mice undergoing training prior to fracture had higher
indices of bone resorption. Bone formation indices were
rates of collagen synthesis and higher concentrations of
also significantly higher in immobilized dogs. Risedronate 
calcium in the healing fracture callus as compared with
treatment reduced, but did not abolish, cancellous bone
sedentary rats.372
loss  caused  by  immobilization.  Immobilized animals
 Although exercise is generally thought to have favor-
 treated with risedronate lost nearly 50% of cancellous bone
 able effects on bone health, it has also been suggested that
mass, whereas trabecular width and number were reduced
exercise may reduce fracture risk .373 Cross-sectional studies
by 31% and 25%, respectively. Also, overall bone forma-
 and interventional studies using assessments such as BMD
tion parameters remained roughly at intact control levels;
and falls support this belief. For rehabilitation programs to
however, mineral apposition rate relative to intact control
improve bone health, they should include not just weight-
was reduced in treated animals, indicating that high-dose
supported activities (e.g., cycling) but also weight-bearing
risedronate treatment might suppress osteoblastic function,
activities (e.g., walking, resistance exercise).373
especially with long-term disuse. Risedronate treatment
was partially effective in preventing cancellous bone loss
Effects of Medications on Bone
during long-tenm disuse. Although bisphosphonates can
A number of studies have evaluated the effects of various
impair the ability of mature osteoclasts to resorb bone, they
compounds on bone mass in dogs. Some of these sub-
do not completely overcome osteoclast recruitment caused
stances are osteoprotective, whereas others, such as corti-
by long-term disuse.
costeroids, may hasten bone loss in immobilized limbs.
There may be differences between the effectiveness of
Some medications and hormones help protect against
bisphosphonates on osteoporosis resulting from disuse
bone loss during immobilization. Dogs receiving 60 to
versus other forms of osteoporosis. One study evaluated
240 ng/kg of vitamin D, for 4 weeks had trabecular bone
whether risedronate can preserve cortical bone mass and
volume of the calcaneus in direct relation to the dosage of
mechanical properties during disuse for 12 months on
vitamin D, in a plaster cast disuse osteoporosis model
metacarpal diaphyses in  dogs.377  Risedronate slowed
for 4 weeks, with the highest dose resulting in bone
cortical thinning and partially preserved mechanical prop-
volume equal to the control limb.374 Unfortunately, this
erties, but it was unable to suppress bone loss to the degree
dose is considered to be toxic. Vitamin D; administered
seen in other osteoporoses. Immobilization caused marked
to beagle dogs after ovariectomy was effective in maintain-
reduction in cortical area (-42%) and cortical thinning
ing normal urinary hydroxyproline excretion, suggesting
(-40%). Both bone resorption and formation were signifi-
that the treatment was effective in helping prevent the bone
cantly elevated over control levels. Immobilization also
loss associated with ovariectomy.37s In fact, BMD of the
 decreased maximum load and stiffness by approximately
lumbar vertebrae and femur of ovariectomized dogs receiv -
80% compared with controls. Risedronate reduced both
ing 2 or 10 mcg/kg of vitamin D; were the same as non-
 periosteal bone loss and marrow cavity expansion, and also
Ovariectomized control animals 30 months after surgery,
reduced cortical bone loss, partially conserving tissue
whereas density was 25% lower in untreated ovariecto-
mechanical properties. This modest effect contrasts with
mized dogs.
more dramatic actions of the bisphosphonate in other
Bone loss during disuse has been prevented with
osteoporoses.
bisphosphonate compounds in humans following paralysis
 Bisphosphonate compounds also affect bone resorption
or bed rest. Using a forelimb immobilization model in
 in other species. A study evaluated tiludronate, a bisphos-
dogs, pamidronate, a bisphosphonate compound, was
phonate, on biochemical biomarkers of bone metabolism
administered for 7 days followed by 3 weeks without treat-
and on bone density and structure in a model of disuse
 ment. This cycle was repeated three times for a total of 12
osteoporosis induced by cast application in horses.378
weeks. This treatment was effective in preventing cancel-
Horses were immobilized for 8 weeks, followed by a
lous bone loss and maintaining cortical bone density and
4-week remobilization period and an 8-week standardized
142
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
training protocol. A rapid decrease was seen in type I col-
as long as 1 year to retum to normal. Early joint mobiliza-
lagen cross-links, an indicator of bone resorption, in horses
tion and limb usage must be tempered with the degree of
receiving tiludronate. No significant differences between
injury and the repair performed, if any. The healing tissues
 groups were seen in bone alkaline phosphatase, a marker 
must be protected from excessive force, and a progressive
of bone formation. The loss of BMD in the immobilized
rehabilitation program should be used that applies low
metac arpal MI bone was significantly less in the tiludronate
cyclic loads to promote healing and enhance remodeling.
group as compared with immobilized placebo controls.
Progressive increases in the frequency and magnitude of
Therefore this bisphosphonate significantly reduced bone
loads applied to the healing tissues enhance healing and
resorption during immobilization, and helped prevent
tissue strength. Although little is known regarding the
 Osteopenia in the immobilized limb.
optimal stress to apply to tissues to obtain an optimal
Tamoxifen citrate administered to growing dogs with a
response, the goal of rehabilitation following injury is
hindlimb placed in a fiberglass cast for 28 days was mod-
to enhance the definitive quantity and quality of repair
 erately effective in sparing bone mass as compared with
tissue.
 immobilized controls.327 The calculated bone mass sparing
effect of tamoxifen was 24.4%. This drug is a nonsteroidal
REFERENCES
antiestrogen compound, with some ability to inhibit pros-
taglandin synthesis, modulate signal transduction pro-
1. Akeson WH, Amiel D, Abel MF et al: Effects of immobi-
lization on joints, Clin Orthop 28-37, 1987.
cesses that control cell growth, and induce TGF-β.
2. Paulos LE, Wnorowski DC, Beck CL: Rehabilitation
Aspirin may also be effective in diminishing bone
following knee surgery: recommendations, Sports Med 11:
loss during immobilization. Osteoporosis was induced in
257-275, 1991.
t  o unzo ns g sn sop smo
 3. Cohen NP, Foster RJ, Mow VC: Composition and dynamics
weeks.34 Bone PGE concentrations doubled and bone
of articular cartilage: structure, function, and maintaining
mass was reduced in untreated immobilized dogs. Dogs
healthy state, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 28:203-215, 1998.
receiving 25 mg/kg of buffered aspirin every 8 hours had
4. Palmoski M, Perricone E, Brandt KD: Development and
a 13% bone mass sparing effect and a 65% reduction
in bone PGE. Similar bone-sparing effects have been
canine knee cartilage after immobilization, Arthritis Rheum
observed with other NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen, in the
22:508-517, 1979.
 5. McDonough AL: Effects of immobilization and exercise on
treatment of osteolytic conditions such as osteomyelitis
articular cartilage—a review of literature, J Orthop Sports
and bone metastases.
Phys Ther 3:2-5, 1981.
Bone morphogenetic proteins have also been used to
6. Setton LA, Mow VC, Muller FJ et al: Mechanical behavior
help manage bone atrophy as a result of fracture. In one
and biochemical composition of canine knee cartilage fol-
case report, recombinant human BMP-2 solution on a col-
lowing periods of joint disuse and disuse with remobiliza-
lagen sponge was placed along the diaphysis of an atrophic
tion, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 5:1-16, 1997.
radius, which had a history of recurring fractures.379 Two
7. Palmoski MJ, Bean JS: Cartilage atrophy induced by limb
months after rhBMP-2 treatment, new mineralized bone
immobilization. In Green wald RA, Diamond HS, eds: CRC
was present, which significantly increased the diameter of
handbook of animal modets for the rheumatic diseases,
the radius and allowed the removal of the ESF.
Boca Raton, FL, 1988, CRC Press.
8. Kiviranta I, Jurvelin J, Tammi M et al: Weight bearing
Rehabilitation Considerations
controls glycosaminoglycan  concentration and  articular
cartilage thickness in the knee joints of young beagle dogs,
Arthritis Rheum 30:801-809, 1987.
The results of these studies are useful to help structure
9. Saamanen AM, Tammi M, Jurvelin J et al: Proteoglycan
rehabilitation programs for musculoskeletal injuries. The
alterations following immobilization and remobilization in
injury must be protected from further damage in the early
the articular cartilage of young canine knee (stife) joint,
stages of healing. Acceleration of the remodeling process
J Orthop Res 8:863-873, 1990.
of healing tissues should be promoted by applying ade-
10. Muller FJ, Setton LA, Manicourt DH et al: Centrifugal and
 quate stress and strain to the tissues in appropriate stages.
biochemical comparison of proteoglycan aggregates from
The deleterious effects on biomechanical properties of
articular cartilage in experimental joint disuse and joint
tissues suggests that immobilization should be avoided or
instability, J Orthop Res 12:498-508, 1994.
11. Behrens F, Kraft EL, Oegema-TR J: Biochemical changes
minimized whenever possible. Joints and limbs should be
in articular cartilage after joint immobilization by casting
mobilized early, while simultaneously protecting the weak-
Or external fxation, J Orthop Res 7:335-343, 1989. [Pub-
ened tissue during healing, especially considering the
lished erratum appears in J Orthop Res 8(4):627, 1990.]
length of time needed to achieve near-normal strength of
12. Ratcliffe A, Beauvais PJ, Saed NF: Differential levels
tissues. Although certain tissues, such as the ligament sub-
of synovial  fuid aggrecan aggregate components in
stance, may recover rapidly following remobilization,
experimental osteoarthritis and joint disuse, J Orthop Res 
other tissues, such as the bone-ligament complex, may take
12:464-473, 1994.
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
143
13. Ratcliffe A, Beauvais PJ, Saed NF et al: Synovial fuid
30. Klein L, Heiple KG, Torzilli PA et al: Prevention of liga-
analyses detect and differentiate proteoglycan metabolism 
ment and meniscus atrophy by active joint motion in a
in canine experimental models of osteoarthritis and disuse
non-weight-bearing model, J Orthop Res 7:80-85, 1989.
atrophy, Agents Actions Suppt 39:63-67, 1993.
31. Noone TJ, Millis DL, Korvick DL et al: Influence of canine 
 14. Haapala J, Lammi MJ, Inkinen R et al: Coordinated regula-
recombinant somatotropin on biomechanical and biochemi-
jejnoqie ayn ul juejuoo ueoeiaae pue ueuoinieAy jo uoy
cal properties of the medial meniscus in stifles with altered
 cartilage of immobilized and exercised dogs, J Rheumatol
stability, Am J Vet Res 63:419-426, 2002.
23:1586-1593, 1996.
32. Buseck MS, Noyes FR: Arthroscopic evaluation of menis-
15. Grumbles RM, Howell DS, Howard GA et al: Cartilage
metalloproteases in disuse atrophy, J Rheumatol Suppt
and immediate motion, Am J Sports Med 19:489-494, 1991.
43:146-148, 1995.
 33. Dowdy PA, Miniaci A, Arnoczky SP et al: The effect of cast
16. Jurvelin J, Kiviranta I, Tammi M et al: Softening of canine
immobilization on meniscal healing: an experimental study
articular cartilage after immobilization of the knee joint,
in the dog, Am J Sports Med 23:721-728, 1995.
Clin Orthop 246-252, 1986.
34. Bray RC, Smith JA, Eng MK et al: Vascular response of the
17. Haapala J, Arokoski J, Pirttimaki J et al: Incomplete restora-
meniscus to injury: effects of immobilization, J Orthop Res
tion of immobilization induced softening of young beagle 
19:384-390, 2001.
knee articular cartilage after 50-week remobilization, Int J
35. Elliott DM, Guilak F, Vail TP et al: Tensile properties of
Sports Med 21:76-81, 2000.
articular cartilage are altered by meniscectomy in a canine
18. Leroux MA, Cheung HS, Bau JL et al: Altered mechanics 
model of osteoarthritis, J Orthop Res 17:503-508, 1999.
and histomorphometry of canine tibial cartilage following
36. Berjon JJ, Munuera L, Calvo M: Degenerative lesions in the 
joint immobilization, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 9:633-640,
articular cartilage after meniscectomy: a preliminary exper-
2001.
imental study in dogs, J Trauma 31:342-350, 2001.
19. Palmoski MJ, Colyer RA, Brandt KD: Joint motion in the
37. Cox JS, Nye CE, Schaefer Ww et al: The degenerative
absence of normal loading does not maintain normal articu-
effects of partial and total resection of the medial meniscus 
lar cartilage, Arthritis Rheum 23:325-334, 1980.
in dog's knees, Clin Orthop 178-183, 1975.
20. Shevtsoy VI, Asonova SN: Ultrastructural changes of
38. Ghosh P, Taylor TK, Pettit GD et al: Effect of postoperative
articular cartilage following joint immobilization with the
immobilisation on the regrowth of the knee joint semilunar 
 Ilizarov apparatus, Bull Hosp Jt Dis 54:69-75, 1995.
cartilage: an experimental study, J Orthop Res 1:153-164,
21. Vanwanseele B, Eckstein F, Knecht H et al: Longitudinal
1983.
analysis of cartilage atrophy in the knees of patients with
39. Ghosh P, Sutherland JM, Taylor TK et al: The effects of
spinal cord injury, Arthritis Rheum 48:3377-3381, 2003.
postoperative joint immobilization on articular cartilage
 22. Palmoski MJ, Brandt KD: Immobilization of the knee pre-
degeneration following meniscectomy, J Surg Res 35:461-
vents osteoarthritis after anterior cruciate ligament transec-
473, 1983.
tion, Arthritis Rheum 25:1201-1208, 1982.
40. Palmoski MJ, Brandt KD: Effects of static and cyclic com-
23. Schoenecker PL, Lesker PA, Ogata K: A dynamic canine
pressive loading on articular cartilage plugs in vitro, Arthri-
model of experimental hip dysplasia. Gross and histological
tis Rheum 27:675-681, 1984.
pathology, and the effect of position of immobilization on 
41. Radin EL, Martin RB, Burr DB et al: Effects of mechanical
capital femoral epiphyseal blood fow, J Bone Joint Surg
loading on the tissues of the rabbit knee, J Orthop Res
Am 66:1281-1288, 1984.
2:221-234, 1984.
 24. Kiviranta I, Tammi M, Jurvelin J et al: Articular cartilage
42. Donohue JM, Buss D, Oegema TR et al: The effects of
thickness and glycosaminoglycan distribution in the young
indirect blunt trauma on adult articular cartilage, J Bone 
canine knee joint after remobilization of the immobilized
Joint Surg Am 65:948-957, 1983.
limb, J 0rthop Res 12:161-167, 1994.
43. Wang J: Response of calcified cartilage to blunt trauma.
25. Haapala J, Arokoski JP, Hyttinen MM et al: Remobilization
Chinese J Sports Med (Beijing) 9:65-66, 1990.
does not fully restore immobilization induced articular car-
44. Hallett MB, Andrish JT: Effects of exercise on articular
tilage atrophy, Clin Orthop 218-229, 1999.
cartilage, Sports Med Arthroscopy Rev 2:29-37, 1994.
26 Jortikka MO, Inkinen RI, Tammi MI et al: Immobilisation
45. Jurvelin J, Kiviranta I, Tammi M et al: Effect of physical
 causes long-lasting matrix changes both in the immobilised
exercise on indentation stiffness of articular cartilage in the 
and contralateral joint cartilage, Ann Rheum Dis 56:255-
canine knee, Int J Sports Med 7:106-110, 1986.
261, 1997.
 46. Kiviranta I, Tammi M, Jurvelin J et al: Moderate running
27  Jurvelin J, Kiviranta I, Saamanen AM et al: Partial restora-
exercise augments glycosaminoglycans and thickness of
 tion of immobilizati on-induced softening of canine articular
articular cartilage in the knee joint of young beagle dogs,
cartilage after remobilization of the knee (stife) joint,
J Orthop Res 6:188-195, 1988.
J Orthop Res 7:352-358, 1989.
47. Jurvelin J, Kiviranta I, Saamanen AM et al: Indentation
28. Palmoski MJ, Brandt KD: Running inhibits the reversal of
stiffness of young canine knee articular cartilage infuence
atrophic changes in canine knee cartilage after removal of
of strenuous joint 1oading, J Biomech 23:1239-1246, 1990.
a leg cast, Arthritis Rheum 24:1329-1337, 1981.
48. Kiviranta I, Tammi M, Jurvelin J et al: Articular cartilage
29. Klein L, Player JS, Heiple KG et al: Isotopic evidence for
thickness and glycosaminoglycan distribution in the canine
resorption of soft tissues and bone in immobilized dogs,
knee joint after strenuous running exercise, Clin Orthop
J Bone Joint Surg Am 64:225-230, 1982.
283:302-308, 1992.
144
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
49. Arokoski J, Jurvelin J, Kiviranta I et al: Softening of the
indomethacin on osteoarthritic cartilage, Arthritis Rheum
lateral condyle articular cartilage in the canine knee joint
28:548-553, 1985.
after long distance (up to 40 km/day) running training
 67. Palmoski MJ, Brandt KD: Relationship between matrix pro-
lasting one year, Int J Sports Med 15:254-260, 1994.
teoglycan content and the effects of salicylate and indo-
50. Arokoski J, Kiviranta I, Jurvelin J et al: Long-distance
methacin on articular catilage, Arthritis Rheum 26:528-531,
running causes site-dependent decrease of cartilage glycos-
1983.
aminoglycan content in the knee joints of beagle dogs,
68. Palmoski MJ, Brandt KD: Effects of salicylate and indo-
Arthritis Rheum 36:1451-1459, 1993.
methacin on glycosaminoglycan and prostaglandin E2 syn-
51. Oettmeier R, Arokoski J, Roth AJ et al: Quantitative study
thesis in intact canine knee cartilage ex vivo, Arthritis
of articular cartilage and subchondral bone remodeling
Rheum 27:398-403, 1984.
in the knee joint of dogs after strenuous running training.
69. Palmoski MJ, Brandt KD: Aspirin aggravates the degenera-
J Bone Miner Res 7(Suppl 2):S419-S424, 1992.
tion of canine joint cartilage caused by immobilization,
52. Arokoski JP, Hyttinen MM, Lapvetelainen T et al: Decreased
Arthritis Rheum 25:1333-1342, 1982.
birefringence of the superficial zone collagen network in the
70. Gay RE, Palmoski MJ, Brandt KD et al: Aspirin causes in
canine knee (stife) articular cartilage after long distance
vivo synthesis of type I collagen by atrophic articular car-
running training, detected by quantitative polarised light
tilage, Arthritis Rheum 26:1231-1236, 1983.
microscopy, Ann Rheum Dis 55:253-264, 1996.
71. Benton HP, Vasseur PB, Broderick-Villa GA et al: Effect of
 53. Lammi M, Hakkinen TP, Parkkinen JJ et al: Adaptation of 
carprofen  on  sulfated  glycosaminoglycan  metabolism,
canine femoral head articular cartilage to long distance
protein synthesis, and prostaglandin release by cultured
running exercise in young beagles, Ann Rheum Dis 52:369.
osteoarthritic canine chondrocytes, Am J Vet Res 58(3):286-
377, 1993
292, 1997.
54. Vasan N: Effects of physical stress on the synthesis and deg-
72. Pelletier JP, Lajeunesse D, Jovanovic DV et al: Carprofen
radation of cartilage matrix, Conn Tiss Res 12:49-58, 1983.
simultaneously  teduces  progression  of  morphological
55. Qi C, Changlin H: Effects of moving training on histology
changes in cartilage and subchondral bone in experimental 
and biomarkers levels of articular cartilage, J Surg Res
dog osteoarthritis, J Rheumatot 27(12):2893-2902, 2000.
135:352-363, 2006.
73. Jiang D, Zou J, Huang L et al: Efficacy of intra-articular
56. Newton PM, Mow VC, Gardner TR et al: The effect of
injection of celecoxib in a rabbit model of osteoarthritis, Int 
lifelong exercise on canine articular cartilage, Am J Sports
J Mof Sci 11:4106-4113, 2010.
Med 25:282-287, 1997.
74. de Boer TN, Huisman AM, Polak AA et al: The chondro-
57. Agudelo CA, Schumacher HR, Phelps P: Effect of exercise
protective effect of selective COX-2 inhibition in osteoar-
on urate crystal-induced infammation in canine joints,
thritis: ex vivo evaluation of human cartilage tissue after in
Arthritis Rheum 15:609-616, 1972.
vivo treatment, Osteoarthr Cart 17:482-488, 2009.
58. Booth FW, Gould EW: Effects of training and disuse on
75. Bacon PA: Etodolac: effcacy in osteoarthritis and effects
connective tissue, Exerc Sport Sci Rev 3:83-112, 1975.
on chondrocyte function, Rheumatot Int 10(Suppl):3-7,
59. Williams JM, Brandt KD: Immobilization ameliorates
1990.
chemically induced articular cartilage damage, Arthritis
76. Miyamoto H, Onuma H, Shigematsu H et al: The effect of
Rheum 27:208-216, 1984.
etodolac on ex perimental temporomandibular joint osteoar-
60. Merritt JL, Hunder GG: Passive range of motion, not iso-
thritis in dogs, J Cranio Maxilo Surg 35:358-363, 2007.
 metric exercise, amplifes acute urate synovitis, Arch Phys
77. Olah EH, Kostenszky KS: Effect of loading and predniso-
Med Rehabil 64:130-131, 1983.
lone treatment on the glycosaminoglycan content of articu-
61. Fam AG, Schumacher HR Jr, Clayburne G et al: Effect of 
lar cartilage in dogs, Scand J Rheumatot 5:49-52, 1976.
 joint motion on experimental calcium pyrophosphate dihy-
78. Keller WG, Aron DN, Rowland GN et al: The effect of
drate crystal induced arthritis, J Rheumatol 17:644-655,
trans-stife external skeletal fixation and hyaluronic acid
1990.
therapy on articular cartilage in the dog, Vet Surg 23:119-
62. Kim HK, Kerr RG, Cruz TF et al: Effects of continuous
128, 1994.
passive motion and immobilization on synovitis and carti-
 79. Comer JS, Kincaid SA, Baird AN et al: Immunolocalization 
lage degradation in antigen induced arthritis, J Rheumatof
of stromelysin, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha, and TNF
22:1714-1721, 1995.
receptors in atrophied canine articular cartilage treated with
63. Egerbacher M, Edinger J, Tschulenk W: Effects of enro-
hyaluronic acid and transforming growth factor beta, Am J
foxacin and ciprofoxacin hydrochloride on canine and
Vet Res 57:1488-1496, 1996.
equine chondrocytes in culture, Am J Vet Res 62:704-708,
80. Smith GN, Myers SL, Brandt KD et al: Effect of intraar-
2001.
ticular hyaluronan injection in experimental canine osteo-
 64. Palmoski MJ, Colyer RA, Brandt KD: Marked suppression
arthritis, Arthritis Rheum 41:976-985, 1998.
by salicylate of the augmented proteoglycan synthesis in 
 81. Schollmeier G, Sarkar K, Fukuhara K et al: Structural and
osteoarthritic cartilage, Arthritis Rheum 23:83-91, 1980.
functional changes in the canine shoulder after cessation of
65. Brandt KD, Palmoski MJ: Effects of salicylates and other
immobilization, Clin Orthop 310-315, 1996.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on articular cartilage,
82. Kaneps AJ, Stover SM, Lane NE: Changes in canine corti-
Am J Med 77:65-69, 1984.
cal and cancellous bone mechanical properties following
66. Palmoski MJ, Brandt KD: Proteoglycan depletion, rather
immobilization and remobilization with exercise, Bone
than fibrillation, determines the effects of salicylate and
21:419-423, 1997.
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
145
83. Jaworski ZF, Uhthoff HK: Reversibility of nontraumatic
 99. Sakakima H, Yoshida Y, Sakae K et al: Different frequency
disuse osteoporosis during its active phase, Bone 7:431-439,
treadmill  running   in  immobilization-induced  muscle
1986.
atrophy and ankle joint contracture of rats, Scand J Med Sci
84. Trudel G, Zhou J, Uhthoff HK et al: Four weeks of mobility
Sports 14(3):186-192, 2004.
after 8 weeks of immobility fails to restore normal motion:
100. Sakakibara Y, Miura T, Iwata H et al: Effect of high-
A preliminary study, Clin Orthop Retat Res 466: 1239-1244,
molecular-weight  sodium  hyaluronate  on  immobilized
2008.
rabbit knee, Clin Orthop Relat Res 299:282-292, 1994.
85. Chimoto E, Hagiwara Y, Ando A et al: Progression of an
101. Gruber BL: Mast cells in the pathogenesis of fibrosis, Curr
 arthrogenic motion restriction after immobilization in a rat
Rheumatol Rep 5(2):147-153, 2003.
experimental knee model, Ups J Med Sci 112:347-355,
102. Monument MJ, Hart DA, Befus AD et al: The mast cell
2007.
stabilizer ketotifen fumarate lessens contracture severity
 86. Hagi wara Y, Ando A, Onoda Y et al: Expression patterns of
and myofbroblast hyperplasia: a study of a rabbit model of
collagen types I and IlI in the capsule of a rat knee contrac-
posttraumatic joint contractures, J Bone Joint Surg Am
ture model, J Orthop Res 28:315-321, 2010.
92(6): 1468-1477, 2010.
87. Hildebrand KA, Zhang M, Germscheid NM et al: Cellular,
103. Braund KG, Hoff EJ, Richardson EY: Histochemical iden-
matrix, and growth factor components of the joint capsule
tification of fiber types in canine skeletal muscle, Am J Vet
are modified early in the process of postraumatic contrac-
Res 39:561-565, 1978.
ture formation in a rabbit model, Acta Orthop 79(1):116-
104. Rivero JL, Diz A, Toledo M et al: Enzyme-histochemical
125,2008
profles of fber types in mature canine appendicular
88. Matsumoto F, Trudel G, Uhthoff HK: High collagen type I
muscles, Anat Histol Embryol 23:330-336, 1994.
and low collagen type Ill levels in knee joint contracture:
105. Latorre R, Gil F, Vazquez JM et al: Skeletal muscle fbre
an immunohistochemical study with histological correlate,
types in the dog, J Anat 182:329-337, 1993.
Acta Orthop Scand 73:335-343, 2002.
106. Snow DH, Billeter R, Mascarello F et al: No classical type
89. Trudel G, Uhthoff H: Contractures secondary to immobil-
IIB fibres in dog skeletal muscle, Histochemistry 75:53-65,
ity: is the restriction articular or muscular? An experimental
1982.
longitudinal study in the rat knee, Arch Phys Med Rehabil 
107. Acevedo LM, Rivero JL: New insights into skeletal muscle
81:6-13, 2000.
fibre types in the dog with particular focus towards hybrid
90. Hagi wara Y, Chimoto E, Ando A et al: Expression of type
myosin phenotypes, Cell Tissue Res 323:283-303, 2006.
 I collagen in the capsule of a contracture knee in a rat
108. Rosenblatt JD, Kuzon-WM J, Pynn BR et al: Fiber type,
model, Ups J Med Sci 112(3):356-365, 2007.
fiber size, and capillary geometric features of the semiten-
91. Amiel D, Akeson WH, Harwood FL et al: The effect of
dinosus muscle in three types of dogs, Am J Vet Res 49:
immobilization on the types of collagen synthesized in peri-
1573-1576, 1988.
articular connective tissue, Connect Tissue Res 8(1):27-32,
109. Newsholme SJ, Lexell J, Downham DY: Distribution of
1980.
fibre types and fibre sizes in the tibialis cranialis muscle of
92. Hagiwara Y, Chimoto E, Takahashi I et al: Expression of
beagle dogs, J Anat 160:1-8, 1988.
transforming growth factor-betal and connective tissue
110. Guy PS, Snow DH: Skeletal muscle fibre composition in
growth factor in the capsule in a rat immobilized knee
the dog and its relationship to athletic ability, Res Vet Sci
model, Ups J Med Sci 113(2):221-234, 2008.
31:244-248, 1981.
93. Hildebrand KA, Sutherland C, Zhang M: Rabbit knee
111. Lee S-J, McPherron AC: Myostatin and the control of
model of post-traumatic joint contractures: the long-term
skeletal muscle mass, Curr Opin Genet Dev 9:604-607,
natural history of motion loss and myofbroblasts, J Orthop 
1999.
Res 22(2):313-320, 2004.
112. Mosher DS, Quignon P, Bustamante CD et al: A mutation
94. Mattyasovszky SG, Hofmann A, Brochhausen C et al: The
in the myostatin gene increases muscle mass and enhances
effect of the pro-infammatory cytokine tumor necrosis
racing performance in heterozygote dogs, PLoS Genet 
factor-alpha on human joint capsule myofi broblasts, Arthri-
3(5):e79, 2007. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0030079.
tis Res Ther 12:R4, 1-16, 2010.
 113. Jespersen JG, Nedergaard A, Andersen LL et al: Myostatin
95. Hildebrand KA, Zhang M, Salo PT et al: Joint capsule mast
 expression during human muscle hyperrophy and subse-
cells and neuropeptides are increased within four weeks of
quent atrophy: increased myostatin with detraining, Scand
injury and remain elevated in chronic stages of posttrau-
J Med Sci Sports 21:215-223, 2011.
matic contractures, J Orthop Res 26(10):1313-1319, 2008.
114. Zhang P, Chen X, Fan M: Signaling mechanisms involved 
96. Schaffer M, Beiter T, Becker HD et al: Neuropeptides:
in disuse muscle atrophy, Med Hypotheses 69:310-321,
mediators of infammation and tissue repair? Arch Surg
2007.
133:1107-1116, 1998
115. Castle ME, Reyman TA: The effect of tenotomy and tendon
 97. Usuba M, Akai M, Shirasaki Y et al: Experimental joint con-
transfers on muscle fber types in the dog, Clin Orthop 186:
tracture correction with low torque-long duration repeated
302-310, 1984.
stretching, Clin Orthop Retat Res 456:70-78, 2007.
116. Gunn HM: Differences in the histochemical properties
98. Usuba M, Miyanaga Y, Miyakawa S et al: Effect of heat in
of skeletal muscles of different breeds of horses and dogs,
increasing the range of knee motion after the development
J Anat 127(3):615-634, 1978.
 of a joint contracture: an experiment with an animal model,
117. F
Barclay JK: Hypothesis: local vascular regulation is a key to
Arch Phys Med Rehabil 87(2):247-253, 2006.
Aow limited muscle function, Can J Sport Sci 15:9-13, 1990.
146
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
118. Dodd SL, Powers SK, Crawford MP: Tension development
139. Lieber RL, Jacks TM, Mohler RL et al: Growth hormone
and duty cycle affect Q peak and vOz peak in contracting 
secretagogue increases muscle strength during remobiliza-
muscle, Med Sci Sports Exerc 26:997-1002, 1994.
tion after canine hindlimb immobilization, J Orthop Res
119. Musch TI: Skeletal muscle blood fow in exercising dogs,
15:519-527, 1997.
Med Sci Sports Exerc 20:S108, 1988.
140. Lieber RL, McKee WT, Gershuni DH: Recovery of the dog
120. Rowell LB: Muscle blood fow in humans: how high can it
quadriceps after 10 weeks of immobilization followed by 4
go? Med Sci Sports Exerc 20:S97-S103, 1988.
weeks of remobilization, J Orthop Res 7:408-412, 1989.
121. Richardson RS: What governs skeletal muscle VOzmax? New
141. Horl M, Bruch HP, Gold R et al: Carbohydrate metabolism
evidence, Med Sci Sports Exerc 32:100- 107, 2000.
of dog skeletal muscle during immobilization, Res Exp Med
122. Haidet GC, Parsons D: Reduced exercise capacity in senes-
Berf 187:81-85, 1987.
cent beagles: an evaluation of the periphery, Am J Physiot
142. Sen CK, Marin E, Kretzschmar M et al: Skeletal muscle
260:H173-H182, 1991.
and liver glutathione homeostasis in response to training.
123. Stainsby WN, Peterson CV, Barbee RW: Oz uptake and
exercise, and immobilization, J App! Physiot 73:1265-1272,
work by in situ muscle performing contractions with
1992.
constant shortening, Med Sci Sports Exerc 13:27-30,
143. Kvist M, Hurme T, Kannus P et al: Vascular density at the
1981.
myotendinous junction of the rat gastrocnemius muscle
124. Brechue WF, Ameredes BT, Barclay JK et al: Blood fow
after immobilization and remobilization, Am J Sports Med
and pressure relationships which determine VOzmax, Med Sci
23:359-364, 1995.
Sports Exerc 27:37-42, 1995.
144. Bebout DE, Hogan MC, Hempleman SC et al: Effects of
125. Naamani R, Hussain NA, Magder S: The mechanical effects 
training and immobilization on VO and DOz in dog gas-
of contractions on blood How to the muscle, Eur J Appt
 trocnemius muscle in situ, J Appl Physiot 74:1697-1703,
Physiot 71:102-112, 1995.
1993.
126. Grassi B: Skeletal muscle VO, on-kinetics: set by O deliv-
145. Jebens E, Steen H, Fjeld TO et al: Changes in Na+, K(+)-
ery or by Oz utilization? New insights into an old issue, Med.
adenosinetriphosphatase, citrate synthase and K+ in sheep
Sci Sports Exerc 32:108-116, 2000.
skeletal muscle during immobilization and remobilization,
127. Hepple RT, Hogan MC, Stary C et al: Structural basis of
Eur J Appl Physiol 71:386-395, 1995.
muscle O, diffusing capacity: evidence from muscle func-
146. Hoppeler H: Exercise-induced ultrastructural changes in
tion in situ, J Appl Physiot 88:560-566, 2000.
skeletal muscle, Int J Sports Med 7:187-204, 1986.
128. Burton HW, Barclay JK: Metabolic factors from exercising
147. Heerkens YF, Woittiez RD, Huijing PA et al: Passive resis-
muscle and the proliferation of endothelial cells, Med Sci
tance of the human knee: the effect of remobilization,
Sports Exerc 18:390-395, 1986.
J Biomed Eng 9:69-76, 1987.
129. Frisbee JC, Murrant CL, Wilson BA et al: Polycythemia
148. LeBlanc A, Rowe R, Schneider V et al: Regional muscle
decreases fatigue in tetanic contractions of canine skeletal
loss after short duration spacefight, Aviat Space Environ
muscle, Med Sci Sports Exerc 31:1293-1298, 1999.
Med 66:1151-1154, 1995.
130. Gladden LB, Stainsby WN, MacIntosh BR: Norepinephrine
149. Borina E, Pellegrino MA, D'Antona G et al: Myosin and
increases canine skeletal muscle VO, during recovery, Med
actin content of human skeletal muscle fibers following 35
Sci Sports Exerc 14:471-476, 1982.
days bed rest, Scand J Med Sci Sports 20:65-73, 2010.
131. Cartee GD: Aging skeletal muscle: response to exercise,
150. Morrissey MC: Refex inhibition of thigh muscles in
Exerc Sport Sci Rev 22:91-120, 1994.
knee injury. Causes and treatment, Sports Med 7:263-276,
132. Hogan MC, Gladden LB, Kurdak SS et al: Increased
1989.
[lactate] in working dog muscle reduces tension develop-
151. Gibson JN, Halliday D, Morison WL et al: Decrease in
ment independent of pH, Med Sci Sports Exerc 27:371-377,
 human quadriceps muscle protein turnover consequent 
1995.
upon leg immobilization, Clin Sci 72:503-509, 1987.
133. Sabbah HN, Hansen SF, Sharoy VG et al: Decreased
 152. Rennie MJ: Exercise- and nutrient-controlled mechanisms
proportion of type I myofbers in skeletal muscle of
involved in maintenance of the musculoskeletal mass,
dogs with chronic heart failure, Circulation 87:1729-1737,
Biochem Soc Trans Vot 35(5):1302-1305, 2007.
1993.
153. Urso ML, Scrimgeour AG, Chen YW et al: Analysis of
134. Wilson JR, Coyle EF, Osbakken M: Effect of heart failure
human skeletal muscle after 48 h immobilization reveals
on skeletal muscle in dogs, Am J Physiot 262:H993-H998,
alterations in mRNA and protein for extracellular matrix
1992.
components, J Appt Physiol 101:1136-1148, 2006.
135. Lieber RL, Friden JO, Hargens AR et al: Differential
154. Rennie MJ, Selby A, Atherton P et al: Facts, noise and
response of the dog quadriceps muscle to external skeletal
wishful thinking: muscle protein turnover in aging and
fixation of the knee, Muscle Nerve 11:193-201, 1988.
human disuse atrophy, Scand J Med Sci Sports 20:5-9,
136. Appell HJ: Muscular atrophy following immobilization. A
2010.
review, Sports Med 10:42-58, 1990.
155. DeMartino GN, Ordway GA: Ubiquitin-proteasome
137. Appell HJ: Skeletal muscle atrophy during immobilization,
pathway of intracellular protein degradation: implications 
Int J Sports Med 7:1-5, 1986.
for muscle atrophy during unloading, Exerc Sport Sci Rev
138. Musacchia XJ, Steffen JM, Fell RD: Disuse atrophy of
26:219-252, 1998.
skeletal muscle: animal models, Exerc Sport Sci Rev 16:61-
156. Hershko A, Ciechanover A: The ubiquitin system, Ann Rev
87, 1988.
Biochem 67:425-479, 1998.
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization 
147
157. Desrosiers J, Trensz F, Grenier G: A novel hindlimb immo-
174. Frontera WR, Hughes VA, Fielding RA et al: Aging of
bilization procedure for studying skeletal muscle atrophy
skeletal muscle: a 12-yr longitudinal study, J Appt Physiot
and recovery in mouse, J Appt Physiol 106(6):2049-2059,
88:1321-1326, 2000.
2009.
175. Lexell J, Taylor CC: Variability in muscle fbre areas in
158. Wu C-L, Kandarian SC, Jackman RW: Identification of
whole human quadriceps muscle: effects of increasing age,
genes that elicit disuse muscle atrophy via the transcription
J Anat 174:239-249, 1991.
factors p50 and Bcl-3, PLoS 0NE 6(1):e16171, 2011.
176. Kadi F, Ponsot E: The biology of satellite cells and telo-
159. Reed SA, Senf SM, Cornwell EW et al: Inhibition of
meres in human skeletal muscle: effects of aging and
 IkappaB kinase alpha (IKKc.) or IKKbeta (IKKβ) plus fork-
physical activity, Scand J Med Sci Sports 20:39-48,
head box O (Foxo) abolishes skeletal muscle atrophy,
2010.
Biochem Biophys Res Comm 405:491-496, 2011.
177. Suetta C, Kjaer M: What are the mechanisms behind disuse
160. Marimuthu K, Murton AJ, Greenhaff PL: Mechanisms
and age-related skeletal muscle atrophy? Scand J Med Sci
regulating muscle mass during disuse atrophy and rehabili-
Sports 20:167-168, 2010.
tation in humans, J Appl Physiol 110:555-560, 2011.
178. Petterson, SC, Bartance P, Buchanan T et al: Mechanisms
161. Lalani R, Bhasin S, Byhower F et al: Myostatin and insulin-
underlying quadriceps weakness in knee osteoarthritis, Med
like growth factor-I and -Il expression in the muscle of rats 
Sci Sports Exerc 40(3):422-427, 2008.
exposed to the microgravity environment of the NeuroLab
179. Aagaard P, Suetta C, Caserotti P et al: Role of the neryous 
space shuttle fight, J Endocrinot 167:417-428, 2000.
system in sarcopenia and muscle atrophy with aging:
162. Wehling M, Cai B, Tidball JG: Modulation of myostatin
sttength training as a countermeasure, Scand J Med Sci
expression during modified muscle use, FASEB J 14:103-
Sports 20:49-64, 2010.
110, 2000
180. Kamen G, Sison SV, Du CC et al: Motor unit discharge
163. Murphy KT, Cobani V, Ryall JG et al: Acute antibody.
behavior in older adults during maximal-effort contractions,
directed myostatin inhibition attenuates disuse muscle
J Appt Physiol 79:1908-1913, 1995.
atrophy and weakness in mice, J Appt Physiot 110(4):1065-
181. Yue GH, Ranganathan VK, Siemionow V et al: Older adults 
1072, 2011
exhibit a reduced ability to fully activate their biceps brachii
164. Fung DL, White DA, Gronert GA et al: The changing phar-
muscle, J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 54:M249-M253,
macodynamics of metocurine identify the onset and offset
1999.
of canine gastrocnemius disuse atrophy, Anesthesiology
182. Suetta C, Kjaer M: What are the mechanisms behind disuse
83:134-140, 1995.
and age-related skeletal muscle atrophy? Scand J Med Sci
165. Fung DL, White DA, Jones BR et al: The onset of disuse-
Sports 20:167-168, 2010.
Telated potassium effux to succinylcholine, Anesthesiotogy
183. Suetta C, Hvid LG, Justesen L et al: Effects of aging on
75:650-653, 1991.
human skeletal muscle after immobilization and retraining.
166. Gronert GA, Fung DL, Haskins SC et al: Deep sedation
J Appt Physiot 107(4):1172-1180, 2009
and mechanical ventilation without paral ysis for 3 weeks in
184. Pattison JS, Folk LC, Madsen RW et al: Selected contribu-
 normal beagles: exaggerated resistance to metocurine in
tion: identificati on of differentially expressed genes between
gastrocnemius muscle, Anesthesiotogy 90:1741- 1745, 1999.
young and old rat soleus muscle during recovery from
167. Gordon T, Mao J: Muscle attophy and procedures for train-
immobilization-induced atrophy, J Appt Physiot 95(5):2 171-
ing after spinal cord injury, Phys Ther 74:50-60, 1994.
2179, 2003
168. Hagerty R, Bostwick J, Nahai F: Denervated muscle faps:
185. Narici MV, Maganaris CN, Reeves ND: Myotendinous
 mass and thickness changes following denervation, Ann
alterations and effects of resistive loading in old age, Scand 
Plast Surg 12:171-176, 1984.
J Med Sci Sports 15:392-401, 2005.
169. Williams HB: The value of continuous electrical muscle
186. Brown AB, McCartney N, Sale DG: Positive adaptations to
 stimulation using a completely implantable system in the
weight-lifting training in the elderly, J Appf Physiof
preservation of muscle function following motor nerve
69:1725-1733, 1990.
injury and repair: an experimental study, Microsurgery
187. Ferri A, Scaglioni G, Pousson M et al: Strength and power
17:589-596, 1996.
changes of the human plantar fexors and knee extensors in
170. Braund KG, Shores A, Brawner WRJ: Recovering from
response to resistance training in old age, Acta Physiot
spinal cord trauma: the rehabilitative steps, complications,
Scand 177:69-78, 2003
and prognosis, Vet Med 85:740-744, 1990.
188. Fry TR, Clark DM: Canine hip dysplasia: clinical signs and
171. Orima H, Fujita M: Computed tomographic findings of
physical diagnosis, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
experimentally induced neurogenic muscular atrophy in
22:551-558, 1992.
dogs, J Vet Med Sci 59:729-731, 1997.
189. Duff R, Campbell JR: Long term results of excision arthro-
172. Begum SJ, Reddy MM, Ramakrishna O et al: Skeletal
plasty of the canine hip, Vet Rec 101:181-184, 1977.
muscle protein metabolism under denervation atrophy in
190. Piek CJ, Hazewinkel HA, Wol vekamp WT et al: Long-term
dog, Canis domesticus, Indian J Physiot Pharmacot 30:341-
follow-up of avascular necrosis of the femoral head in the
346, 1986
dog, J Small Anim Pract 37:12-18, 1996.
173. Reddy KV, Reddy YD, Govindappa S et al: Induced mus-
191. Francis DA, Millis DL, Head LL: Bone and lean tissue
cular work overload and disuse on the serum carbohydrate
changes following cranial cruciate ligament transection and
metabolism of dog, Canis domesticus, Arch Int Physiol
stife stabilization, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 42:127-135,
Biochim 91:411-416, 1983.
2006.
148
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
192. Innes JF, Barr AR: Clinical natural history of the postsurgi-
 209. Hall KD, Hayes KW, Falconer J: Differential strength
cal cruciate deficient canine stife joint: year 1, J Small Anim
decline in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee: revision
Pract 39:325-332, 1998.
of a hypothesis, Arthritis Care Res 6:89-96, 1993.
193. Moeller EM, Allen DA, Wilson ER et al: Long-term out-
 210. Lindehammar H, Sandstedt P: Measurement of quadriceps
comes of thigh circumference, stife range-of-motion, and
muscle strength and bulk in juvenile chronic arthritis. A
lameness after unilateral tibial plateau levelling osteotomy,
prospective, longitudinal, 2 year survey, J Rheumatol 25:
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot 23:37-42, 2010.
2240-2248, 1998
194. Millis DL, Levine D, Mynatt T et al: Changes in muscle
 211. Ozawa J, Kawamata S, Yamaoka K: Morphological changes
mass following transection of the cranial cruciate ligament
in hind limb muscles elicited by adjuvant-induced arthritis
and immediate stife stabilization. Proc 27th Ann Conf Vet
of the rat knee, Scand J Med Sci Sports 20(1):1-8, 2010.
 Orthop Soc, 2000.
212. Ciciliot S, Shiaffno S: Regeneration of mammalian skeletal
195. Mostafa AA, Griffon DJ, Thomas MW et al: Morphometric
muscle. Basic mechanisms and clinical implications, Curr
characteristics of the pelvic limb musculature of Labrador
Pharm Des 16(8):906-914, 2010.
retrievers with and without cranial cruciate ligament def-
 213. Kannus P, Jozsa L, Kvist M et al: Effects of immobilization
ciency, Vet Surg 39(3):380-389, 2010.
and subsequent low- and high-intensity exercise on mor-
196. Hewett TE, Lindenfeld TN, Riccobene JV: The effect of
phology of rat calf muscles. Scan J Med Sei Sports 8:160-
neuromuscular training on the incidence of knee injury in
171, 1998.
female athletes. A prospective study, Am J Sports Med
 214. Kannus P, Jozsa L, Jarvinen TLN et al: Free mobilization
27:699-706, 1999.
and low- and high-intensity exercise in immobilization-
197. Ross M, Worrell TW: Thigh and calf girth following knee
induced muscle atrophy, J Appf Physiof 84:1418-1424,
injury and surgery, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 27:9-15,
1998.
1998.
 215. Oliveira Milani JG, Matheus JP, Gomide LB et al: Biome-
198. Soderberg GL, Ballantyne BT, Kestel LL: Reliability of
chanical effects of immobilization and rehabilitation on the
lower extremity girth measurements after anterior cruciate
skeletal muscle of trained and sedentary rats, Ann Biomed
ligament reconstruction, Physiother Res Int 1:7-16, 1996.
Eng 36(10):1641-1648, 2008.
199. Fink C, Hoser C, Benedetto KP et al: Neuro-muscular
216. Appell HJ: Morphology of immobilized skeletal muscle
changes following ACL injury, Hungarian Rev Sports Med
and the effects of a pre- and postimmobilization training 
34:89-98, 1993.
program, Int J Sports Med 7:6-12, 1986.
200. Arangio GA, Chen C, Kalady M et al: Thigh muscle size
 217. Nascimento CC, Padula N, Milani JG et al: Histomorpho-
and strength after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
metric analysis of the response of rat skeletal muscle to
and rehabilitation, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 26:238-243,
swimming, immobilization and rehabilitation, Braz J Med
1997.
Biot Res 41(9):818-824, 2008.
201. Kannus P, Jarvinen M: Thigh muscle function after partial
 218. Cornachione A, Cagao-Benedini LO, Shimano MM et al:
tear of the medial ligament compartment of the knee, Med
Morphological comparison of different protocols of skeletal 
Sci Sports Exerc 23:4-9, 1991.
"uoisusdsns qupuy ioe sjei un uonezgoui sosnu
202. van Lent MET, Drost MR, Wildenberg FA: EMG profiles
Scand J Med Sci Sports 18(4):453-461, 2008.
of ACL-deficient patients during walking: the infuence of 
219. Phillips SM: Physiologic and molecular bases of muscle
mild fatigue, Int J Sports Med 15:508-514, 1994.
hypertrophy and atrophy: impact of resistance exercise on
203. Kannus P, Jarvinen M: Nonoperative treatment of acute
human skeletal muscle (protein and exercise dose effects),
knee ligament injuries. A review with special reference to
Appt Physiot Nutr Metab 34:403-410, 2009.
indications and methods, Sports Med 9:244-260, 1990.
220. Bruunsgaard H, Galbo H, Halkjaer-Kristensen J et al:
204. Monk ML, Preston CA, McGowan CM: Effects of early
Exercise-induced increase in serum interleukin-6 in humans
intensive postoperative physiotherapy on limb function
is related to muscle damage, J Physiol 499:833-841, 1997.
after tibial plateau leveling osteotomy in dogs with def-
 221. Jones Sw, Hill RJ, Krasney PA et al: Disuse atrophy and
ciency of the cranial cruciate ligament, Vet Res 67:529-536,
exercise rehabilitation in humans profoundly affects the
2006.
expression of genes associated with the regulation of skel-
 205. Braund KG, Shires PK, Mikeal RL: Type I fiber atrophy in
etal muscle mass, FASEB J 18:1025-1027, 2004.
the vastus lateralis muscle in dogs with femoral fractures 
 222. Puustjarvi K, Tammi M, Reinikainen M et al: Running
treated by hyperextension, Vet Pathot 17:164- 176, 1980.
training alters fiber type composition in spinal muscles, Eur
206. Shires PK, Braund KG, Milton JL et al: Effect of localized
Spine J 3:17-21, 1994.
trauma and temporary splinting on immature skeletal
 223. Wakshlag JJ, Kalfelz FA, Barr SC et al: Effects of exercise
muscle and mobility of the femorotibial joint in the dog.
on canine skeletal muscle proteolysis: an investigation of
Am J Vet Res 43:454-460, 1982.
the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and other metabolic
207. Slemenda C, Heilman DK, Brandt KD et al: Reduced quad-
markers, Vet Ther 3:215-225, 2002.
riceps strength relative to body weight: a risk factor for knee
224. Arokoski J, Miettinen P, Saamanen AM et al: Effects of
osteoarthritis in women? Arthritis Rheum 41:1951-1959,
aerobic long distance running training (up to 40 km.day-1)
1998.
of 1-year duration on blood and endocrine parameters of
208. Hayes KW, Falconer J: Differential muscle strength decline
female beagle dogs, Eur J Appl Physiol 67:321-329, 1993.
in osteoarthritis of the knee. A developing hypothesis,
225.（
Gonyea WJ: Muscle fiber splitting in trained and untrained
Arthritis Care Res 5:24-28, 1992.
animals, Exerc Sport Sci Rev 8:19-39, 1980.
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization 
149
226. Luthi JM, Howard H, Claassen H et al: Structural changes
synthesis in humans, Am J Physiot Endocrinot Metab
in skeletal muscle tissue with heavy-resistance exercise,
298:E354-E361, 2009.
Int J Sports Med 7:123-127, 1986.
244. Paulsen G, Egner IM, Drange M et al: A COX-2 inhibitor 
227. Staron RS, Malicky ES, Leonardi MJ et al: Muscle hyper-
reduces muscle soreness, but does not infuence recovery
trophy and fast fiber type conversions in heavy resistance-
and adaptation after eccentric exercise, Scand J Med Sci
trained women, Eur J Appt Physiol 60:71-79, 1989.
Sports 20(1):E195-E207, 2009.
 228. Gonyea WJ, Ericson GC: An experimental model for the
245. Reynolds JF, Noakes TD, Schwellnus MP et al: Non-
study of exercise-induced skeletal muscle hypertrophy,
steroidal anti-infammatory drugs fail to enhance healing of
J Appt Physiol 40:630-633, 1976.
acute hamstring injuries treated with physiotherapy, S Afr
229. Hickson RC, Rosenkoetter MA, Brown MM: Strength
Med J 85:517-522, 1995.
training effects on aerobic power and short-term endurance,
 246. Yarasheski KE: Growth hormone effects on metabolism,
Med Sci Sports Exerc 12:336-339, 1980.
body composition, muscle mass, and strength, Exerc Sport
230. Hickson RC, Dvorak BA, Gorostiaga EM et al: Potential
Sci Rev 22:285-312, 1994.
for strength and endurance training to amplify endurance
 247. Adams GR: Role of insulin-like growth factor-I in the regu-
 performance, J Appt Physiol 65:2285-2290, 1988.
lation of skeletal muscle adaptation to increased loading.
231. Caggiano E, Emrey T, Shirley S et al: Effects of electrical
Exerc Sport Sci Rev 26:31-60, 1998.
stimulation or voluntary contraction for strengthening the
 248. Kanaley JA, Weltman JY, Veldhuis JD et al: Human growth
quadriceps femoris muscles in an aged male population,
hormone response to repeated bouts of aerobic exercise,
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 20:22-28, 1994.
J Appt Physiot 83:1756-1761, 1997.
232. Balon TW, Horowitz JF, Fitzsimmons KM: Effects of car-
249. Kimball SR, Jefferson LS: Signaling path ways and molecu-
bohydrate loading and weight-lifting on muscle girth, Int J
lar mechanisms through which branched-chain amino acids
Sports Wutr 2:328-334, 1992.
mediate translational control of protein synthesis, J Nutr
233. Mikesky AE, Gonyea WJ, Giddings CJ et al: Sexually
136:227S-231S, 2006.
dimorphic response in weight lifting cats, Med Sci Sports
250. Rennie MJ, Bohe J, Smith K et al: Branched-chain amino
Exerc 18:566, 1986.
acids as fuels and anabolic signals in human muscle, J Nutr
 234. Cureton KJ, Collins MA, Hill DW et al: Muscle hypertrophy
136:264S-268S, 2006.
in men and women, Med Sei Sports Exerc 20:338-344, 1988.
251.B
Krebs HA: Adv Enzyme Regul 10:406-413, 1972.
235. Kumar V, Selby A, Rankin D et al: Age-related differences 
 252. Bajotto G, Sato Y, Kitaura Y et al: Effect of branched-chain
in the dose-response relationship of muscle protein synthe-
amino acid supplementation during unloading on regulatory
sis to resistance exercise in young and old men, J Physiot
components of protein synthesis in atrophied soleus
587:211-217, 2009.
muscles, Eur J Appt Physiot 111:1815-1828, 2011.
236. Fujita S, Abe T, Drummond MJ et al: Blood fow restriction
 253. Blomstrand E, Eliasson J, Karlsson HKR et al: Branched-
during low-intensity fesistance exercise increases S6K1
chain amino acids activate key enzymes in protein synthesis
phosphorylation and muscle protein synthesis, J Appt
after physical exercise, Nutr 136:269s-273S, 2006.
Physiol 103:903-910, 2007.
254. Rennie MJ, Edwards RH, Krywawych S et al: Effect of
237. Abe T, Kearns CF, Sato Y: Muscle size and strength are
exercise on protein turnover in man, Clin Sei 61:627-639,
increased following walk training with restricted venous 
1981.
blood flow from the leg muscle, Kaatsu-walk training,
255. Biolo G, Maggi SP, Williams BD et al: Increased rates of
J Appt Physiot 100:1460-1466, 2006.
muscle protein turnover and amino acid transport after
 238. Tannerstedt J, Apro W, Blomstrand E: Maximal lengthening
resistance exercise in humans, Am J Physiot 268:E514-
 contractions induce different signaling response in the type
E520, 1995
I and type II fibers of human skeletal muscle, J Appt Physiot
 256. Biolo G, Tipton KD, Klein S et al: An abundant supply of
106(4):1412-1418, 2009.
amino acids enhances the metabolic effect of exercise on
239. Greene CE, Lorenz MD, Munnell JF et al: Myopathy asso-
muscle protein, Am J Physiot 273:E122-E129, 1997.
ciated with hyperadrenocorticism in the dog, J Am Vet Med
257. Lieber RL, Thornell LE, Friden J: Muscle cytoskeletal dis-
Assoc 174:1310-1315, 1979.
ruption occurs within the first 15 min of cyclic eccentric
240. Hickson RC, Marone JR: Exercise and inhibition of
contraction, J Appl Physiol 80(1):278-284, 1996.
glucocorticoid-induced muscle atrophy, Exerc Sport Sci Rev
 258. Lieber RL, Friden I: Morphologic and mechanical basis of
21:135-167, 1993.
delayed-onset muscle soreness, J Am Acad Orthop Surg
241. Ferreira IM, Verreschi IT, Nery LE et al: The infuence of
10(1):67-73, 2002.
6 months of oral anabolic steroids on body mass and respi-
 259. Pinheiro CHJ, Vitzel KF, Curi R: Effect of V-acetylcysteine
ratory muscles in undernourished COPD patients, Chest 
on markers of skeletal muscle injury after fatiguing
114:19-28, 1998
 contractile activity, Scand J Med Sci Sports 22:24-33,
242. Mikkelsen UR, Schjerling P, Helmark IC et al: Local
2012.
NSAID infusion does not affect protein synthesis and
 260. You JS, Park MN, Lee YS: Dietary fish oil inhibits the early
gene expression in human muscle after eccentric exercise,
stage of recovery of atrophied soleus muscle in rats via
Scand J Med Sci Sports 2010. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.
Akt-p70s6k signaling and prostaglandin F2c., J Nutr
2010.01170.x.
Biochem 21:929-934, 2010.
243. Burd NA, Dickinson JM, LeMoine JK et al: Effect of a
 261. Hamilton B: Vitamin D and human skeletal muscle, Scand
cyclooxy genase-2 inhibitor on postexercise muscle protein
J Med Sci Sports 20:182-190, 2010.
150
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
262. Fleet J: Rapid, membrane-initiated actions of 1,25 dihy-
279. Woo SL, Gomez MA, Sites TJ et al: The biomechanical and
droxy vitamin D: what are they and what do they mean?
morphological changes in the medial collateral ligament of 
J Nutr 134:3215-3218, 2004.
the rabbit after immobilization and remobilization, J Bone
263. Vailas AC, Vailas JC: Physical activity and connective
Joint Surg Am 69:1200- 1211, 1987.
tissue. In Bouchard C, Shephard RJ, Stephens T, eds: Physi-
280. Newton PO, Woo SLY, MacKenna DA et al: Immobilization
cal Activity, Fitness, and Heatth. Champaign, IL, 1994.
of the knee joint alters the mechanical and ultrastructural
Human Kinetics, pp 369-382.
properties of the rabbit anterior cruciate ligament,
264. Loitz BJ, Frank CB: Biology and mechanics of ligament
J Bone Joint Surg Am 13:191-200, 1995.
and ligament healing, Exerc Sport Sci Rev 21:33-64,
281. Christensen B, Dyrberg E, Aagaard P et al: Short-term
1993.
immobilization and recovery affect skeletal muscle but
265. Noyes FR, DeLucas JL, Torvik PJ: Biomechanics of ante-
not collagen tissue turnover in humans, J Appt Physiot
rior cruciate ligament failure: an analysis of strain-rate sen-
105(6) :1845-1851, 2008.
sitivity and mechanisms of failure in primates, J Bone Joint
 282. Enehjelm S, Krogsgaard M, Kjaer M et al: Effects of long-
Surg Am 56:236-253, 1974.
term immobilization and recovery on human triceps surae
266. Noyes FR, Keller CS, Grood ES et al: Advances in the
and collagen turnover in the Achilles tendon in patients with
understanding of knee ligament injury, repair, and rehabili-
healing ankle fracture, J Appl Physiot 105(2):420-426,
tation, Med Sci Sports Exerc 16:427-443, 1984.
2008.
267. Ruffoli R, Augusti A, Giannotti S et al: Mechanoreceptors
 283. Jarvinen TA, Jozsa L, Kannus P et al: Mechanical loading
in the posterior cruciate and lateral collateral ligaments of
regulates the expression of tenascin-C in the myotendinous
the human knee, and the lateral collateral ligament of
junction and tendon but does not induce de novo synthesis
the canine knee, J Sports Traumatot Ret Res 18:113-122,
in the skeletal muscle, J Cell Sci 116(Pt 5):857-866,
1996.
2003.
268. Bodtker S, Kramhoft M, Sylvest A et al: Blood How of the
 284. Vailas AC, Tipton CM, Laughlin HL et al: Physical activity
anterior and posterior cruciate ligament in a canine model,
and hypophysectomy on the aerobic capacity of ligaments
Scan J Med Sci Sports 4:145-147, 1994.
and tendons, J Appt Physiot 44:542-546, 1978.
269. Dunlap J, McCarthy JA, Joyce ME et al: Quantification of 
285. Aro AA, Vidal BC, Tomiosso TC et al: Structural and bio-
the perfusion of the anterior cruciate ligament and the
chemical analysis of the effect of immobilization followed
effects of stress and injury to supporting structures, Am J
by stretching on the calcaneal tendon of rats, Connect
Sports Med 17:808-810, 1989.
Tissue Res 49(6):443-454, 2008.
 270. Butler DL, Grood ES, Noyes FR et al: On the interpretation
 286. Christensen B, Dyrberg E, Aagaard P et al: Effects of long-
of our anterior cruciate ligament data, Clin Orthop 196:26-
term immobilization and recovery on human triceps surae
34, 1985.
and collagen turnover in the Achilles tendon in patients with
271. Gillard GC, Reilly HC, Bell-Booth PG et al: The infuence
healing ankle fracture, J Appt Physiot 105(2):420-426,
of mechanical forces on the glycosaminoglycan content of
2008.
the rabbit fexor digitorum profundus tendon, Connect
287.
 Montgomery RD: Healing of muscle, ligaments, and
Tissue Res 7:37-46, 1979.
tendons, Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim 4:304-311, 1989.
272. Yasuda K, Hayashi K: Changes in biomechanical properties
 288. Aoki M, Kubota H, Pruitt DL et al: Biomechanical and
of tendons and ligaments from joint disuse, Osteoarthritis
histologic characteristics of canine fexor tendon fepair
Cartilage 7(1):122-129, 1999.
using early postoperative mobilization, J Hand Surg Am
273. Laros GS, Tipton CM, Cooper RR: Infuence of physical
22:107-114, 1997.
activity on ligament insertions in the knees of dogs, J Bone
 289. Woo SL, Gomez MA, Inoue M et al: New experimental
Joint Surg Am 53:275-286, 1971.
procedures to evaluate the biomechanical properties of
274. Noyes FR, Torvik PJ, Hyde WB et al: Biomechanics of
healing canine medial collateral ligaments, J Orthop Res
ligament failure. Il. An analysis of immobilization, exer-
5:425-432, 1987.
cise, and reconditioning effects in primates, J Bone Joint
290. Woo SL, Inoue M, McGurk-Burleson E et al: Treatment of 
Surg Am 56:1406-1418, 1974.
the medial collateral ligament injury. II: Structure and func-
275. Noyes FR: Functional properties of knee ligaments and
tion of canine knees in response to differing treatment regi-
alterations induced by immobilization: a corelative biome-
mens, Am J Sport Med 15:22-29, 1987.
chanical and histological study in primates, Clin Orthop
291. Piper TL, Whiteside LA. Early mobilization after knee liga-
123:210-242, 1977.
ment repair in dogs: an experimental study, Clin Orthop
276. Bahniuk E: The effects of the tibial femoral angle and of
1980;277-282.
disuse on the strength of canine anterior cruciate ligaments,
292. Inoue M, Woo SL, Gomez MA et al: Effects of surgical
Bull Hosp Jt Dis Orthop Inst 46:185-192, 1986.
treatment and immobilization on the healing of the medial
277. Tipton CM, James SL, Mergner W et al: Infuence of exer-
collateral ligament: a long-term multidisciplinary study,
cise on the strength of the medial collateral knee ligaments 
Connect Tissue Res 25(1):13-26, 1990.
of dogs, Am J Physiol 218:894-901, 1970.
293. Thornton GM, Shrive NG, Frank CB: Healing ligaments
278. Keira M, Yasuda K, Kaneda K et al: Mechanical properties
have decreased cyclic modulus compared to normal liga-
of the anterior cruciate ligament chronically relaxed by
ments and immobilization further compromises healing
elevation of the tibial insertion, J Orthop Res 14:157-166,
ligament response to cyclic 1oading, J Orthop Res 21(4):716-
1996.
722, 2003.
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
151
294. Inoue M, McGurk-Burleson E, Hollis JM et al: Treatment
310. Ditsios K, Boyer MI, Kusano N et al: Bone loss following
of the medial collateral ligament injury. 1: The importance
tendon laceration, repair and passive mobilization, J Orthop
of anterior cruciate ligament on the varus-valgus knee
Res 21(6):990-996, 2003.
laxity, Am J Sport Med 15:15-21, 1987.
 311. Saini NS, Roy KS, Bansal PS et al: A preliminary study on
295. Demirhan M, Uysal M, Kilicoglu O et al: Tensile strength
the effect of ultrasound therapy on the healing of surgically
 of ligaments after thermal shrinkage depending on time and
severed Achilles tendons in five dogs, J Vet Med A Physiot
immobilization: in yivo study in the rabbit, J Shoutder
Pathot Clin Med 49(6):321-328, 2002.
Elbow Surg 14(2):193-200, 2005.
312. Peltz CD, Dourte LM, Kuntz AF et al: The effect of post-
 296. O'Donoghue DH, Rock wood CA, Zaricznyj B et al: Repair
operative passive motion on rotator cuff healing in a rat
of knee ligaments in dogs. I. The lateral collateral ligament,
model, J Bone Joint Surg Am 91(10):2421-2429, 2009.
J Bone Joint Surg Am 43A:1167-1178, 1961.
313. Gimbel JA, Van Kleunen JP, Williams GR et al: Long dura-
297. O'Donoghue DH, Frank GR, Jeter GL et al: Repair and
tions of immobilization in the rat result in enhanced
reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament in dogs,
 mechanical properties of the healing supraspinatus tendon 
J Bone Joint Surg Am 53A:710-718, 1971.
insertion site, J Biomech Eng 129(3):400-404, 2007.
298. Ogata K, Whiteside LA, Andersen DA: The intra-articular
 314. Kannus P, Jozsa L, Natri A et al: Effects of training, immo-
effect of various postoperative managements following
bilization and remobilization on tendons, Scan J Med Sci
knee ligament repair: an experimental study in dogs, Clin
Sports 7:67-71, 1997.
Orthop 150:271-276, 1980.
 315. Butler DL, Grood ES, Noyes FR et al: Biomechanics of liga-
299. Barber-Westin SD, Noyes FR: The effect of rehabilitation
ments and tendons, Exerc Sport Sci Rev 6:125-181, 1978.
and return to activity on anterior-posterior knee displace-
 316. Cherdchutham W, Meershoek LS, van Weeren PR et al:
ments after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction, Am J
Effects of exercise on biomechanical properties of the
Sports Med 21:264-270, 1993.
superficial digital fHexor tendon in foals, Am J Vet Res
300. Gelberman RH, Woo SLY, Lothringer K: Effects of early
62:1859-1864, 2001.
intermittent passive immobilization on healing canine Hex or
 317. Tipton CM, Matthes RD, Maynard JA et al: The infuence
tendons. J Hand Surg 7A:170-175, 1982.
of physical activity on ligaments and tendons, Med Sci
301. Silva MJ, Boyer MI, Brodt MB et al: Effect of increased
Sports 7:165-175, 1975.
tendon excursion in vivo on the biomechanical properties
 318. Jarvinen TAH, Jozsa L, Kannus P et al: Mechanical loading
of healing fexor tendons. Proceedings of the 45th Annual
regulates tenascin-C expression in the osteotendinous junc-
Meeting of the Orthopaedic Research Society, Anaheim,
tion, J Cell Sci 112:3157-3166, 1999.
Calif, 1999.
 319. Vidik A. Simultaneous mechanical and light microscopic
302. Silva MJ, Brodt MB, Boyer MI et al: Effects of increased
studies of collagen fbers, Z Anat Entwicktungsesch 136:
in vivo excursion on digital range of motion and tendon
204-212, 1972.
strength following fexor tendon repair, J Orthop Res
320. Noyes FR, Grood ES, Nussbaum NS et al: Effect of intra-
17:777-783, 1999.
articular corticosteroids on ligament properties: a biome-
303. Gelberman RH, Boyer MI, Brodt MB et al: The effect of
chanical and histological study in rhesus knees, Clin Orthop
 gap formation at the repair site on the strength and excur-
123:197-209, 1977.
sion of intrasynovial fex or tendons—-an experimental study
 321. Fredberg U: Local corticosteroid injection in sport: review
on the early stages of tendon-healing in dogs, J Bone Joint
of literature and guidelines for treatment, Scand J Med Sci
Surg Am 81A:975-982, 1999.
Sports 7:131-139, 1997.
304. Takai S, Woo SL, Horibe S et al: The effects of frequency
 322. Seneviratne AM, Izawa K, Torzilli PA et al: The effect of
and duration of controlled passive mobilization on tendon 
corticosteroid induced osteoporosis on tendon insertion
healing, J Orthop Res 9:705-713, 1991.
sites in α rabbit model. Proceedings of the 45th Annual
305. Gelberman RH, Siegel DB, Woo SLY et al: Healing of
Meeting of the Orthopaedic Research Society, Anaheim,
digital fexor tendons: importance of the interval from
Calif, 1999.
injury to repait, J Bone Joint Surg Am 73A:66-75, 1991.
 323. Albrechtsen SJ, Harvey JS: Dimethyl sulfoxide. Biome-
 306. Zhao C, Amadio PC, Tanaka T et al: Short-term assessment
chanical effects on tendons, Am J Sports Med 10:177-179,
of optimal timing for postoperative rehabilitation after
1982.
flexor digitorum profundus tendon repair in a canine model,
324. Williams RJ, Attia E, Wickiewicz TL et al: The effect of
J Hand Ther 18(3):322-329, 2005.
ciprofloxacin on tendon, paratenon, and capsular fibroblast
307. Grewal R, Saw SSC, Bastidas JA et al: Passive and active
metabolism, Am J Sports Med, 28:364-369, 2000.
rehabilitation for partial lacerations of the canine fexor
 325. Rodeo SA, Suzuki K, Deng XH et al: Use of recombinant
digitorum profundus tendon in zone II, J Hand Surg 24A:
human bone morphogenetic protein-2 to enhance tendon
743-750, 1999.
healing in a bone tunnel, Am J Sports Med 27:476-488,
308. Grewal R, Chan Saw SS, Varitimidus S et al: Evaluation of
1999.
passive and active rehabilitation and of tendon repair for
326. Grynpas MD, Kasra M, Renlund R et al: The effect of
partial tendon lacerations after three weeks of healing in
pamidronate in a new model of immobilization in the dog.
canines, Clin Biomech 21(8):804-809, 2006.
Bone 17:225S-232s, 1995.
 309. Butler DL, Grood ES, Noyes FR et al: Mechanical properties
327. Waters DJ, Cay wood DD, Turner RT: Effect of tamoxifen
of primate vascularized vs. nonvascularized patellar tendon
citrate on canine immobilization (disuse) osteoporosis, Vet
grafts; changes over time, J Orthop Res 7:68-79, 1989.
Surg 20:392-396, 1991.
152
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
328. Sievanen H, Kannus P, Jarvinen TLN: Immobilization dis-
345. Allison N, Brooks B: Bone atrophy, Surg Gynecol Obstet
torts allometry of rat femur: implications for disuse osteo-
33:250-260, 1921.
porosis, Caicif Tissue Int 60:387-390, 1997.
 346. Turbes CC: Repair, reconstruction, regeneration and reha-
 329. Jee WS, Ma Y: Animal models of immobilization osteope-
bili tati on strategies to spinal cord injury, Biomed Sci Instrum 
nia, Morphotogie 83:25-34, 1999.
34:351-356, 1997.
 330. Marotti G, Delrio N, Marotti F et al: Quantitative analysis 
347. Rodgers MM, Glaser RM, Figoni SF et al: Musculoskeletal
of the bone destroying activity of osteocytes and osteoclasts 
responses of spinal cord injured individuals to functional
in experimental disuse osteoporosis, Itat J Orthop Trauma-
neuromuscular stimulation-induced knee extension exercise 
tol 5:225-240, 1979.
training, J Rehabit Res Dev 28:19-26, 1991.
331. Uhthoff HK, Jaworski ZF: Periosteal stress-induced reac-
348. Stromberg L, Dalen N: Atrophy of cortical bone caused by
tions resembling stress fractures. A radiologic and histo-
rigid internal fixation plates. An experimental study in the
logic study in dogs, Clin Orthop 199:284-291, 1985.
dog, Acta Orthop Scand 49:448-456, 1978.
332. LeBlanc A, Marsh C, Evans H et al: Bone and muscle
 349. Woo SL, Akeson WH, Coutts RD et al: A comparison of
atrophy with suspension of the rat, J Appt Physiot 58:1669-
cortical bone atrophy secondary to fixation with plates with
1675, 1985.
large differences in bending stiffness, J Bone Joint Surg Am
333. Uhthoff HK, Jaworski ZF: Bone loss in response to long-
58:190-195, 1976.
term immobilisation, J Bone Joint Surg Br 60-B:420-429,
 350. Ferguson SJ, Wyss UP, Pichora DR: Finite element stress
1978.
analysis of a hybrid fracture fixation plate, Med Eng Phys
334. Waters DJ, Caywood DD, Trachte GJ et al: Immobilization
18:241-250, 1996.
increases bone prostaglandin E. Effect of acetylsalicylic
351. Liu JG, Xu XX: [Stress shielding and fracture healing.]
acid on disuse osteoporosis studied in dogs, Acta Orthop
Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi 74:483-485, 1994.
Scand 62:238-243, 1991.
352. Xu XX, Zhao YH, Liu JG: Blood supply and structural
335. Uhthoff HK, Sekaly G, Jaworski ZF: Effect of long-term
changes of canine intact tibia following plate fixation with
nontraumatic immobilization on metaphyseal spongiosa in
different rigidities, Chin Med J 104:1018-1021, 1991.
 young adult and old beagle dogs, Clin Orthop 192:278-284,
 353. Sumner DR, Galante JO: Determinants of stress shielding:
1985.
design versus materials versus interface, Clin Orthop
336. Li G, Patrick J: [Blood fow in canine long bones using the
274:202-212, 1992.
radioactive labeled microsphere method.] Chinese J Sports
354. Ijiri K, Jee WSS, Ma YF et al: Remobilization partially
Med 6:209-212, 1987.
restored the bone mass in a non-growing cancellous bone
 337. Schaffer MB, Bizot P, Lang SM et al: Alterations of bone 
site following long term immobilization, Bone 17:213S-
tissue mechanical properties with immobilization, Proc
217S, 1995.
Orthop Res Soc 40:31-36, 1994.
 355. Kannus P, Jarvinen TLN, Sievanen H et al: Effects of immo-
338. Goethgen CB, Sumner DR, Platz C et al: Changes in tibial
bilization, three forms of remobilization, and subsequent
bone mass after primary cementless and revision cement-
deconditioning on bone mineral content and density in rat
less total hip arthroplasty in canine models, J Orthop Res
femora, J Bone Miner Res 11:1339-1346, 1996.
9(6):820-827, 1991.
356. Kannus P, Sievanen H, Jarvinen TLN et al: Effects of free
339. Boyd SK, Wohl GR, Matyas JR et al: Changes in femoral
mobilization and low-intensity to high-intensity treadmil1
bone minerat density in ACL deficient dogs using quantita
running on the immobilization-induced bone loss in rats,
tive computed tomography. Proceedings of the Third North
J Bone Miner Res 9:1613-1619, 1994.
American Congress on Biomechanics, Canadian Society for
357. Kannus P, Jozsa L, Kvist M et al: Expression of osteocalcin
Biomechanics-American Society of Biomechanics, August
in the patella of experimentally immobilized and remobi-
14, 1998.
lized rats, J Bone Miner Res 11:79-87, 1996.
340. Carter DR, Vasu R, Harris WH: The plated femur: relation-
358. Ju YI, Sone T, Okamoto T, Fukunaga M: Jump exercise
ships between the changes in bone stresses and bone loss,
during remobilization restores integrity of the trabecular
Acta Orthop Scand 52:241-248, 1981.
architecture after tail suspension in young rats, J Appt
341. Leppala J, Kannus P, Nati A et al: Effect of anterior
Physiol 104(6):1594-1600, 2008.
cruciate ligament injury of the knee on bone mineral density
359. Trebacz H, Zdunek A: Three-point bending and acoustic
of the spine and affected lower extremity: a prospective
emission study of adult rat femora after immobilization and
one-year follow-up study, Calcif Tissue Int 64:357-363,
free remobilization, J Biomech 39(2):237-245, 2006.
1999.
360. Trebacz H: Disuse-induced deterioration of bone strength
342. Kannus P, Sievanen H, Jarvinen M et al: A cruciate
is not stopped after free remobilization in young adult rats,
li gament injury produces considerable, permanent osteopo-
Biomech 34(12):1631-1636, 2001.
Tosis in the affected knee, J Bone Miner Res 7: 1429-1434,
 361. Smith EL, Gilligan C: Dose-response relationship between 
1992.
phy sical 1oading and mechanical competence of bone, Bone 
343. Kannus P, Jarvinen M, Sievanen H et al: Reduced bone-
18:45S-50S, 1996.
mineral density in men with a previous femur fracture,
362. Kannus P, Sievanen H, Vuori I: Physical loading, exercise,
J Bone Miner Res 9:1729-1736, 1994.
and bone, Bone 18:1S-3s, 1996.
344. Kannus P, Jarvinen M, Sievanen H et al: Osteoporosis in 
363. Westerlind KC, Fluckey JD, Gordon SE et al: Effect of
men with a history of tibial fracture, J Bone Miner Res
resistance exercise training on cortical and cancellous bone
9:423-429, 1994.
in mature male rats, J Appt Physiot 84:459-464, 1998.
Chapter 7
Responses of Musculoskeletal Tissues to Disuse and Remobilization
153
364. Jarvinen TLN, Kannus P, Sievanen H et al: Randomized
372. Heikkinen E, Vihersaari T, Penttinen R: Effect of previous
controlled study of the effects of sudden impact loading on
exercise on fracture healing: a biochemical study with mice,
rat femur, J Bone Miner Res 13:1475-1482, 1998.
Acta Orthop Scand 45:481-489, 1974.
365. Millis DL, Weigel JP, Gerard DA et al: The effects 
 373. Barry DW, Kohrt WM: Exercise and the preservation of bone
of canine recombinant somatotropin on skeletal tissues
health, J Cardioputm Rehabil Prev 28(3):153-162, 2008.
in an unstable fracture gap model, Vet Surg 27:513,
374. Caywood DD, Wallace LJ, Olson WG et al: Effects of 1
1998.
alpha,25-dihydrox ycholecalciferol on disuse osteoporosis
366. Martin RK, Albright JP, Clarke WR et al: Load-carrying
in the dog: a histomorphometic study, Am J Vet Res 40:89-
effects on the adult beagle tibia, Med Sci Sports Exerc
91, 1979.
13:343-349, 1981.
375. Nakamura T, Nagai Y, Yamato H et al: Regulation of bone
367. Puustjarvi K, Lappalainen R, Niemitukia L et al: Long-
turnover and prevention of bone atrophy in ovariectomized
 distance running alters bone anthropometry, elemental com-
beagle dogs by the administration of 24R,25(OH)2D3,
position and mineral density of young dogs, Scand J Med
Calcif Tissue Int 50:221-227, 1992.
Sci Sports 5:17-23, 1995.
376. Yang Li C, Majeska RJ, Laudier DM et al: High-dose rise-
368. Johnson KA, Skinner GA, Muir P: Site-specific adaptive
dronate treatment partially preserves cancellous bone mass
remodeling of Greyhound metacarpal cortical bone sub-
and microarchitecture during long-term disuse, Bone
jected to asymmetrical cyclic 1oading, Am J Vet Res 62:787-
37(3):287-295, 2005.
793, 2001.
377. Li CY, Price C, Delisser K et al: Long-term disuse osteo-
369. Fedler JM, Albright JP, Martin RK et al: Local skeletal
 porosis seems less sensitive to bisphosphonate treatment
effects of a lifetime of physicat activity in the beagte: meta-
than other osteoporosis, J Bone Miner Res 20(1):117-124,
carpats and metatarsals. Transactions of the 37th Annual
2005.
Meeting of the Orthopaedic Research Society, Chicago,
 378. Delguste C, Amory H, Doucet M et al: Pharmacological
1991.
effects of tiludronate in horses after long-term immobiliza--
 370. Liu CH, McCay CM: Studies of calcium metabolism in
tion, Bone 41(3):414-421, 2007.
dogs, J Gerontot 8:264-271, 1953.
379. Bernard F, Furneaux R, Adrega Da Silva C et al: Treatment
371. Meadows TH, Bronk JT, Chao YS et al: Effect of weight-
with rhBMP-2 of extreme radial bone atrophy secondary to
bearing on healing of cortical defects in the canine tibia,
fracture management in an Italian Greyhound, Vet Comp
J Bone Joint Surg Am 72:1074-1080, 1990.
Orthop Traumatol 21(1):64-68, 2008.
Basics of Exercise Physiology
Robert Gillette and R.Barry Dale
good basic knowledge of exercise physiology is
cellular constituents consist of erythrocytes, leukocytes,
necessary when designing and implementing a
 and platelets. Oxy gen and carbon dioxide (discussed in the
 rehabilitation or conditioning program. The defini-
next section) dissolve to a limited extent in blood plasma.
tion of training, for the purposes of this chapter, refers to
but are largely carried bound to hemoglobin found in
working with the dog in an obedience training program that
erythrocytes.
addresses behavioral aspects, whereas conditioning refers
pue Areuond au on pooq dund on saras jea au
to an exercise or workout program that addresses the ani-
 peripheral circulation. Resting heart rate is approximately
mal's physiologic capacity to perform work. Exercise
 80 beats per minute for a large dog. In response to exer-
physiology is a discipline that examines how exercise
cise, heart rate and myocardial contractility increase, which
affects the body and is applicable in the field of physical
concomitantly increases cardiac output. A large dog typi-
rehabilitation.
cally has increases of 30% for stroke volume, 300% for
 The level of conditioning of a dog constantly changes
heart rate, and approximately 400% for cardiac output
any time the body performs at a specific metabolic level
during vigorous exercise when compared with rest.
 proportionate to its current adaptation to physical stress
(Figure 8-1). The systems of the body are conditioned to
Muscle Physiology
maintain homeostasis at this level. If the demands placed
on the body increase over time, the body adapts and condi-
Muscle is a tissue greatly affected by exercise or disuse
tions itself to maintain homeostasis at this new level. An
associated with injury. Understanding muscle function and
understanding of the physiologic changes involved in this
the molecular events of muscle contraction provides a basis
process helps in the development of programs that allow
for the concepts of physical rehabilitation and exercise
regulation of the conditioning or reconditioning of the
physiology. There are three types of muscle in the body:
body. These programs may be used to condition the entire
skeletal, smooth, and cardiac. Skeletal muscles connect
body or to focus on individual body segments. In physical
one bone to another. Each muscle consists of thousands of
rehabilitation, programs may be developed to treat injuries,
myocytes. A muscle fiber is long, fusiform, and surrounded
to stimulate healing of the injuries, and to enhance recon-
by a plasma membrane called the sarcolemma. Inside these
ditioning of the injured segment. Because of the biome-
fibers are myofibrils, which consist of flaments composed
chanical forces acting on the body during the reparative
of contractile proteins. These contractile proteins are
 arranged in units called sarcome res.
than other segments. Exercise programs should be imple-
Actin and myosin are two types of protein chains in the
mented to remedy any conditioning imbalances of the
sarcomere. They interact as a result of enzymatic and
body. The basic goals should be to allow the tissues to heal,
 chemical reactions to produce muscle contraction. Calcium
then to recondition the tissues so that they can accept pre-
and phosphate are chemical components involved with the
 determined workloads, and finally to recondition the entire
production of muscle contractions. Phosphate is in the
body to balance any conditioning deficits.
form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ATP binds to a
receptor site at the end of the myosin leverage arm. The
Cardiopulmonary Physiology
actin filament includes troponin, which is bound to strands
of tropomyosin. A calcium ion attaches to the troponin
The circulatory system carries various oxygen, substrates,
molecule, which changes the shape of the tropomyosin.
and chemical messengers; removes carbon dioxide and
This action opens a myosin-specific binding site on the
metabolic byproducts; assists with thermoregulation; and
actin protein chain. Energy is emitted when ATP releases
is an important mediator for acid-base balance
Blood consists of fuid and cellular components. Blood
The resultant energy allows the ADP to create a bond
plasma is the liquid portion of blood and consists of water,
between the open binding site on the actin filament and
proteins, electrolytes, dissolved gases, and nutrients. The
the myosin leverage arm. This bond changes the myosin
154
Chapter 8
Basics of Exercise Physiology
155
structure, allowing leverage to produce a contraction
Muscle Structure and Function
between the two fibers. The ADP is released and the lever
 anm is freed. Energy is then required to add a phosphate
The innervation to a muscle controls the muscle contrac-
group to the ADP, re-creating ATP, which is then used for
tion by directing an action potential along an efferent
further contractions (Figure 8-2). The accumulated con-
motor neuron. A single motor nerve diverges to innervate
tractions of the muscle fibers create contraction of an entire
 many muscle fibers. The combination of a nerve and the
muscle.
muscle fiber it innervates is called a motor unit. Contrac-
tion of an entire muscle is a result of the cumulative con-
 traction of many motor units.
 The muscle fibers are grouped together and organized
with other fibers by a sheath of connective tissue that is
named according to its level of organization. Endomysium
covers each of the muscle fibers themselves, and perimy-
sium separates discrete bundles of fibers. Epimysium is the
connective tissue layer that surrounds the grouped bundles.
 These three layers of connective tissue are longitudinally
Work
continuous throughout the muscle belly and blend together
capacity
 at each end with the proximal and distal tendons. Muscle
fascia is the sheath that covers the epimysium and serves
 to protect each muscle from movement over hard structures
 or movement from adjacent muscles. The arrangement of
these fibers plays a role in the function of each muscle. It
Time
 is the combination of motor unit group, the characteristics
of the muscle fibers, and fiber arrangement that dictates the
Figure 8-1  Work capacity increases when physical stress increases
resultant type of muscular function (strength, power, or
and adequate time allows for adaptation.
endurance).
Thin Filament
The bound ATP is
 cleaved to ADP and P
which remain associated
ATP
with the myosin head
ADP
Myosin head
Reversible
State 1
Thick Filament
State 2
ADP is released
The myosin head
and a new ATP
ATP
binds to the myosin
releases the
ADP
phosphate and
head, causing it 
binds tightly to the
to detach from
actin filamant
actin
 The myosin head 
ADP
undergoes a large
ADP
conformational change,
the power stroke
State 4
State 3
Figure 8-2 Actin and myosin interaction during contraction. ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; P phosphate.
156
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
In general, muscle contraction and work are transferred
glycolytic metabolism. Energy from this system lasts any-
through the tendon and its attachment to a bone. The mus-
where from 5 to 10 seconds with high-intensity exercise
culotendinous junction is a layered transition between
 and occasionally up to 20 seconds in some elite athletes.
muscle fibers and the collagen of the tendons. Tendons of
The glycolytic pathway provides energy from 5 to 20
origin and insertion may run throughout the length of the
seconds up to 2 minutes as a result of the anaerobic break-
structure. Musculotendinous structures are closely tied to
down of glucose. This is a more complex form of energy
functional requirements. Structural shapes of muscle
production, using multiple enzymes and reactions. In the
include fusiform and pennate forms. Pennate muscles may
first phase of glycolysis, a glucose molecule enters the cell
be divided into unipennate, bipennate, and multipennate
where the enzyme hexokinase adds a phosphate group to
forms. Pennate structures allow a muscle to lift great loads
the glucose molecule, which creates glucose 6-phosphate
but through a small range of motion, such as in vertebrae.
(G6P). G6P then enters a series of reactions to produce
Fusiform structures have the ability to lift a small load at
fructose 1,6-biphosphate. One of the reactions involves the
a great velocity through a large range of motion. These
enzyme phosphofructokinase, which adds another phos-
types of muscles include the biceps brachi and brachialis
phate to the molecule. As a result, two ATP molecules are
muscles in the antebrachium. These two forms of muscle
used in phase 1. In the first reaction of the second phase
of the glycolytic pathway, fructose 1,6-biphosphate is con-
movement are needed in a particular joint, such as the
verted into two three-carbon molecules. Glyceraldehyde
shoulder or hip joint.
3-phosphate is then phosphorylated and oxidized, which
releases two hydrogen molecules and two electrons. The
Muscle Energy Systems
two electrons and one hydrogen molecule combine with
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) to form NADH,
Muscles require energy to maintain basal metabolism and
which can be used in oxidative metabolism. The four
additional energy during physical activity. The body uses
remaining reactions of phase 2 result in the production of
three systems to provide this energy: (1) immediate energy
two ATPs. Combined with two ATPs from the other three-
sources, (2) glycolytic metabolism, and (3) oxidative
carbon chain, this results in a total of four ATPs produced
metabolism. The type of activity the muscle is performing
 in phase 2. The net result of the glycolytic pathway is the
determines which of the systems will be used. The cellular
 production of pyruvate and two ATPs that may be used as
 environment must also be conducive to these processes.
energy (Figure 8-3).
Factors affecting the cellular environment include pH,
 If the pyruvate is not able to enter the oxidative energy
hydration status, temperature, and presence of the proper
system, it combines with NADH via the enzyme lactate
enzymes. Changes in any of these factors may alter the
 dehydrogenase to produce lactic acid. When released into
reactions needed for energy production. While energy pro-
an environment with physiologic pH, lactic acid releases a
 duction is occuring, metabolic byproducts are simultane-
proton and becomes lactate. Without a buffer, lactate pro-
 Ously produced. Byproduct removal is essential, because
duction results in a decrease in cellular pH. Lactate produc-
local accumulation of these substances alters the cellular
tion in itself is not necessarily detrimental to muscle
environment.
The immediate energy source involves intracellular
ATP, creatine phosphate (CP), and the ADP-myokinase
reaction to provide energy for activity. Intracellular ATP is
the frst energy source used for contraction. A limited
Glucose 
amount of ATP is stored at the myosin crossbridges, near
mitochondria, and beneath sarcolemma. ATP breakdown is
ATP
ADP
a hydrolytic reaction and is highly regulated. The body
Glucose-6-phosphate
does not allow large changes in ATP content. CP is a high-
ATP
energy compound used to ensure that the ATP concentra-
ADP
 Fructose-1,6-phosphate
tion does not become depleted. It is located near the
actin-myosin filaments and in the mitochondrial mem-
Glyceraldehyde
 Glyceraldehyde
brane. The CP molecule donates a phosphate group to ADP
phosphate
phosphate
to replenish the ATP used at the contraction site. The third
NADH
NADH
 immediate energy source comes from the myokinase reac-
2 ATPs
2 ATPs
tion. Myokinase is the enzyme that allows two ADP
 Pyruvate
Pyruvate
molecules to combine to fonm ATP and adenosine mono-
phosphate (AMP). This reaction provides little energy to
Figure 8-3  Glycolytic pathway with production of pyruvate and
the system, but AMP serves as one of the allosteric modu-
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; NADH,
lators to stimulate carbohydrate (glucose) breakdown in
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, reduced.
Chapter 8
Basics of Exercise Physiology
157
metabolism. After bouts of intense exercise, lactate is oxi-
produce, transport, and use this energy in the location where
dized back to pyruvate, which can be converted to glucose
it is required. Homeostatic metabolism is associated with
in the liver, or converted to pyruvate in muscle and other
 normal daily needs and allows the body to function properly
tissues for ATP production. Lactate concentrations coincide
throughout the day. If a short-term stress is placed on the
with the release of a proton and potential decreases in pH. It
system, the body is able to adapt, within reason, to meet this
is this decrease in cell and blood pH that has detrimental
altered demand. If the stress is repeated on a daily basis, the
effects on energy metabolism and enzyme activity. There-
 daily routine is altered and the energy systems are condi-
fore, although associated with the release of protons, the
tioned to meet these new demands. Workout repetition
lactate itself is not a problem, but the associated acidosis is.
results in adaptation to meet these demands, including
The third energy source comes from oxidative metabo-
"aa) paau isaeae jo ugeoo aun ne sanos Araua suod
lism, which predominates approximately 2 minutes after
imtracellular ATP, CP, and glucose). The concentrations of
the beginning of exercise. It is the most complicated energy
enzymes required by the specific energy systems used the
system and uses glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the
most may also increase. Workout repetition conditions the
electron transport chain. Each of these are complex mul-
body to the stresses of the new demands and minimizes
tiple reaction cascades that result in the production of ATP
the chances of systemic or cellular injury.
and energy. Carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins are used as
 The muscle response to different types of conditioning
energy sources, and this is the system used to the greatest
 programs is determined by the muscle fiber type. The fiber 
extent during long-tenm activity. Pyruvate is converted to
types are divided into type I (slow-twitch) and type II (fast-
acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) by the enzyme pyruvate dehy-
twitch) muscle fibers. Type I muscle fibers are fatigue
 drogenase, which also produces carbon dioxide and NADH.
resistant, use aerobic metabolism, and have a low contrac-
Free fatty acids are converted to acetyl-CoA by a process
tile force and less ATPase activity. Type II fibers are
called β-oxidation. The resultant acetyl-CoA then enters
subdivided by their metabolic characteristics: type IIa (oxi-
the citric acid cycle. The products of this cycle are carbon
dative) and type IIb (glycolytic) fibers. Type Ia muscle
dioxide, ATP, NADH, and favin adenine dinucleotide,
fibers use both the oxidative energy system (aerobic metab-
reduced (FADH).
olism) and the glycolytic energy system (anaerobic metab-
Oxygen is used in the electron transport chain. The
olism). They may be trained to use one system preferentially
electrons acquired in NADH and FADH are added to hydro-
according to the demands placed on them. Type Ib fibers
gen atoms and oxygen atoms to fonm water, along with
primarily use the glycolytic system (anaerobic metabo-
energy to create ATP from ADP. The last electron receiver
lism), although there is some disagreement over whether
in the chain is oxygen. This process is termed oxidative
dogs have true type IIb muscle fibers as compared with
phosphorylation. Three ATPs are produced for each NADH
 other species ?4 These fbers are generally termed type II
molecule, and two for each FADH molecule. If oxygen is
 Dog. Other intermediate fiber types have also been reported.
not present to receive the electrons that fow down the chain,
 Some change in muscle fiber composition may occur with
the chain stops, and the result is an accumulation of the
exercise and conditioning.
components of the electron transport chain and the systems
How a dog responds to a conditioning program may
that produce them, halting energy production.
be affected by its fiber type composition. The type I/type
 In a rehabilitation program, the conditioning program
 II ratio of the muscle fiber types in a particular muscle
 places energy demands on the muscles. The energy systems
is genetically predetermined, although some change in
used depend on the forces required by the program and the
muscle fber composition may occur with specific condi-
duration of the workout. If the energy systems are insuffcient
tioning.6 Greyhounds bred for sprint activity tend to have
to meet the demands required, the program will not benefit
 a greater percentage of type II fibers than other breeds.
the patient and may actually harm the rehabilitative process.
whereas foxhounds, which are bred for endurance, have a
An understanding of muscle physiology will help in design-
 greater percentage of type I fibers.
 ing a conditioning program that is beneficial to the patient.
 In addition to genetic determination, the distribution of
fiber types throughout the body and within individual
Musculoskeletal Conditioning
muscles depends on the muscle's function. A higher per-
 centage of type I fbers populate the muscles responsible
When the body performs at a level greater than its normal
for maintaining posture, whereas a higher percentage of
daily routine, there is a greater demand for energy. The
type II fibers are present in muscles responsible for speed
    d o   p 
and power.? Altering the muscle function can change the
of need, and at the same time maintain homeostasis. There-
fiber type. Muscle fiber type changes have been produced
fore the fuel resources must be sufficient to meet this demand
by tenotomy, tendon transfers, and altered training.
and be available to the body. In other words, energy must
Knowing the breed of dog and the anatomic area of focus
be stored in the body to perform physical activity, and the
 helps determine the type of conditioning program that will
body's energy systems must be conditioned to efficiently
be most beneficial for the patient.
158
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
There are two general categories of conditioning pro-
from physical activity require that the animal employ heat
grams: strength-power programs and endurance programs.
loss mechanisms to maintain homeostasis. Heat transfer
In human exercise physiology, endurance events usually
mechanisms for gain or loss include conduction, convec-
last longer than 2 to 4 minutes and are performed at intensi-
tion, and radiation. Evaporation is solely a heat loss mecha-
ties of 90% or less of maximal aerobic power (Vozmax).
nism, and dogs rely almost exclusively on panting for heat
Strength-power events are of short duration (<2 minutes)
loss, especially when ambient temperatures are high. This
and are performed at intensities that are max imal or supra-
is because canine sweat glands are poorly developed and
 maximal.0 The metabolic changes that occur during a con-
largely nonfunctional. Fluid loss from panting can be sub-
ditioning program depend on the principles of intensity,
stantial; thus proper hydration is paramount. Cold environ-
 duration, frequency, and method of training. The program
ments require the dog to produce more heat via catabolism
should incorporate these principles to result in proper
while conserving heat loss with peripheral vasoconstriction
system and organ adaptation.
and countercurrent heat exchange.
Central and peripheral physiologic changes occur
because of conditioning. Central changes include altera-
Tissue Injury
tions to the cardiovascular, pulmonary, and endocrine
systems. Peripheral changes occur in the musculoskeletal
 Injury of musculoskeletal tissues may occur when a sudden
system. The conditioning program chosen should be spe-
stress occurs that is too great for the body to overcome, or
cific to the type of activity the dog will be performing.
when chronic stresses are greater than the ability of the
Short-duration, maximal-intensity workouts are recom-
body to repair itself. This may occur in any of the muscu-
mended if the purpose of the program is to increase strength.
loskeletal tissues, but the type and location of injury depend
This type of program affects peripheral conditioning more
on the forces and the direction of the forces that cause the
than central conditioning. If an increase in speed is the goal,
injury. For example, a sudden high-energy force exerted on
the conditioning program should include sprint workouts at
a bone may cause a fracture, whereas chronic prolonged
maximal intensity. Workouts that include exercises for the
stresses may result in periostitis or stress fractures of the
spinal muscles should be included, because it has been theo-
bone. These are examples of bone injuries, but similar
rized that the spinal muscles are the first to fatigue during
stresses may also affect muscle, tendon, ligaments, or
synovial tissue.
condition the spinal muscles. Running with resistance helps
After injury occurs, the body adapts and the dog alters
build body strength. Running with a hamess and pulling
its movements according to limitations as a result of the
weights is an example of resistance running. In a strength
injury. If pain is involved, gait is altered to minimize
program, the most important change to the muscles is amn
painful movement while allowing locomotion.1s.16 Injury
increase in cross-sectional area because of increased myofi-
also changes structure, which alters how forces are received
brillar protein content. In addition, there is an increase in
by the body.1718 As the altered movement continues, the
muscle resting glycogen and muscle buffering capacity.
musculoskeletal system adapts to produce movement with
If the purpose of the program is to increase endurance,
minimal abnormal stress on the system.'9 However, the
long-duration workouts of submaximal intensity are rec-
altered movement may create additional abnormal stresses
 ommended. Examples are distance running or swimming.
that may lead to secondary and sometimes tertiary injuries
An endurance conditioning program may also include
at locations other than the initial insult.
some strength activities. Endurance conditioning improves
 The altered movement and forces resulting from a mus-
aerobic capacity to provide energy and conditions the mus-
culoskeletal insult should be addressed early before further
culoskeletal system to use energy more efficiently. In
injury occurs. The tissues involved should be determined
humans, changes occurring in the cardiovascular system
by a proper diagnostic workup; then a treatment program
include increased stroke volume and cardiac output.2
that addresses the pain and altered structure is initiated. A
Pulmonary changes include an improved ventilation-to-
physical rehabilitation regimen should be implemented
perfusion ratio, tidal volume, and alveolar and arterial
soon after medical treatment is initiated for the initial
 r so audad e uax go sanssaid d
injury to prevent biomechanical alterations that may result
in skeletal muscle are improved capillary density, glyco-
 in secondary problems. Secondary injuries complicate the
lytic and oxidative enzyme activity, and lactate transport
 rehabilitative process and may prolong the recovery time.
 and clearance.14
 Further injury may also occur during healing and reha-
bilitation. If the rehabilitation program places too much
Environmental Considerations
stress on the healing tissue, tissue healing may be impaired
with Conditioning
and the tissue may be reinjured. For this reason, retum to
Dogs are homeotherms that maintain a normal body tem-
normal function should be delayed until the original tissue
perature between 37.9-39.9°C. Environmental tempera-
insult has healed to a point that it can withstand normal
tures that exceed body temperature and metabolic heat gain
activity. A properly managed rehabilitation program should
Chapter 8
Basics of Exercise Physiology
159
minimize the time of restricted activity without creating
of the injured segment during healing and not cause further
further injury.
damage. The secondary goal is to retum the tissues of the
 affected segment to normal strength and character after
Disuse and Immobilization
injury and therapy. The third goal is to recondition the entire
body to increase strength, coordination, and endurance to
Following injury and rest, the body adapts to decondition-
balance any secondary biomechanical disturbances that 
ing, with changes occurring as a result of disuse or immo-
 developed during injury and recovery.
bilization. Disuse refers to the state in which the segment
The goal of maintaining condition of the ligaments,
is not used as a result of injury or dysfunction. Immobiliza-
tendons, and cartilage may be achieved to some extent by
tion occurs when a limb is maintained in a fixed position
passive range of motion. These tissues maintain their
by splints, casts, or extermal fixation. Both of these states
strength or conditioning level by mechanical action or
result in disuse atrophy, which has effects on muscle, bone,
movement, and by the forces placed on them. Bone depends
ligaments,tendon, and cartilage 2021 Coincidently, many of
more on loading forces and less on mechanical action and
the adverse effects associated with aging are a result of
motion. Muscle requires active contractions to preserve
 progressive reduction of physical activity.
tissue strength. In most instances, bone and muscle tissue
 Disuse atrophy of muscle results in decreased circum-
are most affected during healing and rehabilitation.
ference and muscle fiber size. Type I muscle fibers are
After sufficient healing has occurred, the next step is to
more affected than type II fibers, with a decrease in overall
return strength to the involved tissues. The conditioning
muscle strength. Muscle atrophy and weakness from
 program should emphasize strengthening exercises. Before
immobilization occur quickly, and appear to affect anti-
any reconditioning program is begun, the level of strength
gravity muscles to a greater extent initially. Because of the
should be determined, and therapeutic goals should be set
decrease in strength and endurance, there is increased
 by the clinician and owner. The reconditioning program
stress on the affected joints, abnormal movement, and an
should then be designed to achieve these goals.
 increased risk of injury.
There are three types of strengthening exercises: iso-
Bone responds with an increase in bone resorption and
metric, isokinetic, and isotonic. Isometric exercises involve
perhaps decreased bone deposition and is guided by the
muscle contraction without movement. This type of exer-
extermal forces exerted on the bone. Immobilization also
cise is difficult to achieve in dogs. Isokinetic exercises
decreases loads on ligaments. Ligament mass decreases
after just a few weeks of immobilization so that after 6 to
Because of the equipment needed to perform this form of
9 weeks of immobilization, the ligament complexes are
exercise, it has not been used in canine rehabilitation. Iso-
 only approximately 50% as strong as normal controls.223
tonic exercises involve forces of varying magnitude applied
Tendons behave in a similar manner, with alterations in the
throughout the range of motion and is the most common
balance of collagen synthesis and degradation. Articular
form of exercise in dogs.
cartilage also responds by atrophy and thinning of the
Isotonic exercise involves the muscle contracting while
surface layer of cartilage. If the joint is immobilized in a
it shortens (concentric) or the muscle contracting while it
weight-bearing position, changes similar to those that
 lengthens (eccentric) while it is loaded throughout a range
Occur with osteoarthritis may develop.
 Of motion. Loading the muscle stimulates strength gains.
Immobilization may nevertheless be indicated as part of
The effort should be high-intensity submaximal loading.
the initial treatment of many musculoskeletal injuries to
Strength gain in reconditioning is similar to that of a
allow an adequate healing environment, in spite of the
regular strength program, except that the initial condition-
changes that may occur with disuse and immobilization.
ing status of the tissue is less than normal. Exercises should
 The detrimental effects of immobilization should be consid-
 be focused on strengthening the limb that is most affected
ered in designing the treatment protocol because the recov-
by the injury, taking care to avoid overloading the healing
 ery patterm is related to the duration of immobilization.
tissues to avoid further damage.
As rehabilitation progresses, the focus shifts from local-
Reconditioning
ized exercise to overall body conditioning. This includes
strength workouts balanced with endurance workouts. The
A reconditioning program should address aspects of tissue
strength portion of the program may still be focused on the
 healing, musculoskeletal physiology, and joint anatomy. It 
areas of weakness, and the endurance portion can act on
must include not only the injured area, but also the entire
the entire body.
body. Nutrition, psychological aspects, and the effects of 
tissue injury on the body must also be considered. The goals
Nutrition
should be to maximize healing of injured tissue and mini-
mize degradation of healthy tissue. The primary long-term
An important component of any conditioning program
goal of rehabilitation is to maintain the physical condition
is nutrition.  Nutritional needs change throughout the
160
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
detrimental effects of injury to the healthy tissues and the
Caloric
entire body. As healing progresses, the program should
expenditure
recondition and strengthen the tissues that are affected by
mjury. It should also provide nutrients to allow proper
healing and be designed to consider the psychological
Caloric
aspects of rehabilitation. An understanding of exercise
intake
physiology is necessary to design and implement rehabilita-
Figure 8-4  Caloric balance depends on intake and expenditure.
tive programs that aid tissue healing and recovery of the
Body mass is maintained when intake equals expenditure.
patient.
treatment and time of rehabilitation. Initially, there is a
REFERENCES
decrease in energy use by the patient. This should be
1. Cunningham J: Textbook of veterinary physiology, Philadel-
addressed to keep the patient from becoming overweight
phia, 1997, WB Saunders.
during rehabilitation. After reconditioning begins, nutri-
 2. Braund KG, Hoff EJ, Richardson EY: Histochemical identi-
tional components may be added to allow for the nutri-
fication of fiber types in canine skeletal muscle, Am J Vet Res 
39:561-565, 1978.
tional demands of increased physical activity. The basic
3. Rivero JL, Diz A, Toledo M et al: Enzyme-histochemical
feeding program should provide for the basic nutritional
profles of fber types in mature canine appendicular muscles,
needs of the patient. The content of protein, carbohydrate,
Anat Histol Embryol 23:330-336, 1994.
and fat in the feeding program is determined by the type
4. Snow DH, Billeter R, Mascarello F et al: No classical type
of conditioning. For example, dogs that are performing
IIB fbres in dog skeletal muscle, Histochemistry 75:53-65,
strength workouts use the immediate and glycolytic energy
1982.
systems. Therefore they may require a lower percentage of
5. Latorre R, Gil F, Vazquez JM et al: Skeletal muscle fbre
fat in their diets. Caloric balance is the ultimate consider-
types in the dog, J Anat 182(Pt 3):329-337, 1993.
ation for diet in dogs (Figure 8-4). If caloric expenditure
 6. Rosenblatt JD, Kuzon WM, Jt., Pynn BR et al: Fiber type,
exceeds caloric intake, then energy will come from various
fiber size, and capillary geometric features of the semitendi-
nosus muscle in three types of dogs, Am J Vet Res 49:1573-
deposits within the body, including stored fat, glycogen,
1576, 1988
and muscle, and body mass will decrease. Conversely,
7. Newsholme SJ, Lexell J, Downham DY: Distribution of fibre
excessive caloric intake and inadequate energy expenditure
types and fibre sizes in the tibialis cranialis muscle of beagle
is associated with energy storage as glycogen or fat, and
dogs, J Anat 160:1-8, 1988.
increased body mass.
 8. Castle ME, Reyman TA: The effect of tenotomy and tendon
Body mass varies greatly across the variety of dog
transfers on muscle fiber types in the dog, Clin Orthop Relat
breeds. Body composition may vary with breed, but largely
Res 186:302-310, 1984.
 depends on age. Metabolic rate adjusted for body mass may
 9. Puustjarvi K, Tammi M, Reinikainen M et al: Running train-
ing alters fiber type composition in spinal muscles, Eur Spine
it appears that canine resting metabolic rate (RMR) declines 
J 3:17-21, 1994
 au yo -au aay sea g o  pae s ae yim
10. Potteiger J: Principles of applied exercise physiology and
 of dogs aged 1 to 2 years.24 These factors underscore the
training. Seventh Annual Central Veterinary Conference,
Kansas City, MO, 1995.
importance of a lifetime of physical activity, which stimu-
11. Zebas C: Selected kinematic differences in the running gait
lates the various physiologic systems and maintains a
of the greyhound athlete during the beginning and end of
healthy weight when in balance with caloric intake.
the race. In Tant C, Patterson P, York S, eds: Biomechanics
Supplemental feeding should be timed to benefit condi-
in sport IX, Ames, 1991, Iowa State University.
tioning. An important feeding strategy is to provide a post-
12. Hartley L: Cardiac function and endurance. In Shepard R,
workout snack. This is the optimal time to replenish
Astrand P, eds: Endurance in sport, Oxford, 1992, Blackwell
nutrients that become depleted during the workout. Imme-
Scientific.
diately after the workout, the body is devoted to replenish-
 13. Dempsey J, Manohar M: The pulmonary system and endur-
ing the deficits of the energy systems. Feeding a snack
ance. In Shepard R, Astrand P, eds: Endurance in sport,
 during this time promotes replenishment of the deficient
Oxford, 1992, Blackwell Scientific.
14. Wells C, Pate R: Training for performance of prolonged
nutrients. This snack should consist of simple carbohy-
exercise. In Lamb D, Murray R, eds: Perspectives in exercise
drates, a meat protein source, calcium, and phosphorus.
science and sports medicine, Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada,
1988, Benchmark.
Summary
15. Dueland R, Bartel DL, Antonson E: Force plate technique
for canine gait analysis: preliminary report on total hip and
A proper conditioning program provides a good healing
excision arthroplasty [proceedings], Bult Hosp Joint Dis
environment for injured tissues. It should minimize the
38:35-36, 1977.
Chapter 8
Basics of Exercise Physiology
161
16. Rumph PF, Kincaid SA, Baird DK et al: Vertical ground
 21. Shires PK, Braund KG, Milton JL et al: Effect of localized
reaction force distribution during experimentally induced
trauma and temporary splinting on immature skeletal muscle
acute synovitis in dogs, Am J Vet Res 54:365-369, 1993.
 and mobility of the femorotibial joint in the dog, Am J Vet 
17. De Camp CE, Riggs CM, Olivier NB et al: Kinematic evalu-
Res 43:454-460, 1982.
ation of gait in dogs with cranial cruciate ligament rupture,
 22. Noyes FR: Functional properties of knee ligaments and alter-
Am J Vet Res 57:120-126, 1996.
 ations induced by immobilization: a correlative biomechani-
18. Bennett RL, De Camp CE, Flo GL et al: Kinematic gait
cal and histological study in primates, Clin Orthop Relat Res 
analysis in dogs with hip dysplasia, Am J Vet Res 57:966-971,
123:210-242, 1977.
1996.
 23. Woo SL, Gomez MA, Sites TJ et al: The biomechanical and
19. Rumph PF, Kincaid SA, Visco DM et al: Redistribution of
 morphological changes in the medial collateral ligament of
vertical ground reaction force in dogs with experimentally
the rabbit after immobilization and remobilization, J Bone 
induced chronic hindlimb lameness, Vet Surg 24:384-389,
Joint Surg Am 69:1200-1211, 1987.
1995.
 24. Speakman JR, van Acker A, Harper EJ: Age-related changes
 20. Lieber RL, Friden JO, Hargens AR et al: Differential response
in the metabolism and body composition of three dog breeds
of the dog quadriceps muscle to external skeletal fixation of
and their relationship to life expectancy, Aging Cell 2:265-
the knee, Muscle Nerve 11:193-201, 1988.
275, 2003.
Exercise Physiology of the
Canine Athlete
Ralph Millard
 xercise physiology is the study of the effects of
fiber. Each muscle fiber contains several hundred to several
exercise and training on normal functions of the
thousand myofibrils. Myofibrils are composed of contrac-
body. When implementing a rehabilitative exercise
tile protein filaments called myosin (thick filaments) and
or a conditioning program it is important to have a thorough
actin (thin filaments). Myofibrils are divided into segments
understanding of normal and abnormal physiologic func-
called sarcomeres, each of which lies between two Z discs
tions of the body. Sufficient knowledge of physiologic func-
(filamentous protein different from actin and myosin).
tions of the body increases understanding of the body's
From each Z disc actin filaments extend in both directions
response to exercise and allows one to maximize the effec-
to interdigitate with myosin filaments.
tiveness of a rehabilitative program. Exercise has many pro-
Contraction of a muscle fiber is first initiated by an
found effects on the musculoskeletal system. There is a vast
action potential, which starts at the central nervous system,
amount of coordination and integration of individual body
travels down an alpha motoneuron to its own axon and the
systems, and, although exercise programs and our rehabili-
neuromuscular junction. The action potential causes a large
tative efforts mainly focus on improving the function of the
infux of calcium ions through calcium channels. The
musculoskeletal system, it is important to understand the
calcium infux results in the release of acetylcholine into
response of other major body systems to the influence of
the extracellular space between the motoneuron and the
exercise. Physical rehabilitation is typically used to treat or
neuromuscular junction of the muscle fber. The acetyl-
condition areas of the body that are injured or are suffering
choline then activates nicotinic acetylcholine receptors,
from abnormal function. Because there may be limitations 
opening sodium-potassium channels, triggering an action
during healing of an injury, one should understand the
potential. The action potential travels along a muscle
body's limitations during injury as well as compensatory
fiber's T-tubule network, depolarizing the muscle mem-
 methods used by the body. A good general understanding
brane. The action potential causes the sarcoplasmic reticu-
 of physiology is very beneficial to the clinician performing
lum to release large quantities of calcium into the
rehabilitation, in designing a rehabilitation program and
cytoplasm. A protein called tropomyosin is associated with
understanding how exercise and training affect the body.
each actin filament. In a resting state tropomyosin covers
the active sites on the actin filaments so that attraction
Skeletal Muscle
between an actin and myosin filament cannot occur and
cause contraction. Calcium released from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum binds to a protein called troponin, which causes
Muscle Physiology
 the tropomyosin to shift positions and uncover the binding
Skeletal muscle plays a large role in exercise and determin-
 site between actin and the cross bridge portion of myosin
ing athletic performance, and it is important to understand
filaments. Prior to binding of actin and a myosin cross
its structure and function. The muscular system is a col-
bridge, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) bound to myosin is
lection of contractile units that provide the forces for
cleaved; however, the adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and
various functions to take place such as locomotion, posture,
phosphate ion remain bound to the cross bridge. When the
respiration, and circulation. The three types of muscle in
myosin head portion of the cross bridge bonds with the
the body are skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscle. This
active site on the actin filament, a conformational change
section focuses on skeletal muscle physiology.
is created, causing a power stroke or pulling of the actin
The functional unit of skeletal muscle is the muscle
filament. The previously cleaved ATP supplies the energy
fiber, or myofiber (Figure 9-1). Most skeletal muscles
for a power stroke. After the power stroke has been com-
contain muscle fbers that span the entire length of the
pleted, the ADP and phosphate ion are released from the
muscle, cross over at least one joint, and are typically
myosin head, allowing for binding of a new ATP molecule.
innervated by only one alpha motor neuron. The sarco-
The binding of a new ATP molecule causes detachment of
lemma is the cell membrane that surrounds each muscle
the myosin head from the actin filament. The ATP is then
162
Chapter 9
Exercise Physiology of the Canine Athlete
163
Muscle belly
Fiber bundle
Muscle fiber
Myofibril
A band
Z disc
Mline
Z disc
Myofibril
Hzone
Sarcomere
Figure 9-1  Skeletal muscle diagram.
cleaved to begin a new power stroke. This process is
fibers (I, IA, and IX) and two hybrid fibers (I+IIA and
repeated again and again to contract a muscle.
IIAX).3 The oxidative/glycolytic ratio of canine muscle
Skeletal muscle cells are classified into types based on
fibers decreases from type I (highest) to IX (lowest). Type
the specific individual contractile and metabolic properties
IIA is intermediate, with both hybrids between their respec-
 of each cell. A general classification scheme divides muscle
tive pure isoforms. The decrease in oxidative potential
fibers based on their speed of contraction, which is a result
from type I to type IIX is three to four times less than other
of their contractile and metabolic properties. Generally
 mammals, which is another finding supporting the superior
speaking, muscle fibers are considered to be either slow
oxidative capacity of canine skeletal muscle. Even the least
twitch (type I) or fast twitch (type II). Type I fbers contain
oxidative muscle fibers in dogs have a substantial capabil-
higher levels of oxidative enzymes, myoglobin, and mito-
ity for aerobic metabolism compared with fast fibers of
chondria, and are well suited to perform aerobic activities
other species. The maximum shortening velocity of canine
and resist fatigue. Type II fibers have smaller amounts
muscle fibers increases from type I (slowest) to type IX
of oxidative enzymes and limited aerobic capabilities.
(fastest).3
However, type II fibers have large amounts of glycolytic
enzymes for anaerobic metabolism and are capable of gen-
Muscle Fatigue
erating higher levels of tension and shortening velocity, but
Contraction of skeletal muscle at some rates required for
are much less resistant to fatigue than type I fibers.
exercise cannot continue indefinitely. When a muscle is
Dogs are rather unique in that, along with the aerobic
unable to maintain power output during contraction, it has
abilities of slow twitch fbers, their fast fibers also have
reached the point of fatigue. There are several explanations
significant oxidative capabilities. In fact, there is signif-
for the cause of fatigue. One controversial explanation is
cant evidence that suggests an absence of purely glycolytic
that fatigue can originate from the central nervous system
muscle fibers in the skeletal muscle of the trunk and limbs
(CNS), possibly because of psychological factors that can
of dogs. It has been suggested that the only location of 
either enhance or limit performance. Dogs may serve as a
type IIB muscle fibers in dogs is in laryngeal muscles.1- It 
good example for this theory because the personality of
is believed that previous studies that relied on immuno-
certain breeds of dogs might allow them to continue to
staining alone have resulted in misclassification of muscle
exercise beyond the point that other breeds or species
fibers. Newer studies have implemented electrophoresis,
would continue. The drive to run or retrieve might allow
immunoblots, immunohistochemistry, and image analysis
some dogs to continue to participate in intense physical
to characterize canine muscle fibers..3
activity despite obvious exhaustion, simply as the result of
Currently, five major fiber types are described in the
verbal encouragement, whereas other breeds or species
trunk and limb muscles of dogs, which include three pure
would not continue regardless of the stimulus. The
164
Section ll
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
evidence on CNS involvement in fatigue is unclear and
 s re a   n 
unproven.
 energy metabolism.? The high-fat, high-protein diet of sled
However, there are several changes at the cellular level
dogs can help preserve muscle glycogen stores during
of skeletal muscle that result in fatigue during exercise.
exercise. Evaluation of fasted rats subjected to several
Fatigue is mainly an imbalance between ATP requirements
bouts of repeated exercise showed similar results of muscle
by muscle and the ability to produce ATP. During exercise,
glycogen preservation, suggesting that metabolic adjust-
the need for ATP by skeletal muscle dramatically increases.
ments allow certain species, such as dogs, to preserve
As the components needed to regenerate ATP levels
muscle glycogen stores during bouts of repeated exercise.
become depleted, there is less ATP available to provide
There may be a critical concentration of muscle glycogen
energy for sustained muscle contraction, resulting in an
that the body protects against excessive consumption
inability to exercise or perform at the same level or rate
during repeated exercise. Compared with humans, condi-
as before. Phosphate is one of the components needed for
tioned canine athletes may have an advantage regarding
formation of ATP. When ATP formation cannot keep up
 prolonged exercise based on their highly aerobic metabo-
with ATP consumption, excessive inorganic phosphate ions
lism and ability to use altermative substrates for energy and
accumulate in the muscle cell. High concentrations of
maintenance of muscle glycogen stores.
phosphate ions can directly interfere with cross bridging
Conditioning and Training of
of actin and myosin, as well as inhibit calcium release
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.4 Lactic acid (lactate) is
Skeletal Muscle
 Conditioning of skeletal muscle involves performing phys-
colytic pathway. Lactate is formed during conditions of 
ical exercise that prepares muscle for the specific task that
inadequate oxygen supply to muscle or by muscle fibers
it will be asked to perform. Training pertains to incorporat-
with low numbers of mitochondria. Accumulation of lactic
 ing the specific exercise into the type of sporting event or
acid as a result of anaerobic metabolism within muscle
activity the dog will be involved in. A portion of training
cells can also inhibit enzymes involved in production
also involves behavior modification required to perfonm
of ATP.
the specific activity. During exercise training athletes are
Glycogen is an important energy source used during
frequently pushed to perform an activity until physically
exercise. Depletion of muscle glycogen is a critical factor
unable to continue. This is commonly termed the overload
 associated with fatigue in elite athletes during prolonged
principle, which refers to the need for a system to be exer-
periods of exercise.6 Sled dogs are a good example of an
cised to a level beyond that which it is accustomed for
elite endurance athlete. High-endurance canne athletes can
training to have an effect. Placing the system in an over-
have a remarkable ability to maintain muscle glycogen
loaded state causes it to adapt to new conditions, thereby
concentrations during periods of prolonged exercise.
improving a system's ability to perform a task at a higher
Despite limited carbohydrate intake, sled dogs running
 level of performance. This principle applies to the cardio-
160 km (99.4 miles) per day for 5 consecutive days did not
vascular system, the musculoskeletal system, and other
develop cumulative muscle glycogen depletion.7. On the 
body systems. Factors that infuence overload include
first day of exercise there was a decrease in muscle glyco-
intensity, duration, and frequency of a particular exercise.
gen content; however, each of the subsequent periods of
Most types of exercise training can be divided into either
exercise resulted in stable muscle glycogen content, which
endurance or strength training activities. It is important that
was greater than the content after the frst day. It has been
 training uses the systems and structures involved in the
determined that muscle glycogen preservation in high-
activity. This is a training principle called specificity. For
endurance athletes, such as sled dogs, occurs as a result of
example, a dog that competes in a sport that requires
 attenuation of depletion rather than rapid replenishment.
 pulling loads would be better served to run while pulling
During the first portion of multiday endurance racing, sled
against resistance as opposed to trotting for a long duration
dogs use a significant portion of muscle glycogen. On
on a treadmill. In humans, engaging in training activities
subsequent days they use only a small percentage of their
that target specific muscle groups results in adaptations in
remaining muscle glycogen stores. Rather than glycogen,
the muscle types targeted. For example, endurance-type 
-sin alosnu se yons sarunos Araua rauo asn sop pals
exercises, such as running prolonged distances at a sub-
erides. Dogs are likely capable of this form of metabolism
maximal heart rate, increases the capacity to produce
because of their imnate ability to use free fatty acids, their
energy in an aerobic manner by increasing capillaries and
mitochondria, especially in type I muscle fibers.0
activities, and the consumption of a diet with a large per-
High levels of endurance are very important in dogs that
centage of fat as one of its components. Canine skeletal
participate in prolonged periods of exercise such as sport-
muscle is composed mostly of type I, HIA, and HIAX muscle
ing, herding, and long-distance racing dogs. Endurance
fibers, all of which are capable of high levels of oxidative
relates to the ability of a muscle or group of muscles to
metabolism. Highly aerobic mammals such as dogs have
undergo many repetitions of contraction under low loads.
Chapter 9
Exercise Physiology of the Canine Athlete
165
Endurance exercise usually targets specific muscle groups
of the shared characteristics of type I and type II fibers in
involved in the specifc action and lasts for a prolonged
dogs have led to misclassification, and therefore uncer-
time, usually greater than 15 minutes. Endurance exercises 
tainty in potential changes in muscles and their fiber types.'
for dogs include trotting, running, swimming, land and
Newer techniques used to identify canine muscle fiber
underwater treadmill activity, and long-distance sled
 types might provide insight into identification of possible
pulling. It was previously believed that endurance exercise
fiber type conversion as a result of endurance exercise. In
does not result in an increase in type I muscle fibers. More
addition to a lack of concrete evidence to support the
recent research indicates that prolonged endurance exer-
theory of muscle fiber type conversion, dogs undergoing
cise can promote a shift of type II muscle fibers to type I
endurance exercise have not shown an increase in muscle
in humans.1 Other changes associated with long-tenm
capillary density, capillary to fiber ratio, or capillary area
endurance training include an increase in capillary density
to fiber ratio in some studies.12 The lack of a change in
and vascularity of muscle tissue, increasing the delivery of
capillary density in skeletal muscle after endurance train-
Oxygen and nutrients to the muscle. The issue of muscle
ing suggests that microcirculation of untrained fox hounds
fiber type conversion after endurance exercise in humans
is already adequate to meet the demands of endurance
remains somewhat controversial, but can be explained by
training or the overload needed to promote changes was
the fact that muscle fibers are classified by staining them
not achieved in these studies. Even untrained dogs have a
and as their aerobic capacities are altered, fibers that
 high aerobic capacity and appear to be genetically adapted
were borderline in classification can "shift' into another
for efficient oxygen extraction and use.
category.
 However, it is important not to confuse an untrained dog
Studies have evaluated skeletal muscle adaptation in
with a sedentary, inactive, or obese dog. There is a lack of
dogs during periods of endurance training. One study of
studies involving changes in skeletal muscle in sedentary
fox hounds undergoing endurance exercise failed to show
Or overweight dogs after undergoing exercise training. It is
the biochemical and histochemical adaptations in skeletal
likely that untrained but active dogs possess advantages
muscle that have been found in some studies involving
 Over sedentary or obese dogs at the cellular level of skeletal
humans.12 Fox hounds did not show alterations in the activ-
 muscle. Significant biochemical and histochemical changes
ity of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), muscle fiber type,
have yet to be documented in sedentary dogs after under-
or capillary density of skeletal muscle after a 12-week
 going endurance exercise training. However, endurance
yim senuos ssupuy asau 'uesoid suuen aoueinpua
training is likely very beneficial for the overall health of
those of humans, who do undergo detectable skeletal
 dogs and improved athletic function. Perhaps future studies
muscle adaptations after endurance training. SDH is a
may discover previously unknown adaptations of canine
measure of the oxidative capacity of a muscle. There was
skeletal muscle, which are uniquely different from those
no difference in SDH activity, muscle fiber staining, Or
of humans and other species.
 capillary density in trained and untrained foxhounds, sug-
 Other adaptations and alterations in body systems occur
gesting that an untrained dog is already well suited to
after endurance training that likely allow for improved
support the highly oxidative metabolism of endurance
performance during exercise. Although there may not be
exercise, or that the training program employed in that
specific biochemical or histochemical change in muscle,
study was not challenging enough to result in muscle fiber
there is some support that endurance exercise can improve
changes. The lack of a change in fiber type staining after
the functional blood tissue gas exchange properties of skel-
endurance exercise may support the theory that dogs, such
etal muscle in dogs. A study evaluating endurance-trained
as foxhounds, are highly reliant on oxidative enzyme
 dogs and dogs with one limb immobilized found that at a
metabolism during exercise independent of the patterm of
constant rate of oxygen delivery, endurance-trained dogs
 motor unit recruitment.12
had an increased Vo, max, mainly as a result of increased
Another study, however, concluded that endurance exer-
 Oxygen diffusive conductance (Doz) in skeletal muscle.14
cise can induce a shift of type II to type I muscle fibers.!3
An interesting discovery, however, was that despite a 31%
 Beagles exercising on a treadmill 5 days per week for 55
reduction in muscle weight, there was no difference in Voz
a u sr i ada ui as u pp sm
 Or Do between immobilized dogs and a control group
thoracic spinal muscles as well as the triceps muscle.3
 during exercise.14
The unique nature of canine skeletal muscle as well as the
Strength of muscle refers to the maximal force a muscle
shortcomings of various staining and imaging techniques
or group of muscles can generate during one repetition.
has made classification of canine skeletal muscle a difficult
Muscle strength is associated with an increase in muscle
task, much less classifying changes as a result of endurance
Jo aqedno an siaqy aosnu Il adi (udoady) azis
training. It is fairly well accepted that canine skeletal
developing more force per cross-sectional area and con-
 muscle has a relatively high capacity for aerobic metabo-
tract at a higher velocity than type I fbers (Figure 9-2).
lism.' It may be likely that dogs experience changes in
Strength training increases the size of type II fibers more
muscle fiber type in response to exercise; however, some
 a sasnau n asiai- o' I ad u
166
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
160-
In addition to conditioning muscles of the limbs it is also
important to focus on spinal muscles. During sprinting
140
 exercise it has been observed that spinal muscles are among
120
the first to experience fatigue.'s Incline treadmill running
NU
and uphill sprinting are good activities to strengthen
三100
on
muscles, including the spinal muscles. Other strengthening
80
exercises include running or racing, pulling or carrying
Tel
resistance loads, swimming against jets, and trotting or
60
running up inclines or stairs. Performing strength exercise
40
can increase the size of muscle groups and the force they
 are capable of generating. The opposite is true if skeletal
20
muscle is subjected to periods of disuse or immobilization.
Under these conditions, the muscles undergo atrophy and
IIA
IIX
IIB
decreased muscle strength of the limb. A study that evalu-
MuscleFiberType
ated muscle atrophy caused by immobilization found that
immobilization of the hindlimb for a period of 10 weeks
reduced the diameter of type II fbers by 50% and type I
2.5
fibers by 35% in the vastus lateralis muscle and maximum
production of tetanic torque by the affected limb decreased
by 50%.16 When removed from the immobilized state,
growth hormones increased the size of muscle fibers and
1.5
increased strength of the previously immobilized limb
 during the recovery period significantly more than a control
group.16
0.5
Respiration
The tenm respiration can relate to pulmonary or cellular
IIA
IIX
IIB
respiration. This section discusses pulmonary respiration
Muscle Fiber Type
and the effect of exercise on ventilation. The term pulmo-
Figure 9-2 A, Comparison of maximal force generated between
nary respiration refers to ventilation of air into and out of
canine fiber types. B, Comparison of maximal shortening velocities
the lungs and the exchange of gases between inspired or
between canine fiber types. (Adapted from Toniolo L, Maccatrozzo L,
expired air and lung tissue. Ventilation refers to the
Patruno M et al: Fiber types in canine muscles: myosin isoform
mechanical movement of air into and out of the lungs.
expression and functional characterization. Am J Physiol Celf Physiof
Diffusion is the process by which gas molecules move
292:C1915-C1926, 2007.)
either from air into blood or blood into air. In addition to
 providing a means of supplying oxygen to the blood and
tissues of the body and allowing for release of carbon
 of contractile proteins in type II fibers, which increases the 
 dioxide, the pulmonary system plays an important role in
cross-sectional area and the force they are able to generate.
regulating acid-base balance during rest and during exer-
The enlargement of muscles that occurs with strength
cise, as well as thermoregulation. Inflow of air to the lungs
training is thought to mostly occur as a result of hypertro-
occurs as a result of intrapulmonary pressure dropping
phy of muscle fibers and not hyperplasia (adding muscle
below atmospheric pressure, and expiration occurs when
fibers). Strength in dogs is mainly related to speed and the
 intrapulmonary pressure rises above atmospheric pressure.
ability to carry or pull loads. Strength is also important for
The most important inspiratory muscle is the diaphragm;
dogs that must accelerate and decelerate very rapidly, such
however, any muscle capable of increasing the volume of
as dogs that participate in agility competitions. Like
the chest cavity can contribute to inspiration. Because of
strength, sprinting speed is also most affected by type II
the elastic nature of pulmonary tissue and the thoracic
 muscle fibers. The distribution of certain fiber types also
cavity, expiration at rest is typically a passive event. During
depends on genetic factors. Sprinting breeds, such as grey-
exercise, expiration can become partially active because of
hounds, have a greater percentage of type II muscle fibers.
contraction of muscles of the abdominal wall.
whereas breeds such as foxhounds have larger percentages
Precise control of ventilation and pulmonary gas
of type I fbers and are more adept at endurance exercise.
exchange during exercise is required to maintain Poz. PCOz,
Short-duration, maximal-intensity workout programs are
and acid-base balance. During exercise a change in ventila-
best suited for promoting an increase in strength or speed.
tion is required to keep up with metabolic needs, which
Chapter 9
Exercise Physiology of the Canine Athlete
167
requires an increase in ventilation.17.18 Higher demand for
oscillations of abdominal contents associated with locomo-
oxygen and a need to rid the body of large amounts of
tion are not critical for airfow in exercising dogs.21
carbon dioxide necessitate higher rates of ventilation. The
 The diaphragm is required to perform very high levels
respiratory control center in the medulla oblongata initiates
of work to provide adequate ventilation during exercise.
the drive to inspire and expire. To increase ventilation,
The diaphragm muscle is highly oxidative, preventing it
input to the respiratory center can come from both humoral
from fatiguing easily. Historically, the muscles of the respi-
and neural sources. At the onset of exercise, one theory
ratory system were not thought to be a limiting factor
states that impulses from the motor cortex to control skel-
during exercise. Respiratory muscle fatigue is defined as a
etal muscle movement can "spill' over into the respiratory
condition in which there is a loss in the capacity for devel-
center as they pass through the medulla, causing an increase
oping force or velocity of muscle contraction of respiratory
in ventilation.'9 This is further supported by the fact that
muscles, resulting from muscle activity under load, which
during strenuous exercise, arterial POz, PCOz, and pH
is reversible by rest.2 Studies have confirmed that respira
often remain almost the same as during resting. At the
tory muscle fatigue can occur during high-intensity exer-
 initial onset of exercise, ventilation increases prior to any
pasuooid sunp pun paaaaq ose si lI gz' sueuny ui asio
significant changes in blood chemicals. This supports the
high-intensity exercise, respiratory muscle fatigue can
 os  r    
limit exercise performance in humans. One notable finding
signals sent to the respiratory center of the brainstem at the
 in humans was that fatiguing respiratory muscles cause
same time that signals are sent to skeletal muscle. Chemo-
reflex vasoconstriction to skeletal muscle of the limbs,
receptors in respiratory muscles may respond to potassium
resulting in exercise limitation of muscles, thus limiting
and H+ and send afferent information to the respiratory
some of the oxygen demand.?3 There have been no studies
center. Central chemoreceptors detect increases in PCO2
evaluating respiratory muscle fatigue in healthy exercising
and decreases in pH. Peripheral chemoreceptors are sensi-
dogs; however, the condition occurs in cases of cardiogenic
tive to increases in PCOz and decreases in PO, or pH. All
and septic shock.24.25 It is likely that the highly aerobic
of these receptors act to fine-tune ventilation during exer-
nature of the canine diaphragm muscle normally protects
cise. Input from higher brain centers, regulation of PCO2,
it from fatigue.
and lowering of pH caused by increased blood lactate
Healthy dogs are likely to have a low likelihood of
levels are all methods thought to increase ventilation
 developing respiratory muscle fatigue. However, dogs with
during exercise.
underlying conditions, especially those involving the respi-
The process of breathing at rest is clearly initiated in
ratory system, are more likely to be susceptible to fatigue.
the CNS after input from other areas of the CNS, as well
 Dysfunction of the respiratory system, such as pneumonia.
 as peripheral signals. However, the exact causes of breath-
increases the work load for respiratory muscles. Dogs
ing in dogs during exercise prompted investigation to
determine whether ventilation is an active or passive
tilation. Although respiratory muscles such as the dia-
 process. Some have proposed that the passive forces from
phragm may not fatigue easily during exercise, energy is
limb movement in trotting dogs contribute a substantial
still required to maintain such a high rate of ventilation.
 amount to hyperpnea during exercise.?0 The forces believed
 One consideration is that the cost of energy to maintain
to affect respiration include the cranial and caudal dis-
high rates of ventilation can represent a significant amount
placement of the abdominal organs during acceleration or
of total energy expenditure of a dog during exercise and
deceleration; concussive forces of limb impact, which
thus represent a potential limiting factor of performance.
change intrathoracic pressure; fexion and extension of the
A study that calculated the dynamic respiratory work of
lumbosacral region resulting in compressive forces within
exercising dogs suggested that the higher rates of ventila-
the abdomen thus leading to intrathoracic pressure changes;
tion and elevated body temperature associated with exer-
and inertial forces on the chest wall caused by limb contact 
cise may induce changes that decrease the cost of
with the groumd.20
breathing.?6 Dogs exercising on a treadmill showed a
A subsequent study demonstrated different results that
decrease in dynamic respiratory work as a result of
contradict the proposition that breathing in dogs during
decreased airway resistance that resulted in up to an eight-
exercise is largely a passive event associated with stride. It
fold savings of energy expenditure of respiratory muscles.
was concluded that breathing in exercising dogs is a neural-
When body temperature rises to more than 39° C and respi
 driven event. Diaphragmatic electromyographic activity.
ratory rate increases to 120 breaths per minute, there is an
esophageal pressure changes, and phasic diaphragmatic
 apparent decrease in dynamic respiratory work as a result
shortening and breathing frequency remain strictly syn-
of lower airway resistance.?6 It is unknown whether there
 chronous during exercise and are not significantly associ-
is a progressive decrease in airway resistance as body tem-
ated with stride.?’ Active recruitment of the diaphragm
perature rises or if a sudden change in breathing frequency
and abdominal muscles is the major contributor to intra-
induces the change. It is believed that the most likely site
thoracic pressure changes and generation of airflow, and
of resistance reduction is at the level of the larynx. During
168
Section ll
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
states of hyperthermia, cats have reduced laryngeal resis-
is increased by venoconstriction, which decreases the
tance to almost half of normal values.?7 The lower airway
storage capacity of the venous system and causes blood to
resistance in exercising dogs decreases the amount of
move back toward the heart. The mechanical action of
contracting skeletal muscle compresses veins to push
for strenuous exercise. This mechanism may help resist
blood toward the heart. The rhythmic action of breathing
respiratory muscle fatigue as well as conserve energy for
also promotes blood flow from the abdomen to the thorax.
use by skeletal muscles in the trunk and limbs.
Increased fow of blood to the heart increases the volume
Depending on the environment a dog exercises in, it is
of blood in the ventricles at the end of diastole (preload)
possible for ambient temperature to have direct effects on
available for the heart to pump back into circulation for
the respiratory system of athletes. Repeated exercise in
skeletal muscle demands. The increased preload also acts
cold environments can result in airway disease. Dogs exer-
to increase the strength of muscular contraction by way of
cising in cold conditions can develop pulmonary changes
the Frank-Starling mechanism.
similar to a condition known as "ski asthma" in humans.
Other methods of meeting the increased oxygen
Dogs exercising for prolonged periods in cold environ-
demands of skeletal muscle during exercise are to increase
ments show significantly more reactivity to aerosol hista-
blood fow to muscle by decreasing blood fow to other
mine and overall greater airway resistance when compared
 Organs and vasodilatation of skeletal muscle arterioles.
with dogs not racing in cold environments.23 This type of
Skeletal muscles in resting humans receive approxi-
dysfunction can persist for at least 4 months after rest. It
mately 15-20% of total cardiac output; during maximal
is believed that continuous cold air hyperventilation causes
exercise this increases to 80-85% of total cardiac output.29
excessive heat and water loss, leading to airway mucosal
There is some controversy as to the exact mechanism by
injury. The specifc effects of cold weather changes of the
which skeletal muscle blood fow increases, and blood
respiratory system on exercise performance have not been
fow to other organs decreases during exercise. During
fully evaluated. However, any condition that results in
exercise, vascular resistance in skeletal muscles decreases
inflammatory changes of the airways would likely have
while vascular resistance in visceral organs increases.30
some degree of negative effect on performance.
Initial vascular resistance within skeletal muscle is believed
to decrease as the result of withdrawal or attenuation of
Cardiovascular System
sympathetic input to skeletal muscle arterioles; however,
maintenance of vasodilatation is likely due to intrinsic
 The primary purpose of the cardiovascular system is to
control caused by local changes in metabolites such as pH,
deliver oxygen and nutrients to the tissues of the body as
Oxygen tension, and nitric oxide.2931 Another possible
well as remove wastes and aid in temperature regulation.
mechanism that acts to increase blood fow to muscle in
To accomplish these tasks, the cardiovascular system
dogs is the concept of sympatholysis, which was demon-
works in conjunction with the respiratory system. During
strated by attenuation of vasoconstrictor response during
exercise, cardiac output must increase in proportion to the
dynamic exercise compared with a resting state.32
increase in metabolic rate. In human athletes there is a
Studies have been performed regarding the effect exer-
linear relationship between percent maximal oxygen
cise has on the cardiovascular system of dogs. Similar to
uptake (Vo, max) and cardiac output. Cardiac output is the
humans, changes in the cardiovascular system of dogs are
quantity of blood pumped into the aorta each minute by
required to meet the metabolic needs of skeletal muscle
the heart and is determined by the product of the heart rate
 during exercise. Sled dogs, some of the most elite canine
and volume of blood ejected per heartbeat (stroke volume).
athletes, have provided invaluable information on the car-
This in tum determines the amount of blood that fows
 diovascular system during maximal exercise. The heart rate
through the circulation. An increased demand for oxygen
of sled dogs can dramatically increase at the onset of exer-
 and nutrients by skeletal muscles during exercise requires 
cise. Heart rate can increase from a resting rate of 50 beats
an increase in cardiac output as well as redistribution of
 per minute to 300 beats per minute and remain between
 blood from inactive organs to active skeletal muscle.
250-300 beats per minute during a 60-minute run.3 Fox-
The onset of exercise induces changes that increase
hounds exercising on a treadmill show similar trends of
cardiac output. The initial changes in the cardiovascular
change in heart rate. Heart rate continues to increase as
system at the onset of exercise are thought to originate
dogs are subjected in increasing levels of submaximal
from centrally generated motor signals followed by modi-
exercise. When foxhounds reach a state of maximal tread-
fication and fine-tuning from baroreceptors, chemorecep-
mill exercise (approximately 12 km/hr on a 28% grade),
tors, and mechanoreceptors throughout the body.?9 Both
heart rates approach 300 beats per minute (Figure 9-3, A).
inhibition of the parasympathetic and activation of the
When comparing heart rate of exercise-trained and
sympathetic nervous system act to increase heart rate and
untrained foxhounds at different levels of submaximal
strength of contraction during exercise. Stroke volume is
exercise, trained dogs have on average a heart rate 14 beats
also increased during exercise. Venous retum to the heart
 per minute lower than untrained dogs at each level of
Chapter 9
Exercise Physiology of the Canine Athlete
169
300
enhances vagal tone and causes left- and right-ventricular
enlargement.36 These cardiac changes can result in resting
260
bradycardia, increased end-diastolic volume, and increased
stroke volume. Changes such as physiologic murmurs,
bradyarrhythmias, and cardiac chamber enlargement are
220
thought to be associated with cardiac adaptations to sus-
tained endurance exercise and not pathologic conditions.36
+
180
Auscultatory and electrocardiographic (ECG) studies have
found that highly trained dogs have cardiac changes very
140
similar to human elite athletes.37.38 Murmurs evident on
saop pauen Ay u peay fuana ae uonnsng
100
compared with untrained dogs. Murmurs in athletic dogs
 are typically grade I-II systolic murmurs heard best over
Increasing Submaximal
 Maximal
the left heart base.37 The murmurs are likely a result of
Exercise
Exercise
increased blood velocity passing through the aortic valve
A
 in response to physiologic heart hypertrophy and increased
200
stroke volume.7 It has been observed that highly trained
dogs without a low-grade murmur tend to perform more
s s eg inunut apia-mo e any eun saop ueu Aood
180
Systolic
further evidence that low-grade murmurs in endurance-
ure
trained dogs are a physiologic response to exercise and not
160
evidence of a pathologic cardiac condition. Cardiac studies 
 on canine athletes have shown that endurance training
P
ww
140
eL
results in a significant reduction in resting heart rate as well
Mean
physiologic hypertrophy of the heart.3&.3 ECG monitoring
Arte
120
of canine athletes engaged in endurance training has shown
an increase in QRS duration, which is refective of physi-
100
ologic cardiac hypertrophy.3 Hypertrophy of the canine 
Diastolic
 heart as a result of endurance training is believed to be a
80
reversible event.38
Increasing Submaximal
 Maximal
Blood fow changes in exercising dogs are similar to
Exercise
Exercise
changes seen in exercising humans. Blood fow to the
B
terminal aorta and coronary vessels of dogs significantly
Figure 9-3 A, Changes in heart rate of foxhounds as a function of
increases during exercise as a result of increased cardiac
relative work rate. B, Changes in arterial blood pressure of foxhounds
 output.33 Increased blood fow to the coronary vessels is 
as a function of relative work rate. (Adapted from Musch Il, Haidet
important because just as skeletal muscle increases its
GC, Ordway GA et al: Dynamic exercise training in foxhounds. I.
oxygen demands during exercise, so does cardiac muscle.
Some studies of splanchnic blood fow in dogs during
59:183-189, 1985.)
exercise are in disagreement with one another. One study
of blood fow during exercise determined that mesenteric
and renal blood flow were unchanged in racing sled dogs
n pasns suy asau ee ais sunsa on paeds
measured submaximal exercise.34 Exercise also affects
increased cardiac output and autoregulation of vascular
blood pressure. Systolic pressures can increase to more
resistance in skeletal muscle, and not redistribution of
than 200 mm Hg during exercise. However, diastolic pres-
blood volume from other organs, mainly control increased
sures during exercise are frequently lower than resting
blood flow to skeletal muscle in exercising sled dogs. This
values, resulting in a mean pressure similar to that of
is in contrast with studies in humans that have shown
resting values3 (Figure 9-3, B). These changes are the
diminished visceral blood fow during exercise as a com-
result of arteriolar vasodilatation at the level of skeletal
pensatory change that occurs with redistribution of fow to
muscle, which decreases diastolic blood pressure.
muscles. A subsequent study involving foxhounds found
The heart itself undergoes changes as a result of
different results than the sled dog study and discovered that
exercise, to better meet demands of the body.3s The
 blood fow to abdominal organs decreased during maximal
tenm athletic heart has been used to describe cardiac
 exercise, similar to humans.40 The conficting results may
changes that occur as a result of prolonged high-intensity
be explained by different blood flow measurement tech-
exercise. In human athletes, strenuous repetitive exercise
niques. Blood fow to the splanchnic region of the sled
170
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
dogs was evaluated by placing fow transducers around
to undergo aerobic metabolism and influences exercise
the cranial mesenteric artery and left renal artery. Blood
performance.
fow of the foxhounds was determined by the use of radio-
Cardiovascular System and Voz Max
active labels, which allowed for inclusion of blood flow to
during Exercise
abdominal organs from other arteries in addition to the
cranial mesenteric and renal. Another variable between
Vo max is the greatest rate of oxygen uptake by the body
the two studies may be effects of ambient temperature on
during extreme dynamic exercise and is the best index of
distribution of blood fow. It may be possible that a
the intensity of an aerobic exercise. Maximum oxygen
 much cooler ambient temperature infuenced splanchnic
uptake is the product of cardiac output and systemic
blood fow to maintain core body temperature in the
 Oxygen extraction. In humans, increases in Vo max with
sled dogs.
endurance training are a result of an equivalent increase in
Vasoconstriction of inactive tissues and splenic contrac
both maximal cardiac output (50%) and systemic oxygen
extraction (50%).4 Elevation of cardiac output is infu-
ing blood fow to active skeletal muscle. As previously
enced by increases in preload caused by increased heart
stated, blood fow to inactive tissues, such as abdomi-
size, increased venous retum, and increased myocardial
nal organs, may be decreased during exercise because
contractility, as well as a decrease in the resistance the
of vasoconstriction, and this is mainly a result of alpha-
heart has to pump against (afterload). Cardiac contractility
adrenergic infuence. Unlike humans, dogs are capable
can increase with sympathetic stimulus of the ventricle, as 
 Of splenic contraction during exercise as a mechanism of
well as by way of the Frank-Starling mechanism. Afterload
increasing the number of circulating red blood cells and
can be reduced by decreasing peripheral resistance of 
the oxygen-carrying capacity of blood. It is thought that
blood vessels, especially the arterioles supplying skeletal
alpha-adrenergic influence also contributes to contraction
 muscle (Figure 9-4). Increased systemic oxygen extraction
of the spleen in dogs. One study demonstrated that alpha-
can result from increased capillary density in skeletal
adrenergic blockade of dogs undergoing maximal exer-
muscle or increased oxidative capacity of muscle cells.
cise reduced oxygen consumption and increased anaerobic
metabolism.41 The reduced arterial oxygen content was
Oxygen uptake by muscle cells.
caused by inhibition of splenic contraction of exercis-
Studies of oxygen uptake in dogs have shown some
ing dogs that underwent blockade. The value of splenic
similarities to studies of humans. Foxhounds undergoing
contraction in exercising dogs was also demonstrated in
submaximal and maximal endurance exercise have a pre-
splenectomized dogs, which had reduced arterial oxygen
dictable increase in Vo, max (Figure 9-5, A). Similar to
-ads auoliapun aany neu saoa t'asioiaxa suunp quauon
humans, Vo, increases during exercise are attributed to
nectomy lack a major adaptation that affects their ability
increased cardiac output. The increase in cardiac output in
Increase in 
Increase in
Increase in
cardiac output
VO2max
 oxygen extraction
Increase in 
Increase in 
Autonomic/
 Increase in 
 Highly oxidative
stroke volume
 heart rate
 adrenal system 
 muscle blood flow
fibers
 Increase in 
 Decrease in 
Increase in
 Splenic
Visceral
preload
 afterload 
contractility
contraction
vasoconstriction
 Skeletal muscle
 Skeletal muscle
vasodilatation
activity
Figure 9-4  Summary of factors affecting Vo, max during endurance exercise.
Chapter 9
Exercise Physiology of the Canine Athlete
171
160
22
lor
120
/kg/min）
ndno
10
(L/min)
diac
14
40
10
Increasing Submaximal
 Maximal
Exercise
Exercise
A
Increasing Submaximal
 Maximal
Exercise
Exercise
06
B
80
18
ntent
Diff
14
Volu
70
(7w)
10
60
50
Increasing Submaximal
Maximal
40
Exercise
Exercise
D
Increasing Submaximal
Maximal
C
Exercise
Exercise
Figure 9-5 A, Changes in oxygen consumption of foxhounds as a function of relative work rate. B, Changes in cardiac output of foxhounds 
as a function of relative work rate. C, Changes in stroke volume of foxhounds as a function of relative work rate. D, Changes in arteriovenous
O, difference of foxhounds as a function of relative work rate. (Adapted from Musch Tl, Haidet GC, Ordway GA et al: Dynamic exercise training
dogs during exercise is mostly attributed to increases in
trained dog during exercise, there does not seem to be
stroke volume up to approximately 50-70% of Vo, max,
significant evidence to demonstrate pronounced increases
after which stroke volume levels off during submaximal
after training.
activity and further increases in cardiac output are mostly
When athletes stop training, their Vo, max decreases.
due to increased heart rate34 (Figure 9-5, B and C). In
This is a result of decreased maximal cardiac output and
 contrast to humans, changes in systemic oxygen extraction
systemic oxygen extraction. In humans, an initial decrease
 do not significantly contribute to increases in Vo, max in
in cardiac output is due to a decrease in stroke volume
 from loss of plasma volume mainly as a result of a decrease
This is further supported by minimal evidence that dogs
 in plasma protein levels and plasma renin and vasopressin
undergo biochemical or histochemical adaptations in skel-
activity, which are upregulated during periods of exer-
 etal muscle after undergoing endurance training.1? Vo
cise.434 As a state of detraining continues, Vo, max con-
max elevation in endurance-trained dogs compared with
tinues to decrease, along with reduced systemic oxygen
untrained dogs is derived primarily from central changes
extraction. In humans, periods of detraining decrease 
(increased cardiac output) and not from changes in oxygen
the overall oxidative capacity of skeletal muscles.4 Because 
extraction. Increased cardiac output accounts for 96% of
untrained dogs have an oxidative capacity similar to dogs
the increase in Vo max in endurance-trained foxhounds,
that have undergone endurance training, it is reasonable
whereas increased ox ygen extraction accounts for only 4%
to speculate that a decrease in Vo max of a previously
of the increase.34 Compared with a resting state, dogs
p g poad e oun pa s u sop paun
 engaged in exercise activity have a substantial increase in
would mostly be a result of a decreased cardiac output
systemic oxygen extraction (Figure 9-5, D). However,
and not the reduced ability of skeletal muscle to extract
when comparing the ox ygen extraction of an untrained and
oxy gen.
172
Section ll
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
Exercise Capacity and Age
with advancing age. Exercise performance may also be
more likely to decline in older dogs with the onset of other
The age of a dog can affect the ability to exercise. Older
 medical conditions that may develop with advancing age.
dogs have reduced capability for maximal exercise capac-
ity.46.47 A group of older dogs (10-14 years) showed signif-
Exercise and Nutrition
cantly reduced exercise capacity and maximum oxygen
consumption compared with a group of younger dogs (2-3
Nutrition requirements for athletes are different from those
years) during treadmill exercise.*6 The reduction in Vo, in
who lead a more sedentary lifestyle, and the nutrition
older dogs was mostly associated with reduced cardiac
requirements of athletic dogs are different from that of
output.46 Decreased Vo, in older exercising beagles was
human athletes. Compared with humans, canine skeletal
attributed to a 25% decrease in cardiac output and an 11%
muscle contains a high degree of oxidative fibers. The
reduction in systemic oxygen extraction.*6 The relative
majority of exercise studies on dogs have been performed
reduction in cardiac output in older dogs appears to be
on either greyhounds or sled dogs. However, information
caused in part by attenuation of heart rate during exercise
from effects of diet on the performance of athletes, such
as well as stroke volume. These findings correlate with a
as sled dogs, has been applied to diet modification of less
study that demonstrated a reduced maximal heart rate
 specialized athletes. One common ingredient in the diet of
response to isoproterenol in older dogs.4α A reduction in
canine athletes is raw meat. Raw meat by itself is not a
maximal heart rate of older adult humans during exercise
balanced diet. It is deficient in essential vitamins and min-
has been demonstrated in numerous studies.4950 The reduc-
erals and if fed alone can lead to conditions such as nutri-
tion in stroke volume in older beagles may be a result of
Ys paseaiou pue usipioiyeediady Arpuooas [euon
age-related changes to the myocardium, peripheral vascu-
of fracture.s’ Calcium deficiency is the most common
lature, pericardium, or decreased splenic contraction
imbalance in a raw-meat diet. Addition of 1 g of bone meal
during exercise.46
to every 50 g of raw meat can correct the deficiency;
In addition to cardiovascular changes in older dogs,
however, excess supplementation can increase the risk of
changes in skeletal muscle can have an effect on exercise
 Orthopedic disease, especially in larger immature dogs.52
 performance. Aging is associated with a decrease in muscle
Risk of food-borme infection is another concerm when
mass and capillary density. Older beagles have been noted
feeding a raw-meat diet. Common pathogens such as Sal.
to experience a 16% loss of type II muscle fibers when
monella, Escherichia coli, Campylobacter, Listeria, and
compared with younger dogs. The total fiber area of type
Shiga-like toxin produced by E. coli O:157:H7 are poten-
I muscle fibers seems to be maintained, and may even
tial pathogens found in raw meat that can pose a very
increase in some areas, such as in the semitendinosus
serious hazard to both dogs and humans." Therefore, raw-
muscle.47 There is also a reduction in muscle capillary
 meat diets are not recommended for canine athletes.
density and capillary/fiber ratio in older dogs. Despite
 Daily energy requirement for maintenance depends on
these age-related changes at the level of skeletal muscle,
body weight, age, exercise, breed, and ambient tempera-
blood flow is relatively well maintained during exercise.
ture. Cooler temperatures require less energy for mainte-
During maximal exercise in older dogs there is no signifi-
nance. However, higher levels of energy are required once
cant decrease in blood fow to locomotion muscles.47 A
the ambient temperature drops below the point at which
significant decrease in vascular resistance to skeletal
 metabolic rate must increase to maintain body temperature.
muscle and reduction of blood fow to splanchnic circula-
 For thin-coated breeds this temperature is approximately
tion seem to allow for maintenance of muscle metabolism
20°C and for thick-coated breeds critical temperature is
during exercise. Despite maintaining blood fow to skeletal
less than 0°C.54 Energy requirements for movement are
 muscle during exercise, older dogs have a reduced maximal
more proportional to the distance traveled than the speed
exercise capacity compared with younger dogs. In
of travel.$ It requires more energy for a dog to trot 13 miles
summary, the maximal Vo, for an older dog is significantly
than it does to sprint 100 yards at top speed. Certain diets
less than that of a younger dog at maximal exercise, but
may increase stamina during exercise. Exercise stamina for
reduction in blood fow to muscle does not appear to be a
humans can be increased by high-carbohydrate diets,
factor for decreased Voz max in older dogs. Rather, the
-ap aue saoa s saaa[ uasools asnu asiou ym
main causes are reduced cardiac output and ox ygen extrac-
ent than humans in that they metabolize free fatty acids at
tion.46.47 Maintenance of blood fow to skeletal muscle
twice the rate of humans.°6 Skeletal muscles in dogs are
during exercise only partially compensates for age-related
more adapted to use fat than humans. A high-fat, low-
changes such as decreased metabolic potential, oxygen
carbohydrate diet increases the stamina of an exercising
content of arterial blood, and cardiac function, which
 dog compared with a diet with only a moderate amount of
account for the inability of older dogs to reach the same
fat. High-carbohydrate diets increase muscle glycogen
level of Vo max as younger dogs.47 It should be expected
levels; however, during short high-intensity exercise, gly-
that the exercise performance of dogs will likely decrease
cogen is used up more rapidly in dogs. Fat oxidation during
Chapter 9
Exercise Physiology of the Canine Athlete
173
both rest and exercise is twice as active in dogs as com-
can be quite large. The body is relatively inefficient at
 pared with other less aerobic species.?
using energy, and a significant portion of energy use for
High levels of protein are another important component 
work results in heat production.
 Of the canine athlete. Anemia can develop in highly athletic
 During periods of intense exercise it becomes necessary
 dogs fed a low-protein diet. A diet of at least 32% of energy
for the body to take measures to increase heat loss to
as protein prevents a drop in hematocrit in highly athletic
 prevent body temperature from rising too high. Heat loss
dogs.*α For sprint exercises, mild restriction of food intake
can occur by four different mechanisms: radiation, con-
before races to reduce body weight improved sprint per-
duction, convection, and evaporation. Radiation is the loss
formance in greyhounds.$9 Different than endurance racing
of heat in the form of infrared rays. This process involves
dogs, feeding an increased protein and decreased carbohy-
the transfer of heat down a thermal gradient from the
drate diet to sprinting greyhounds resulted in slower per-
surface of one object to another with no physical contact.
formance times. However, when higher levels of fat, along
Conduction is the transfer of heat from a warmer object
with high protein and lower carbohydrate levels, were fed
to a cooler object that it is in contact with. Convection is
to greyhounds, race times improved.60.61 To increase the
the loss of heat into either air or water that is in contact
stamina of working or exercising dogs, canned diets with
with the body. Evaporation is the loss of heat as it is
high levels of fat and protein can be added to a commercial
transferred to water on a surface of the body and converted
diet before periods of heavy exercise. An altermative is to
into gas. By far the most important method of heat loss
add beef to a commercial diet that has high levels of energy
for exercising dogs is evaporation. Dogs have poorly devel-
as both protein and fat." It may be necessary to supplement
oped sweat glands, which are not significant in thenmo-
a dog's diet with components such as fat and protein to
regulation. Instead, dogs mostly use evaporation as a
method of heat loss by way of panting. During exercise
important that the diet be balanced and complete for all
there is increased blood fow to the respiratory system,
needs of the body.
tongue, and oral mucosa, and an increase in saliva and
The components of an athletic dog's diet are important,
respiratory secretions. Blood has a high capacity to store
but the timing of feedings is important as well. Strenuous
heat and is very efficient at transporting heat. Exercising
exercise in untrained dogs delays gastric emptying for
 dogs take frequent shallow breaths, allowing air to rapidly
more than 1 hour.6 Feeding of meals should not occur
move over the oral mucosa and respiratory dead-space for
during periods of exercise, and it is best to wait until after
evaporation and heat loss.
a short period of rest.
There is little information on the vitamin, mineral, and
Effect of Ambient Temperature on Exercise
other nutrient requirements for athletic dogs. Commercial
 Despite countermeasures taken by the body, dogs can expe-
dog foods contain sufficient amounts of vitamins and min-
rience significant increases in body temperature during
erals for nonathletic dogs. If excessive supplements are
 periods of exercise. Healthy Labrador retrievers performing
added to a commercial dog food, toxicity issues are a
feld trial retrieving exercises for 10-minute periods out-
possibility.
 doors can have a marked increase in body temperature.63-65
In an ambient temperature of up to 28°C, normal healthy
Temperature
 Labrador retrievers undergoing strenuous exercise can have
 Regulation of body temperature is a critical process to
to approximately 2°C more than resting temperature is
maintain homeostasis and normal function. Metabolic
common during normal exercise among Labrador retrievers
pathways and cellular structures are affected by tempera-
ture. Prolonged or excessive increases in body temperature
thermia, dogs typically experience a respiratory alkalosis,
 can denature proteins needed for vital metabolic pathways
hypocapnia, and mild metabolic acidosis when exercising
and can even result in death. A decrease in body tempera-
 in temperatures ranging from 11-299 C.63.64 Another study
ture can slow metabolic pathways to the point that vital
confinmed that Labradors retrievers undergo a significant
body functions are affected. Body temperature is deter-
increase in temperature during strenuous exercise regard-
mined by the difference between heat gain and heat loss.
less of a cool or warm ambient temperature.6 However.
Maintenance of body temperature is a highly regulated
despite no severe differences in body temperature in strenu-
process. The thermoregulatory center is located in the ante-
ously exercising dogs under the previously mentioned
rior hypothalamus. It receives information from peripheral
range of ambient temperatures, deleterious changes may
thermoreceptors to initiate changes in the body to either
occur when exercising in warmer environments.
increase heat production or to increase loss of body heat.
Dogs exercising in an ambient temperature less than
 Normal metabolic processes in the body produce heat. At
21°C were less likely to develop respiratory alkalosis and
rest, the metabolic rate is low and the production of heat
hypocapnia. Dogs exercising in an ambient temperature
is relatively small. During intense exercise, heat production
 greater than 21°C are very likely to develop respiratory
174
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
'sumas uauadxa un un sgeudday pun siso
higher degree of cardiac output.66 The cooling mechanism
severe acute hypocapnia results in decreased cerebral and
myocardial perfusion. It is uncertain what effect these
skin. Because of this, dogs do not experience peripheral
hemodynamic changes have on healthy dogs during exer-
pooling of blood during exercise in heat, and thus do not
cise. Several dogs in these studies became uncoordinated
experience the drop in cardiac output that humans can
and weak during the training exercises; however, they
recovered and did not experience any further problems.
heat storage compared with humans. It is common for body
Sprinting greyhounds show similar dramatic increases in
temperature to reach 42° C in exercising dogs, which does
temperature, but in contrast to Labrador retrievers, they
tend to have a more pronounced drop in blood pH after
This type of exercise hyperthermia is also thought to be an
racing.67 The lower blood pH in greyhounds may also be
effective method of water conservation during exercise in
partially explained by the fact that greyhounds experience
warm weather. This well-tolerated elevation in body tem-
significantly higher blood lactate elevations during
perature in dogs reduces the amount of water lost to evapo-
exercise.
rative cooling, which would occur at a higher rate if body
It seems that in ambient temperatures between 21 -29° C,
temperature were maintained at a lower level during exer-
despite significant increases in body temperature and
hemodynamic changes, healthy dogs do not experience
inactivity may be more susceptible to development of
significant adverse clinical effects. Although there were no
severe hyperthermia compared with dogs that are active on
a routine basis.73
retrieving trials in these studies, care should always be
 Dehydrated dogs that exercise have significantly higher
taken when exercising dogs, especially in warmer condi-
body temperature and lower rates of water lost by evapora-
tions. Sporting breeds such as Labrador retrievers often
tion. Cardiac output and carotid blood fow are signiff-
have a personality (drive to retrieve), which causes them
cantly reduced as a result of decreased plasma volume.71
to voluntarily exercise to the point of exhaustion. It is pos-
When dehydrated, the process of reducing evaporation is
sible that uncontrolled excessive exercise in an environ-
a method to save total body water. However, the body
ment with a high ambient temperature can lead to adverse
temperature of dehydrated animals could become danger-
effects such as heatstroke. Dogs with underlying condi-
ously high. Dogs in a state of dehydration should be
tions (especially respiratory related) would likely be much
withheld from exercise, and ample water should be
 more susceptible to adverse effects of exercising in warm
supplied for exercising dogs to help prevent a state of
environments.
dehydration.
Exercising dogs should have access to plenty of water
to help avoid possible dehydration as well as an area for
Adverse Effects of Exercise
the dog to retreat to for a cool down if necessary. If a dog
shows signs of significant fatigue, it is advisable to allow
Exercise and training are designed to condition the body,
for a period of rest before resuming exercise. A study that
enhance the performance of physical activity, and improve
compared dogs that were cooled with ice packs during
the overall state of fitness and health. However, the act of
exercise with dogs that were not cooled showed that the
exercise can potentially have adverse effects on the body.
cooled group had increased exercise performance, and
The body can certainly become injured as a result of exter-
lower heart rates, respiration rates, and blood lactate levels
nal infuences, such as the force of impact on the body, or
than the noncooled group.6′ Owners and trainers should
variables in the environment. However, the act of physical
monitor dogs closely for signs of heatstroke during exer-
activity alone can unmask an underlying disease or condi-
cise and seek immediate veterinary attention if necessary.
tion or it can directly affect an otherwise healthy body by
When exercising for a short period in a cool ambient
causing alterations that have the potential to have adverse
temperature, changes in cardiac output and blood fow
effects.
mainly address increasing blood fow to working skeletal
 Unexpected injury and even death, although unlikely,
muscles. When exercise is sustained long enough to raise
can happen to dogs that are elite athletes as well as those
body temperature, or when exercising in a higher ambient
that lead a more sedentary lifestyle. There is limited
temperature, blood fow must change to allow for heat loss
information on causes of severe injury or death of dogs
in addition to supplying the demand of skeletal muscle.
 during exercise. One study's aim was to evaluate necropsy
Peripheral pooling of blood potentially leading to reduced
Aipodxun pai eu saop pais uysera uo ssuuy
cardiac output is a cost of cooling for humans exercising
during competition. The most common postmortem find-
 in the heat.8 Humans performing heavy walking exercise
ings included aspiration pneumonia, gastric mucosal
in the heat can experience a significantly reduced cardiac
lesions, and blood loss as a result of gastrointestinal ulcer-
output." Perhaps yet another physiologic adaptation of
ation.74 Other findings included rhabdomyolysis, hepato-
dogs is that exercise in warm environments results in a
cellular necrosis, and cardiac myodegeneration. The cause
Chapter 9
Exercise Physiology of the Canine Athlete
175
of pneumonia in most cases was aspiration of gastric con-
Hematologic and Biochemical Effects
tents. All dogs with pneumonia had concurrent gastric
from Exercise
lesions and it is thought that the lesions found in the gas-
-  a  n d  d nn [so
Dogs undergo various hematologic and biochemical chan ges
troesophageal reflux, leading to aspiration. Severe injury
as a response to exercise. Most changes are not severe, and
or sudden death is a rare event and does not occur fre-
it is often not clear if the changes are truly abnormal or if
quently during periods of exercise.
they are normal physiologic responses to exercise.
Serious injury or death during exercise is more likely to
 Prolonged endurance exercise results in a catabolic state
be related to an underlying condition that was exacerbated
that can cause changes in hydration status, electrolyte alter-
by the demands and stress associated with exercise. It is
 ations, plasma enzyme values, and other hematologic
possible that signs of an underlying condition could go
 changes. Sprinting and agility dogs can experience changes
unnoticed during periods of inactivity. Certain conditions
in blood lactate levels, pH, hematocrit, protein, and potas-
can manifest signs for the frst time during periods of
 sium levels. However, the changes are not severe and do not
exercise. During periods of strenuous exercise, Labrador
appear to have a significant effect on exercise perfor-
retrievers can be affected by a syndrome called exercise-
mance.81.2 Wel-conditioned sled dogs develop multiple
induced collapse (EIC). This condition is a fairly common
abnormalities in serum chemistry values, but they are of
cause of exercise intolerance in otherwise healthy young
 limited severity.83 These changes are most likely attributed
adult Labrador retrievers. Dogs affected by this condition
to adaptation to prolonged endurance training and effects of
can tolerate moderate amounts of exercise, but may become
dietary components such as high amounts of fat and protein.
ataxic and collapse after only 5-15 minutes of strenuous
One of the most significant changes in racing sled dogs is
exercise. The cause of EIC has been determined to be a
the development of hypoproteinemia, mostly caused by
ao n saed au su se as I uap a u uonn
hypoglobulinemia.83 This change may be caused by immu-
in synaptic vesicle endocytosis of neurotransmission in the
nosuppression, elevated protein catabolism, and protein
brain and spinal cord. The first signs of this condition are
loss in the gastrointestinal system as a result of exercise.
gait abnormalities, such as a wide-based pelvic limb stance
Short-duration strenuous activities result in activation of
along with rocking and loss of balance. If a dog is known
 platelets and neutrophils in dogs.84 Activation of neutrophils
to have this condition, exercise should be discontinued
is a process that occurs to prime the cells to fight against
 immediately if gait abnormalities are recognized. All dogs
infections. Activated neutrophils are beneficial in septic
in one study had loss of patellar refex after exercise.76
conditions. In a nonseptic state, such as during exercise,
Other conditions that may first be noticed during exercise
activated neutrophils may have adverse effects. Activated
and can lead to very serious problems or even death include
neutrophils upregulate surface receptors and are primed for
malignant hyperthermia, hypoglycemia, laryngeal paraly-
release of ox ygen radicals and proteolytic enzymes, making
sis, myasthenia gravis, cardiac abnormalities, metabolic
them less likely to migrate to extravascular sites and perhaps
disturbances, and others.
more likely to lodge in small vessels in body." Neutrophil
The gastrointestinal tract may experience abnormal
activation has been documented in humans as well, but there
changes during exercise in otherwise healthy athletes. Gas-
are no data to support adverse effects of neutrophil activa-
trointestinal disease, such as diarrhea, is a common abnor-
tion on exercise performance. A concerm with activated
mality in human endurance athletes, including marathon
platelets  is development of a hypercoagulable state;
runners. Sustained periods of exercise increase the fre-
however, this state has not been demonstrated in exercising
a sams ee suonan pue suisa osn jo uanb
dogs. It is possible that increased fibrinolytic activity bal-
also shown that in addition to gastric lesions, prolonged
ances out platelet activation during exercise. Exercise train-
strenuous exercise can cause intestinal mucosal damage,
ing can induce a decrease in packed cell volume. This may
increasing intestinal permeability.7 It seems that gastric
be explained by plasma volume expansion and blood loss
mucosal damage can occur at more intense levels of exer-
 secondary to gastrointestinal tract bleeding.86
cise (submaximal and maximal); however, intestinal per-
Chronic exercise training leads to expansion of plasma
meability can also be altered during less intense routine
volume.? This may be an adaptive mechanism to provide
training exercises.9 It is not known specifically what
a larger vascular volume to meet the increased cardiovas-
 effect, if any, these lesions have on the performance capa-
cular and thermoregulatory needs during exercise. Grey
bility of elite athletes such as sled dogs. Administration of
hounds can increase their plasma volume by almost 30%
famotidine once daily decreases the severity and perhaps
after undergoing a 2-week training period.s Studies
the prevalence of exercise-induced gastric ulcers in dogs.3
suggest that the primary reason for plasma volume expan-
Although the effect of gastric ulcers on performance is
sion in endurance dogs is due to an increase in water intake
unknown, the ease of administration and lack of adverse
with minimal involvement from renal control.&
effects may make the use of famotidine as prophylaxis
Agility dogs can increase their hematocrit by 21%,
against gastric ulcers beneficial in performing dogs.
plasma volume by 4%, and total blood volume by 12%
176
Section Il
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
during exercise as a result of splenic contraction.? within
 health is widely accepted in the human medical world.93
 minutes of discontinuing exercise activity, the hematocrit
There is growing evidence that exercise has benefts regard-
decreases as a result of recapture by the spleen. Agility
ing the mental well-being of humans as well.94 In humans
exercise in dogs does not seem to induce changes in red
there is evidence that exercise can improve physical self-
 blood cell indices or morphologic findings.?2
perceptions, enhance mood states, help treat clinical
Exercise can also affect honmones such as thyroid hor-
depression and anxiety, and even improve cognitive func-
mones. Short-term treadmill exercise and sprinting increase
tion.* In addition to the physical health benefts such as
 levels of thyroid hormones 90.91 Prolonged endurance exer-
weight loss in obese dogs, and increases in strength and
 cise results in substantial decreases in plasma hormone
endurance, exercise may also have some psychological
levels (T4 and T3).92 The effect of changes in thyroid
benefits in dogs.
hormone on exercise performance in dogs is unknown. It
Collecting information on the mental well-being of
is important that the finding of abnormal thyroid hormones
dogs is not easily done, leaving perceptions of owners as
in an exercising dog does not lead to a potential misdiag-
the only means of determining their well-being. The term
nosis such as hypothyroidism.
quality of life is frequently used when attempting to
Lactate concentration in blood increases during periods 
describe the well-being of a dog. The owner, or the indi-
of exercise. The degree of increase is related to the inten-
vidual who spends the most time with a dog, is frequently
sity of activity as well as the index of glycolytic activity
 the one who makes assessments regarding quality of life.
 in skeletal muscle. Different breeds of dogs partaking in
Many people would agree that it is easy to see the delight
various forms of physical activity experience differences
a dog experiences when participating in various forms of
in the degree of lactic acid elevation. Lactate concentration
 exercise, whether it be retrieving, agility, sled racing, and
 in dogs performing in an agility competition rise to approx-
 so on. A quality of life screening program of owners evalu-
imately 4.5 mmol/L, which is almost twice the resting
ated aspects of a dog's life that were thought to be major
value. Fifteen minutes after discontinuing the exercise,
 infuences of quality of life. The most common suggestion
lactate levels are not significantly different than resting
from owners was that more exercise for their dogs would
values.? Foxhounds engaged in maximal exercise and
improve their quality of life." Exercise is not only a benef-
Labrador retrievers participating in field trials develop
cial method of improving physical health and implement-
lower concentrations of lactate during exercise at approxi-
 ing therapeutic effects for rehabilitative purposes, it is an
mately 2.7 mmol/L and 2.5 mmol/L, respectively.34.64 The
experience that often provides great enjoyment for dogs.
difference in lactate levels may be due to different levels
of aerobic metabolism between foxhounds and Labrador
REFERENCES
retrievers, and the dogs participating in the agility com-
1. Acevedo LM, Rivero JL: New insights into skeletal
petitions, or that the agility competitions are much shorter
muscle fbre types in the dog with particular focus towards
in duration and are a more anaerobic activity. A more
hybrid myosin phenotypes, Cell Tissue Res 323:283-303,
dramatic contrast is seen when comparing other breeds
2006.
of athletic dogs with greyhounds, which frequently experi-
2. Wu YZ, Crumley RL, Caiozzo VJ: Are hybrid fibers a
ence a rise in lactate levels close to 30 mmol/L.81 Short
common motif of canine laryngeal muscles? Single-fiber
periods of maximal exercise experienced during racing
anal yses of myosin heavy-chain isoform composition, Arch
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 126:865-873, 2000.
certainly contribute a significant portion of this increase;
however, the higher percentage of glycolytic muscle fibers
3. Toniolo L, Maccatrozzo L, Patruno M et al: Fiber types in
canine muscles: myosin isoform expression and functional
in greyhounds may also explain this breed difference. The
characterization, Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 292:C1915-
 blood lactate elevations do not appear to have a negative
C1926, 2007.
effect on healthy dogs participating in these types of exer-
4. Fitts RH: Cellular mechanisms of muscle fatigue, Physiof
Rev 74:49-94, 1994.
of various serum chemistry values in dogs. Successive
 5. Ikai M, Steinhaus AH: Some factors modifying the expres-
days of endurance exercise can cause increases in serum
sion of human strength, J Appt Physiol 16:157-163, 1961.
sodium, creatine kinase, aspartate aminotransferase, alka-
 6. Green HJ: How important is endogenous muscle glycogen to
line phosphatase, and alanine aminotransferase, and a
fatigue in prolonged exercise? Can J Physiot Pharmacot
decrease in serum potassium. In healthy dogs these
69:290-297, 1991.
changes are mild and are not of significant clinical
7. McKenzie E, Holbrook T, Williamson K et al: Recovery of 
muscle glycogen concentrations in sled dogs during pro-
importance.83
longed exercise, Med Sci Sports Exerc 37:1307-1312,
2005.
Exercise and Mental Well-Being
 8. McKenzie EC, Hinchcliff KW, Valberg SJ et al: Assessment
 of alterations in triglyceride and glycogen concentrations in
Exercise is an important aspect of life for both humans and
muscle tissue of Alaskan sled dogs during repetitive pro-
animals. The association between exercise and physical
longed exercise, Am J Vet Res 69:1097-1103, 2008.
Chapter 9
Exercise Physiology of the Canine Athlete
177
9. McClelland G, Zwingelstein G, Taylor CR et al: Increased
 29. Laughlin MH: Distribution of skeletal muscle blood fow
capacity for circulatory fatty acid transport in a highly
during locomotory exercise, Adv Exp Med Biot 227:87-101,
aerobic mammal, Am J Physiot 266:R1280-R1286, 1994.
1988.
10. Holloszy JO, Coyle EF: Adaptations of skeletal muscle to
30. Rowell LB, O'Leary DS: Refex control of the circulation
endurance exercise and their metabolic consequences, J App!
during exercise: chemoreflexes and mechanoreflexes, J App!
Physiol 56:831-838, 1984.
Physiol 69:407-418, 1990.
 11. Demirel HA, Powers SK, Naito H et al: Exercise-induced altera-
31. Shen W, Xu X, Ochoa M et al: Endogenous nitric oxide in
tions in skeletal muscle myosin heavy chain phenotype: dose-
the control of skeletal muscle ox ygen extraction during exer-
response relationship, J Appl Physiot 86:1002-1008, 1999.
cise, Acta Physiol Scand 168:675-686, 2000.
12. Parsons D, Musch TI, Moore RL et al: Dynamic exercise
 32. Ruble SB, Valic Z, Buckwalter JB et al: Dynamic exercise
training in foxhounds. Il. Analysis of skeletal muscle, J App!
attenuates sympathetic responsiveness of canine vascular
Physiol 59:190-197, 1985.
smooth muscle, J Appt Physiot 89:2294-2299, 2000.
 13. Puustjarvi K, Tammi M, Reinikainen M et al: Running train-
 33. Van Citters RL, Franklin DL: Cardiovascular performance of
ing alters fiber type composition in spinal muscles, Eur Spine
Alaska sled dogs during exercise, Circ Res 24:33-42, 1969.
/ 3:17-21, 1994
34. Musch TI, Haidet GC, Ordway GA et al: Dynamic exercise
14. Bebout DE, Hogan MC, Hempleman SC et al: Effects of
training in fox hounds. I. Oxygen consumption and hemody-
 taining and immobilization on VO and DOz in dog gastroc-
namic responses, J Appt Physiol 59:183-189, 1985.
nemius muscle in situ, J Appt Physiol 74:1697-1703, 1993.
 35. Blomqvist CG, Saltin B: Cardiovascular adaptations to phys-
15. Zebas C: Selected kinematic differences in the running gait
ical training, Ann Rev Physiot 45:169-189, 1983.
of the greyhound athlete during the beginning and end of the
 36. Huston TP, Puffer JC, Rodney WM: The athletic heart syn-
race. In Tant CL PP, ed: Biomechanics in sport IX, Ames,
drome, N Engt J Med 313:24-32, 1985.
1991, Iowa State University.
37. Constable PD, Hinchcliff KW, Olson J et al: Athletic heart 
16. Lieber RL, Jacks TM, Mohler RL et al: Growth hormone
syndrome in dogs competing in a long-distance sled race, J
secretagogue increases muscle strength during remobiliza-
Appt Physiol 76:433-438, 1994.
tion after canine hindlimb immobilization, J Orthop Res 
38. Constable PD, Hinchcliff KW, Olson JL et al: Effects of
15:519-527, 1997.
endurance training on standard and signal-averaged electro-
17. Powers SK, Coombes J, Demirel H: Exercise training-
cardiograms of sled dogs, Am J Vet Res 61:582-588, 2000.
induced changes in respiratory muscles, Sports Med 24:120-
39. Stepien RL, Hinchcliff KW, Constable PD et al: Effect of
131, 1997.
endurance training on cardiac morphology in Alaskan sled
18. Powers SK, Criswell D: Adaptive strategies of respiratory
dogs, J Appt Physiol 85:1368-1375, 1998.
muscles in response to endurance exercise, Med Sci Sports
 40. Musch TI, Haidet GC, Ordway GA et al: Training effects on
Exerc 28:1115-1122, 1996.
Tegional blood fow response to maximal exercise in fox-
19. Eldridge FL, Millhorn DE, Kiley JP et al: Stimulation by
hounds, J Appt Physiot 62:1724-1732, 1987.
central command of locomotion, respiration and circulation
41. Longhurst JC, Musch TI, Ordway GA: O2 consumption
during exercise, Respir Physiol 59:313-337, 1985.
during exercise in dogs—roles of splenic contraction and
20. Bramble DM, Carrier DR: Running and breathing in
alpha-adrenergic vasoconstriction, Am J Physiot 251:H502-
mammals, Science 219:251-256, 1983.
H509, 1986.
 21. Ainsworth DM, Smith CA, Henderson KS et al: Breathing
 42. Ekblom B: Effct of physical training on circulation during
during exercise in dogs—passive or active? J Appt Physiot 
prolonged severe exercise, Acta Physiot Scand 78:145-158,
81:586-595, 1996.
1970.
22. NHLBI Workshop summary. Respiratory muscle fatigue.
 43. Coyle EF, Hemmert MK, Coggan AR: Effects of detraining
Report of the Respiratory Muscle Fatigue Workshop Group.
on cardiovascular responses to exercise: role of blood
Am Rev Respir Dis 142:474-480, 1990.
volume, J Appl Physiol 60:95-99, 1986.
23. Sheel AW, Derchak PA, Morgan BJ et al: Fatiguing inspira-
44. Convertino VA, Brock PJ, Keil LC et al: Exercise training-
tory muscle work causes refex reduction in resting leg blood 
induced hypervolemia: role of plasma albumin, renin, and 
fow in humans, J Physiol 537:277-289, 2001.
vasopressin, J Appt Physiot 48:665-669, 1980.
24. Aubier M, Trippenbach T, Roussos C: Respiratory muscle
45. Coyle EF, Martin WH 3rd, Bloomfeld SA et al: Effects of
fati gue during cardiogenic shock, J Appt Physiot 51:499-508,
detraining on responses to submaximal exercise, J Appt
1981.
Physiol 59:853-859, 1985.
25. Hussain SN, Simkus G, Roussos C: Respiratory muscle
46. Haidet GC: Dynamic exercise in senescent beagles: ox ygen
fati gue: a cause of ventilatory failure in septic shock, J Appt
 consumption and hemodynamic responses, Am J Physiot
Physiol 58:2033-2040, 1985.
257:H1428-H1437, 1989.
 26. Saibene F, Mognoni P, Aguggini G et al: Work of breathing 
47. Haidet GC, Parsons D: Reduced exercise capacity in senes-
in dog during exercise, J Appt Physiol 50:1087-1092, 1981.
 cent beagles: an evaluation of the periphery, Am J Physiot
27. Dixon M, Widdicombe JG, Wise JC: Laryngeal calibre
260:H173-H182, 1991.
during hyperthermia in cats, Respir Physiot 20:371-377,
48. Yin FC, Weisfeldt ML, Milnor WR: Role of aortic input
1974.
impedance in the decreased cardiovascular response to exer-
 28. Davis M, Williamson K, McKenzie E et al: Effect of training
cise with aging in dogs, J Clin Invest 68:28-38, 1981.
pals Suroei ul soniedoid peoueyoeu Aioneiidsoi uo jsai pue
49. Corteia LC, Lakatta EG, O'Connor FC et al: Attenuated
dogs, Med Sci Sports Exerc 37:337-341, 2005.
cardiovascular reserve during prolonged submaximal cycle
178
Section II
Basic Science of Veterinary Rehabilitation
exercise in healthy older subjects, J Am Coll Cardiot 40:1290-
 69. Nadel ER, Cafarelli E, Roberts MF et al: Circulatory regula-
1297,2002
tion during exercise in different ambient temperatures, J App!
50. Stratton JR, Levy WC, Cerqueira MD et al: Cardiovascular
Physiot 46:430-437, 1979.
responses to exercise. Effects of aging and exercise training
70. Rowell LB, Marx HJ, Bruce RA et al: Reductions in cardiac
in healthy men, Circulation 89:1648-1655, 1994.
 output, central blood yolume, and stroke volume with thermal
51. Mormis ML Jr., Teeter SM, Collins DR: The effects of the
stress in normal men during exercise, J Clin Invest 45:1801-
exclusive feeding of an all-meat dog food, J Am Vet Med
1816, 1966.
Assoc 158:477-488, 1971.
71. Baker MA: Thermoregulatory responses to exercise in dehy-
52. Hazewinkel HA, Van den Brom WE, Van TKATet al: Calcium
drated dogs, J Appt Physiot 56:635-640, 1984.
 metabolism in Great Dane dogs fed diets with various calcium
72. Taylor CR, Schmidt-Nielsen K, Dmi'el R et al: Effect of
and phosphorus levels, J Nutr 121:S99-106, 1991.
hyperthermia on heat balance during running in the African
53. Chengappa MM, Stats J, Oberst RD et al: Prevalence of
hunting dog, Am J Physiot 220:823-827, 1971.
 Salmonella in raw meat used in diets of racing greyhounds,
73. Pohoska E: The effect of prolonged restriction of physical
J Vet Diagn Invest 5:372-377, 1993.
activity on exercise performance in dogs, Acta Physiot Pot
54.E
 Finke MD: Evaluation of the energy requirements of adult
30:337-350, 1979.
kennel dogs, J Nutr 121:S22-S28, 1991.
74. Dennis MM, Nelson SN, Cantor GH et al: Assessment of
 55. Hill RC: The nutritional requirements of exercising dogs, J
necropsy findings in sled dogs that died during Iditarod Trail
Nutr 128:2686S-2690S, 1998.
sled dog races: 23 cases (1994-2006), J Am Vet Med Assoc
56. de Bruijne JJ, Altszuler N, Hampshire J et al: Fat mobiliza-
232:564-573, 2008.
tion and plasma hormone levels in fasted dogs, Metabofism 
75. Patterson EE, Minor KM, Tchernatynskaia AV et al: A canine
30:190-194, 1981.
DNMl mutation is highly associated with the syndrome of
 57. Downey R: Diet of beagles affects stamina, J Am Anim Hosp
exercise-induced collapse, Nat Genet 40:1235-1239, 2008.
Assoc 16:273-277, 1980.
76. Taylor SM, Shmon CL, Adams VJ et al: Evaluations of Lab-
 58. Kronfeld DS, Hammel EP, Ramberg CF Jr et al: Hematologi-
rador retrievers with exercise-induced collapse, including
cal and metabolic responses to training in racing sled dogs
response to a standardized strenuous exercise protocol, J Am
fed diets containing medium, low, or zero carbohy drate, Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 45:3-13, 2009.
J Clin Nutr 30:419-430, 1977.
77. Davis MS, Willard MD, Nelson SL et al: Prevalence of
59. Hill RC, Lewis DD, Randell SC et al: Effect of mild restric-
gastric lesions in racing Alaskan sled dogs, J Vet Intern Med
tion of food intake on the speed of racing Greyhounds, Am.
17:311-314, 2003.
J Vet Res 66:1065-1070, 2005.
78. Davis MS, Willard MD, Williamson KK et al: Sustained
60. Hill RC, Lewis DD, Scott KC et al: Effect of increased
 sttenuous exercise increases intestinal permeability in racing
dietary protein and decreased dietary carbohydrate on per-
Alaskan sled dogs, J Vet Intern Med 19:34-39, 2005.
formance and body composition in racing Greyhounds, Am
 79. Davis M, Willard M, Williamson K et al: Temporal relation-
J Vet Res 62:440-447, 2001.
ship between gastrointestinal protein loss, gastric ulceration
61. Hill RC, Bloomberg MS, Legrand-Defretin V et al: Mainte-
of erosion, and strenuous exercise in racing Alaskan sled
 nance energy requirements and the effect of diet on perfor-
dogs, J Vet Intermn Med 20:835-839, 2006.
mance of racing Greyhounds, Am J Vet Res 61:1566-1573,
 80. Williamson KK, Willard MD, McKenzie EC et al: Efficacy
2000.
of famotidine for the prevention of exercise-induced gastritis
62. Kondo T, Naruse S, Hayakawa T et al: Effect of exercise on
in racing Alaskan sled dogs, J Vet Intern Med 21:924-927,
gastroduodenal functions in untrained dogs, Int J Sports Med
2007.
15:186-191, 1994.
 81. Nold JL, Peterson LJ, Fedde MR: Physiological changes in
63. Matwichuk CL, Taylor S, Shmon CL et al: Changes in rectal
the running greyhound (Canis domesticus): infuence of race
temperature and hematologic, biochemical, blood gas, and
length, Comp Biochem Physiol A Comp Physiot 100:623-
acid-base values in healthy Labrador Retrievers before and
627, 1991.
after strenuous exercise, Am J Vet Res 60:88-92, 1999.
 82. Rovira S, Munoz A, Benito M: Hematologic and biochemical
64. Steiss J, Ahmad HA, Cooper P et al: Physiologic responses
changes during canine agility competitions, Vet Clin Pathot
 in healthy Labrador Retrievers during feld tial training and
36:30-35, 2007
competition, J Vet Intemn Med 18:147-151, 2004.
83. McKenzie EC, Jose-Cunilleras E, Hinchcliff KW et al:
65. Steiss JE, Wright JC: Respiratory alkalosis and primary
Serum chemistry alterations in Alaskan sled dogs during five
hypocapnia in Labrador Retrievers participating in field trials 
successive days of prolonged endurance exercise, J Am Vet
in high-ambient-temperature conditions, Am J Vet Res
Med Assoc 230: 1486-1492, 2007.
69:1262-1267, 2008.
 84. Moritz A, Walcheck BK, Deye J et al: Effects of short-term
 66. Chapman LW, Baker MA: Cardiac output of dogs exercising
racing activity on platelet and neutrophil activation in dogs,
in the heat, Am J Physiot 247:R124-R126, 1984.
Am J Vet Res 64:855-859, 2003.
67. Rose RI, Bloomberg MS: Responses to sprint exercise in the
 85. Kirschenbaum LA, Aziz M, Astiz ME et al: Infuence of
 greyhound: effects on haematology, serum biochemistty and
rheologic changes and platelet-neutrophil interactions on cell
muscle metabolites, Res Vet Sci 47:212-218, 1989.
filtration in sepsis, Am J Respir Crit Care Med 161:1602-
68. Kruk B, Kaciuba-Uscilko H, Nazar K et al: Hypothalamic,
1607, 2000.
rectal, and muscle temperatures in exercising dogs: effect of
 86. Davis MS, Davis WC, Ensign WY et al: Effects of training
cooling, J Appt Physiot 58:1444-1448, 1985.
and strenuous exercise on hematologic values and peripheral
Chapter 9
Exercise Physiology of the Canine Athlete
179
blood leukocyte subsets in racing sled dogs, J Am Vet Med
 91. Hill RC, Fox LE, Lewis DD et al: Effects of racing and train-
Assoc 232:873-878, 2008.
ing on serum thyroid hormone concentrations in racing Grey-
87. Convertino VA, Greenleaf JE, Bernauer EM: Role of thermal
hounds, Am J Vet Res 62:1969-1972, 2001.
and exercise factors in the mechanism of hypervolemia, J
 92. Panciera DL, Hinchcliff KW, Olson J et al: Plasma thyroid
Appt Physiot 48:657-664, 1980.
hormone concentrations in dogs competing in a long-distance
88. McKeever KH, Schurg WA, Convertino VA: Exercise
sled dog race, J Vet Intern Med 17:593-596, 2003.
training-induced hypervolemia in greyhounds: role of water
93. Exercise for health. WHO/FIMS Committee on Physical
intake and renal mechanisms, Am J Physiot 248:R422-R425,
Activity for Health, Bull World Heaith Organ 73:135-136,
1985.
1995.
 89. Rovira S, Munoz A, Benito M: Fluid and electrolyte shifts
 94. Fox KR: The infuence of physical activity on mental well-
during and after agility competitions in dogs, J Vet Med Sci
being, Public Heatth Nutr 2:411-418, 1999.
69:31-35, 2007.
95. Mullan S, Main D: Preliminary evaluation of a quality-of-life
90. Kaciuba-Uscilko H, Brezezinska Z, Kozlowski S: Changes
screening programme for pet dogs, J Small Anim Pract
in blood thyroxine level during physical exercise in dogs,
48:314-322, 2007.
Bull Acad Pol Sci Biol 22:123-126, 1974.
SECTION III
Patient Assessment and Manaqement
Orthopedic and Neurologic
Evaluation
Darryl L. Millis and Joe Mankin
etection and assessment of orthopedic and neuro-
The progression of the condition should be addressed,
logic disorders may be challenging. Ideally, each
including when it started, changes in severity over time,
person involved in the treatment and rehabilitation
changes with weather, changes with exercise or rest, and
of the patient should be able to perform a physical ex amina-
any changes that occur over the course of a typical day.
tion for evaluation of orthopedic and neurologic conditions,
Information regarding any previous diagnoses should also
and should have knowledge of the underlying condition and 
be obtained. The results of any previous treatments should
its management. The evaluator should develop a systematic
be assessed. In particular, any medications administered
approach to standardize the physical examination and to
should be recorded, along with the dose, dosing interval,
prevent omissions of important findings.
length of treatment time, and whether or not the treatment
was effective. It is relatively common for inappropriate
History
doses of medications, such as nonsteroidal antiinfamma-
tory drugs, to be administered, and it may be inappropriate
The patient's age, gender, and breed should be recorded
to conclude that treatment has been ineffective in the treat-
in the medical record. It is helpful to obtain information
ment of conditions such as osteoarthritis
regarding the patient's general health. The owner should
The owner's impression of the degree of pain or lame-
s go si  a ar f a m psnb a
ness should be obtained, and whether there is multiple limb
temic disease, such as fever, anorexia, depression, vomit-
involvement. With regard to the lameness, the following
ing, or diarrhea. The presence of any preexisting conditions
short series of questions may be useful:
that may produce or contribute to the lameness should be
 How long has the lameness been present?
recorded.
Has the lameness increased or decreased in severity?
Any known previous trauma should be recorded, along
 Is the lameness worse in the morming or evening?
with the affected areas that were injured. The travel history
Was the limb subjected to some traumatic event?
of the affected animal or of other pets in the household
 Does the lameness improve or worsen after a few
should be assessed. Certain fungal diseases and some dis-
minutes of activity, such as walking?
eases transmitted by ticks, such as ehrlichiosis and Rocky
 Does the lameness change with weather or exercise?
 Mountain spotted fever, are endemic in certain geographic
 Have other limbs been involved?
areas, and travel to those regions may result in infection
 Have there been any previous related diagnoses or
and lameness.
treatment?
The owner or handler should be asked to state the chief
During the gathering of historic information it is vital
complaint, or the reason why the dog is being evaluated.
that the examiner also consider that certain neurologic or
When questioning an owner or handler regarding the
oncologic problems may mimic orthopedic diseases, and
affected limbs, it is important to be certain that the correct
the converse is true as well. Dogs with bilateral cranial
limb is identified. Sometimes, the owner may be confused
cruciate ligament ruptures may have gait and stance prob-
and misidentify the affected legs. To eliminate any confu-
lems suggestive of neurologic disease. Oncologic condi-
sion, the owner should point to the limb that is the source
tions, such as osteosarcoma or multiple myeloma, may
of concem.
 present with a lameness that mimics an orthopedic problem.
180
Chapter 10
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
181
Some neoplastic conditions may have paraneoplastic mani-
Initial observation
festations, such as hypertrophic osteopathy, in which a
mass in another location may result in periosteal reaction
of the bones of the distal limbs and lameness.
The dog should be carefully observed at rest and at several
gaits before in-depth examination and palpation to avoid
General Physical Examination
artificially accentuating lameness with manipulation of the
affected areas. If possible, observe the patient as it arises
It is critical that a thorough general physical examination
from a sitting or recumbent position. Often the lameness is
be performed by the attending veterinarian. Information
more severe immediately after rising and then improves
concerming other body systems is vital to determine whether
with ambulation; in some instances, the patient may not use
certain forms of therapy may be contraindicated, or if a
the affected limb at all to help rise to a standing position.
systemic disease such as Lyme disease or systemic lupus
With the patient standing, one should observe for weak-
erythematosus may be the underlying cause of a lameness.
ness, limb trembling, asymmetry of regions of the limbs
It is especially important if surgical intervention is possible
indicative of muscle atrophy, asymmetry of the head and
or if long-term medication is anticipated to be certain that
neck, limb position, and confonmation (Figure 10-1). It is
major body systems are healthy and able to tolerate the
common for standing animals to bear less weight on a limb
treatment. In particular, the cardiovascular, respiratory, gas-
afflicted with lameness. In this situation, the animal may
trointestinal, hepatic, renal, and endocrine systems should
not have the entire foot in contact with the foor. One
be assessed to determine if underlying disease conditions
method to assess the relative amount of weight placed on
are present that may affect the selection and appropriate
each limb is for the examiner to place the front feet or the
use of various medications or anesthetic agents. Thorough
rear feet on the palm of each hand and allow the animal to
auscultation of the heart and lungs, abdominal palpation,
bear weight on the observer's hands rather than on the
lymph node palpation, evaluation of mucocutaneous junc-
foor. This is a semiquantitative method of assessing weight
tions, and assessment of the skin are necessary. Ancillary
bearing. Another method to assess weight bearing is to use
tests may be needed for more thorough evaluation, includ-
bathroom scales, or more sophisticated devices described
ing electrocardiogram, complete blood count, serum bio-
in Chapter 13, under each foot to determine the amount of
chemistry profle, urinalysis, radiographs or sonograms of
weight placed on each limb at a stance. In many lame-
the thorax or abdomen, and other special tests.
nesses there is also marked muscle atrophy of the affected
Figure 10-1  The dog should be observed from (A) the front and (B) the rear while standing for evidence of reduced weight bearing on an
affected limb, turning the toes out, and not bearing weight symmetrically in comparison with the contralateral limb. Note the reduced weight
bearing on the left rear limb indicated by less contact of the metatarsal pad with the ground and the more lateral position of the foot as com-
pared with the other rear limb.
182
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
Figure 10-2 The dog should be observed going (4) away from and (8) toward the evaluator at both a walk and a trot. (C) The dog should
 also be observed from the side.
which a diagonal forelimb and hindlimb strike the ground
Box 10-1
Lameness Score (Applied
at the same time. Observing at a walk with separate limb
Separately at a Walk and a Trot)
strikes helps to determine which diagonal limb is affected
0: Normal
in cases of subtle lameness. In many cases, the head will
1: Slight, intermittent lameness 
nod up and down if a lameness is present. In general the
2: Obvious weight-bearing lameness
head will nod up when the affected leg is placed on the
3: Severe weight-bearing lameness
 ground if a forelimb lameness is present, and the head will
4: Intermittent non-weight-bearing lameness
nod down when the affected limb is placed on the ground
 5: Continuous non-weight-bearing lameness
if a hindlimb lameness is present. The reason for this is to
reduce weight bearing and force on the lame limb by using
the head and neck as a lever arm to shift weight from the
leg. In some chronic lamenesses there may be abnormal
painful limb to the opposite end of the body.
The patient should also be evaluated at a trot, which is
noticeable.
a symmetric two-beat diagonal gait. Subtle lameness is
generally easier to see at a trot because greater forces
Gait
placed on the lame limb accentuate the lameness. Although
Gait evaluation is generally performed after observing the
moderate forelimb and hindlimb lameness may be differ-
dog rising and at a stance. The patient's gait is best observed
 entiated at a walk because the patterm of footfalls is sepa-
in a large, enclosed exercise area from a distance. In addi-
rated, differentiation of forelimb and hindlimb lameness is
tion, it is beneficial to have an area in which observations
more challenging at a trot. The reason for this is that diago-
may be made with the dog off leash. Gaiting begins with
nal forelimbs and hindlimbs strike the ground at the same
the handler moving the patient first at a walk, then at a trot.
time. As an example, consider a head that nods up when
The patient should be evaluated while moving directly
the left forelimb strikes the ground. This may indicate a
away from, and then toward the examiner (Figure 10-2).
left forelimb lameness. However, it may also be indicative
The patient should then be evaluated from the side at a
of a left hindlimb lameness, because as the left hindlimb
distance (Figure 10-2C). Evaluation at a lope or gallop may
strikes the ground, the head will nod down; as the right
be performed if the patient is able, but this gait is less
hindlimb and left forelimb strike the ground immediately
useful for evaluation of most lameness because of the
after, the head will nod back up. Careful observation of
speed of limb motion and the fact that these gaits are asym-
other features of gait may help distinguish between fore-
metric. It may be helpful to capture the gait with a video
limb and hindlimb lameness at a trot, in conjunction with
camera and then evaluate the gait in slow motion. The
other features of the physical examination. It may also be
degree of lameness may be subjectively evaluated using a
helpful to place each major joint through a full range of
lameness scoring system to allow comparison of the lame-
motion, and then reassess the lameness. Stresses placed on
ness over time (Box 10-1).
joints as they are fexed and extended may accentuate a
Observation of the patient while it is walking is beneff-
subtle lameness.
cial for those patients with severe lameness that may be
 In addition, other factors such as stride length, limb
unwilling to trot. Because the walk is a slow four-beat gait,
carriage, joint motion, and side bending of the spinal
each limb may be separately evaluated. This is particularly
column are useful in evaluating lameness. The affected
beneficial to help differentiate a lameness seen at a trot, in
limb  may have a  shortened  stride  length and  reduced
Chapter 10
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
183
fexion and extension of the affected joints. Most dogs will
walk with the normal limb centered under the body during
the weight-bearing phase of gait on that limb, whereas a
lame limb may be carried further eccentrically during
weight bearing. The affected limb may also circumduct
 during gait. Animals with hip or stife conditions may have
increased lateral fexion of the spinal column toward the
affected side in an attempt to advance the limb by using
the back, especially if the stride is shortened on that side.
In all cases, symmetry of movement should be evaluated.
Abnormal proprioception, dragging of the nails, knuckling
over on the dorsum of the paw, and hypermetria indicate
neurologic disease.
When possible, the patient should be walked and trotted
in a large circle in both directions. In many cases, lameness
 Of the inside limb will be accentuated. Stairs and steps may
also be helpful in observing lameness and subtle neuro-
logic problems. Dogs may skip up or down steps with the
affected limb rather than pushing off the limb to ascend or
descend a fight of stairs, or may knuckle over on the
dorsum of the paw of a limb afficted with a neurologic
Figure 10-3  Simultaneous palpation of both hindlimbs for evi-
condition.
dence of muscle atrophy and asymmetry.
General Palpation for Symmetry
and Atrophy
behind the dog and placing the thumbs of each hand on
 Following observation of the patient for lameness during
the lateral epicondyles. The fingers are then wrapped
ambulation, a brief examination is performed while the dog
around the cranial aspect of the elbow, and the index
is still standing to assess symmetry and to assess relative
fingers are placed in the region of the medial coronoid
muscle mass and the presence of muscle atrophy. Simulta-
 processes of the ulnas. The area of the medial coronoid
neous palpation of both forelimbs and then both rear limbs
process is firmly pressed to assess for pain and discomfort,
will allow the examiner to detect subtle differences between
which may indicate a fragmented medial coronoid process.
limbs that are normally symmetric (Figure 10-3). Fractures
Following palpation of this area, the cranial and caudal
and neoplasia of the musculoskeletal system are usually
aspects of the medial joint are assessed for joint effusion,
obvious. Individual regions are evaluated for swelling.
swelling, and increased or decreased soft-tissue mass. The
abnormal shape, heat, and sensitivity and pain.
caudolateral joint compartment is assessed next between
Beginning with the forelimb, the dorsal border of the
the lateral epicondyle and the olecranon process for joint
scapula is palpated to be certain that one side is not higher
effusion or swelling, which might indicate osteoarthritis
than the other. The spine of the scapula is assessed for
or an ununited anconeal process. This swelling is usually
fractures and prominence of the spine of the scapula,
palpable caudal and parallel to the lateral epicondyle, and
which might indicate muscle atrophy if it is readily pal-
compression forces the effusion medially. By palpating
pable and differs from the other side. The acromion and
the elbows simultaneously with the dog standing. subtle
greater tubercle of the humerus are palpated next. The
abnormalities may be detected by assessing the area for
distance between the two landmarks and the amount of soft
asymmetry. It may also be helpful in certain cases to
tissue between the two points should be equal on both
 pronate and supinate the distal extremity when evaluating
sides. The shaft of the humerus is palpated next to locate
each individual elbow. These maneuvers help to concen-
 any areas of swelling or muscle atrophy.
trate the forces in the medial or lateral joint compartment,
The elbow is a difficult joint to assess because many
accentuating any subtle discomfort.
structures are present in a relatively small area, including
The shafts of the radius and ulna are palpated from
the medial and lateral epicondyles of the humerus and the
proximal to distal to assess the bones for any pain or swell-
fexor and extensor muscles that arise from them, the head
ing. The carpi and digits are usually best assessed with the
of the radius, the region of the medial coronoid process
 dog in lateral recumbency, although the standing angle of
of the ulna, the joint capsule, and other soft-tissue struc-
the carpus should be observed to be certain that carpal
tures in the area. The task is made easier by standing
 hyperextension is not present.
184
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
The hindlimbs are evaluated next. The dorsal aspect
of the wings of the iliums are located to be certain that
one is not located further cranially or dorsally than the
other, which might indicate a sacroiliac luxation. The
gluteal muscles are assessed for atrophy throughout the
ilium. The area between the greater trochanter and the
tuber ischium is located and compared with the other side.
Asymmetry may indicate the presence of muscle atrophy
 Oon the side that has less soft tissue between the two points,
or a hip luxation if the distance between the two points
differs. The thigh musculature is evaluated for atrophy.
The stifles are simultaneously palpated in a manner similar
to that of the elbows to assess for joint effusion, the pres-
ence of finm tissue on the medial aspect of the distal
femur (often referred to as a medial buttress) that might
indicate a chronic rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament,
Figure 10-4 The interdigital areas, pads,phalanges, and metatarsal
and the position of the patellae, which should be
bones should be palpated and the joints placed through a range of
symmetric.
motion.
 The tibias are assessed for any asymmetric swelling or
 pain, and the angle of the tarsus is observed to evaluate the
integrity of the common calcaneal tendons. The tarsus and
digits are best evaluated with the patient in lateral
is further assessed by fexing and extending individual
recumbency.
joints and placing varus and valgus stresses on the joints.
 It is helpful to be familiar with the origin and insertion of
the interphalangeal ligaments to properly evaluate instabil-
Orthopedic Examination
ity (Box 10-2).
The tarsus is a complex series of joints. It is first
 A systematic approach to the orthopedic examination is
assessed for joint effusion and instability. Palpation of the
necessary to reduce the risk of missing a condition and to
 dorsal aspect of the tarsocrural joint is especially reward-
create an evaluation that can be consistently repeated. In
ing in cases of joint effusion. The joint is placed through
many cases the contralateral limb may be used as a refer-
a full range of motion to assess the joint for limitations,
ence for comparison of limb circumference, range of
crepitus, and pain. The examiner's finger is used to palpate
 motion, and sensitivity to palpation. Comparison with the
the tarsal bones, with particular attention to the central,
contralateral limb may be especially helpful when a subtle
third, and fourth tarsal bones. The tarsus has short and
condition exists and there is uncertainty regarding an
long components of the medial and lateral collateral liga-
abnormality. Concentrating on anatomy during the exami-
ments that are taut in different degrees of fexion and
nation, and referring to an anatomy book as necessary,
extension. To assess the long components of the collateral
helps in confusing or unusual situations. The patient is
ligaments, valgus and varus stresses are applied while the
usually ex amined in lateral recumbency, but may be evalu-
tarsus is placed in full extension (Figure 10-5). Normally,
ated while standing if it is anxious.
there should be little varus or valgus movement with the
hock extended. The short portions of the collateral liga-
Rear Limbs
ments are assessed by placing varus and valgus stresses
Evaluation of the rear limbs first may be safer for the
on the tarsus with the tarsocrural joint fexed to 90 degrees.
examiner while the patient is becoming accustomed to the
Assessment of these structures while the hock is fexed
examiner. The phalanges and metatarsals of the distal limb
is more difficult because there is some normal motion in
are evaluated first. The toes are spread apart to evaluate the
this position. After stabilizing the metatarsus with one
 nail beds, webbing between the toes, and the pads for any
hand and the tuber calcis with the other, dorsal and plantar
infection, trauma, or cracks. The phalanges, interphalan-
stresses are placed on the hock to determine if subluxation
geal joints, metatarsal bones, and metatarsophalangeal
is present or if there has been damage to the supporting
joints are individually palpated and assessed for pain, crep-
plantar structures. With the stife maintained in an extended
itus, swelling, fractures, luxations, or collateral ligament
position, the hock is fexed to evaluate the calcaneus and
instability (Figure 10-4). The range of motion of the joints
common calcaneal tendon. Normally, there should be little
is also assessed. The area over the plantar sesamoid bones
ability to fex the tarsus. Excessive fexion may indicate
is palpated for pain and proliferative changes that might be
that there has been a fracture of the calcaneus or damage
associated with an old fracture or arthritis. Joint stability
to the common calcaneal tendon. It is also helpful to
Chapter 10
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
185
Box 10-2
 Common Conditions
of the Hindlimbs
Common Conditions of the Digits, Pads, and Feet
Par onychia
Lacerations of the interdigital skin or foot pads
Luxations of the interphalangeal joints
Luxations of the tarsometatarsal joint
 Fractures of the metatarsal bones
 Fractures of the phalanges
Fractures of the sesamoid bones
Common Conditions of the Tarsus
Figure 10-5 The tarsus is evaluated for evidence of medial or
Osteochondritis dissecans of the talus
lateral collateral ligament damage by applying varus and valgus
 Fracture of the calcaneus
stresses to the joint.
Fracture of the central tarsal bone
 Fracture of the third or fourth tarsal bones
Luxations of the tarsus with damage to the short or long
tarsocrural ligaments
Osteoarthritis
Disruption of the common calcaneal tendon
 Rupture of the plantar ligaments 
Common Conditions of the Tibia and Fibula
 Fractures of the tibia and fbula
Panosteiti s
 Traumatic periostitis
Osteosarcoma
Common Conditions of the Stifle
Cranial cruciate ligament disruption
Osteochondritis dissecans of the femoral condyle
Injuries to the medial and lateral collateral ligaments
Figure 10-6  The tibia is palpated for evidence of pain, swelling. or
Medial and lateral patellar luxation
inflamm ation.
 Medial and lateral meniscal damage
Fractures
 Congenital absence of the patella
Caudal cruciate ligament disruption
Osteoarthritis
Palpation of the tibia is relatively easy because the
Common Conditions of the Femur
medial aspect has little muscle covering. The metaphyseal
and diaphyseal regions are palpated for periosteal or
 Fracture of the femur
 Panosteiti s
bone pain, which might indicate hypertrophic osteodystro.
Osteosarcoma
phy, panosteitis, fractures, neoplasia, or traumatic perios-
titis (Figure 10-6). It is helpful to palpate the medial
Common Conditions of the Coxofemoral Joint
Hip dysplasia
and lateral malleoli distally and the head of the fibula
 Fracture of the acetabulum
proximally.
 Fracture of the femoral head or neck
The stife joint is frequently afflicted with orthopedic
Fracture and separation of the proximal capital femoral physis
 conditions. Sedation may be necessary in some larger
Legg-Cal ve-Perthes disease
 patients that are tense. The joint is initially assessed for
Traumatic luxation of the coxofemoral joint
swelling. The tibial tubercle is located first, and the path
Osteoarthritis
of the patellar ligament is traced proximally. The joint is
palpated medial and lateral to the patellar ligament. Nor-
mally, the ligament feels like a pencil and the medial and
lateral edges can be distinctly felt, but with joint effusion,
palpate the insertion of the tendon on the calcaneus to
the patellar ligament is less distinct and fuid may be pal-
rule out partial avulsion injuries, which may be manifested
pable in cases of moderate to severe joint effusion. The
as a finm swollen area. It is valuable to compare the sus-
femoral condyles and the region of the trochlear ridges are
pected limb with the contralateral limb to assess subtle
palpated next. In some cases, osteophytes or joint capsule
findings.
thickening may be palpable. Thickening of the medial
186
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
aspect of the distal femur is often present in dogs with
patella is located. To test for lateral patella luxation, the
chronic rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament. This is
stife is placed in extension or slight fexion while the distal
suy pe puy sraxa a sud Aq ny Aa
limb is extermally rotated. Pressure is applied to the medial
across the stifle so that the fingers rest over the medial
aspect of the patella, trying to force it laterally. Although
surface of the joint. The other stife may be simultaneously
medial patella luxation is most common in all breeds, if a
 palpated to compare the two limbs. Swelling of the cranio-
lateral patella luxation is present, it is most likely a large
lateral joint in a young dog might indicate the presence of 
dog or a chondrodystrophic breed.
an avulsion of the long digital extensor tendon, although
Instability of the medial collateral ligament is assessed
this condition is rare. The stife is fexed and extended to
with the stife in extension. While holding the distal femur
evaluate for crepitus, grating, clicking, or snapping, which
with one hand and the proximal tibia with the other, a
might indicate osteoarthritis, a damaged meniscus, or joint
valgus stress is placed on the tibia. In normal dogs, little
instability. The examiner's hand may be placed on the
motion occurs with this maneuver. Lateral collateral liga-
patella to assess crepitus. Often dogs with a partial rupture
ment integrity is assessed by holding the limb as if check-
of the cranial cruciate ligament or chronic osteoarthritis
ing for medial collateral instability, but a varus stress is
secondary to cranial cruciate ligament rupture have marked
placed on the tibia.
pain with full stifle extension.
Injury to the cranial cruciate ligament is common, and
The patella is assessed for medial or lateral luxation. To
this structure should be carefully evaluated. Large dogs
test for medial patella luxation, the stife is extended, the
may be tense and require sedation for a thorough examina-
distal limb is intermally rotated, and pressure is applied to
tion. The most common method of assessing rupture of the
the lateral aspect of the patella to try to displace it medially
cranial cruciate ligament rupture is the cranial drawer test
(Figure 10-7). While maintaining pressure, the limb is
(Figure 10-8). To perform this test, place one index finger
slowly fexed and extended to see if luxation occurs with
on the tibial tubercle and stretch the soft tissues caudally
the limb in a position other than full extension. Medial
with the thumb until the head of the fibula is reached. Place
 patella luxation is common in toy and miniature breeds and
the other index finger on the patella and stretch the soft
in larger breeds such as Labrador retrievers. In small dogs,
tissues with the thumb until the lateral fabella is palpated.
the patella may be difficult to locate if patella ectopia
Now place the stife in mild fexion and quickly and gently
exists. In these cases, the tibial tubercle is located and the
try to move the tibia cranially and caudally (slide the
path of the patellar ligament is traced proximally until the
drawer open and closed). The examiner should avoid
intermally rotating the limb while performing the drawer
maneuver. Because the cranial cruciate ligament also
limits excessive intermal rotation and hyperextension, in
addition to cranial drawer, excessive intermal rotation or
Figure 10-8 Cranial drawer motion is assessed by placing one
forefinger on the patella, one thumb on the lateral fabella, the other
forefinger on the tibial tuberosity, and the other thumb on the
Figure 10-7 To evaluate the stifle for medial patella luxation, the
head of the fibula. An attempt is then made to slide the tibia cranially
stifle is extended, the tibia is internally rotated, and an attempt is
in relation to the femur, while holding the femur in a steady
 made to push the patella medially out of the trochlear groove.
position.
Chapter 10
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
187
hyperextension may be helpful in diagnosing injury to the
collateral ligament, or the medial meniscus. To assess the
ligament. In some cases, partial drawer may be detected.
caudal cruciate ligament, the limb is held as for testing
This may result from a partial cranial cruciate rupture, a
cranial drawer, but the tibia is displaced caudally rather
torm meniscus that has become wedged between the tibia
than cranially. Diagnosis of tears of the caudal cruciate
and femur, or a chronic cranial cruciate ligament rupture
ligament can be difficult and requires excellent knowledge
with periarticular fibrosis providing partial stability of the
of the spatial anatomy of the stife joint. The integrity of
stifle. In some cases of partial cranial cruciate ligament
the medial and lateral collateral ligaments are assessed by
rupture, there may be drawer motion in fexion but not
holding the stife in an extended position while placing
extension.
valgus and varus stresses on the joint.
An indirect method of evaluating the integrity of the
The femur is evaluated next. The quadriceps, biceps
cranial cruciate ligament is the tibial compression test
femoris, semimembranosus, and semitendinosus muscles
(Figure 10-9). The stife is fexed to an approximately
are palpated for atrophy, swelling, and pain. Although
90-135-degree angle. One hand is placed on the stife with
muscle tears are rare in breeds other than sight hounds, the
the forefinger resting on the tibial tuberosity. The tarsus is
tensor fascia lata and gracilis muscles should be ex amined.
slowly fexed with the other hand while keeping the stifle
The shaft of the femur is palpated between muscle bellies,
at a fixed angle. This causes tension in the gastrocnemius
being careful not to confuse bone pain with pain from
muscle and common calcaneal tendon that compresses the
 pinching muscles (Figure 10-10). Bone pain and swelling
femur and tibia. In the absence of the cranial cruciate liga-
 in the distal femur may indicate osteosarcoma in a large
ment, cranial movement of the tibial tuberosity in relation
 breed, whereas pain in the diaphysis of the bone in a skel-
to the distal femur is detected.
 etally immature dog may indicate panosteitis.
Injury to the caudal cruciate ligament is rare and is
The coxofemoral, or hip joint is also commonly
usually due to trauma. Other structures are also commonly
afflicted with orthopedic conditions. The hip joint should
injured, such as the cranial cruciate ligament, the medial
 be assessed for luxation in dogs with acute lameness of a
rear limb as a result of trauma. To do this, fingers are
placed on the tuber sacrale, greater trochanter, and tuber
ischium (Figure 10-11). The greater trochanter should be
below a line drawn from the tuber ischium to the tuber
sacrale; if not, then a hip luxation should be suspected.
Next, a thumb is placed in a notch between the greater
Figure 10-9 The tibial compression test is a method to indirectly
create cranial drawer motion. To perform this maneuver, the stifle is
 placed in a slightly extended walking position and firmly maintained 
in this position. The examiner places a forefinger on the tibial tuberos-
ity and the thumb and remaining fingers on the medial and lateral
condyles of the femur. The other hand is used to flex the hock. The
forefinger on the tibial tuberosity detects any cranial shift of the tibia
in relation to the femur as a result of an insufficient cranial cuciate
Figure 10-10  The femur is palpated for any pain, inflammation, or
ligament.
swelling, while minimizing excessive compression of the muscles.
188
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
trochanter and the tuber ischium, and the femur is exter-
notch. Another method of evaluating the possibility of a
nally rotated. With a nonmal hip, the thumb will be dis-
hip luxation is to measure the length of the affected leg.
placed out of the notch as the femur is rotated. With a hip
The affected leg will be shorter with the hip extended and
luxation, the thumb is not displaced because the greater
will be longer with the hip flexed as compared with the
trochanter is typically displaced cranially and dorsally and
normal contralateral leg. It should be noted that fractures
does not rotate caudally to displace the thumb from the
of the femoral neck and capital femoral physeal fractures
may give similar physical examination findings.
Next the hip should be placed through a range of motion,
including fexion, extension, and rotation of the hip joint
to detenmine if pain, crepitus, or decreased range of motion
exist. In most cases, dogs have full hip fexion with little
or no pain. Patients with osteoarthritis of the hip have pain
with hip extension. Subluxation of the hip commonly
occurs in young dogs with hip dysplasia. The Ortolani sign
may be performed to determine whether subluxation of the
coxofemoral joint is present (Figure 10-12). To perform
this test, the dog is placed in lateral or dorsal recumbency.
The palm of one hand is placed over the region of the
sacrum to support the dog, and the fingers of that hand are
placed on the greater trochanter and rim of the acetabulum.
The femur is grasped with the other hand, and the femur
Figure 10-11  The relationships of the dorsal border of the wing of
is adducted and pushed dorsally. The examiner may feel
the ilium, the greater trochanter of the femur, and the ischiatic tuber-
the femur displace from the acetabulum. The femur is then
osity are established. A triangle should be formed when these struc-
slowly abducted while palpating for a change in the rela-
tures are outlined. In this photo, the thumb is on the tuber ischium,
the forefinger is on the greater trochanter, and the middle finger is
tion of the greater trochanter and acetabulum. If the hip
on the dorsal border of the wing of the ilium. If the greater trochanter
is in a line with the dorsal wing of the ilium and the ischiatic tuberos-
spontaneously reduces itself as the femur is abducted. An
ity, a craniodorsal luxation of the coxofemoral joint may be present.
 Ortolani maneuver may be performed in a standing dog by
aui yo eane aui laao paseid si puey auo jo wped aun suagwnsal peatel u paeid s saed aun 'isat jueloio ay woad oi't zl-ot ani
pelvis, the thumb or forefinger of that hand is placed on the greater trochanter, and the femur is adducted while the femur is pushed dorsally
with the other hand. B, The femur is then abducted, and if subluxation of the hip has occurred, the reduction will be felt with the thumb or
forefinger on the greater trochanter as it is reduced.
Chapter 10
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
189
Box 10-3
Common Conditions
of the Forelimbs
Common Conditions of the Digits, Pads, and Feet
 Paronychia
Lacerations of the interdigital skin or foot pads
Lux ations of the interphalangeal joints
Lux ations of the carpometacarpal joint
Fractures of the metacarpal bones
Fractures of the phalanges
 Fractures of the sesamoid bones
Stress periostitis
 Periosteal bone formation associated with hypertrophic
osteopathy
Common Conditions of the Carpus
Fractures of the accessory, radial, ulnar, or numbered carpal
Figure 10-13  The phalanges are flexed and extended to determine
if any pain or decreased range of motion is present. Here, the digits
bones
Carpal hyperextension injury
are flexed as a group.
Flexural contracture of the carpus
Lux ation of the antebrachiocarpal joint
 Collateral ligament injuries
placing the dog's pelvis and sacrum against the examiner's
Stress tendinitis of the ulnar lateralis 
chest and using one hand to create a dorsal force while
Osteoarthritis
adducting the hip.
Common Conditions of the Radius, Ulna, and Elbow
Forelimbs
 Fragmented coronoid process of the ulna
 Ununited anconeal process
Evaluation of the digits, pads, interdigital skin, metacarpal
 Osteochondritis dissecans of the medial aspect of the humeral
bones, phalangeal joints, and metacarpophalangeal joints
condyle
is similar to that conducted in the rear limbs (Figure 10-13
 Incongruity of the elbow joint
and Box 10-3). Careful digital palpation on the dorsal
 Fracture of the lateral and medial condyle of the humerus
surface of these bones may reveal point pain or tendermess
Luxation of the elbow joint, usually lateral
often associated with stress periostitis.
Panosteitis
The carpus is evaluated next. The antebrachiocarpal,
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
middle carpal, and carpometacarpal joints are assessed for
Osteoarthritis
Fracture of the radius and ulna
effusion. The areas of each carpal bone are individually
palpated for pain, swelling, and discomfort that may indi-
Common Conditions of the Humerus
 cate chip fractures or other injuries. The carpus is placed
 Fracture of the humerus
through a complete range of motion to assess for restricted
Panosteitis
motion, pain, or crepitus. Normally, the carpus should fex 
Osteosarcoma
so that the pads on the bottom of the foot contact the caudal
Common Problems of the Scapulohumeral Joint
aspect of the antebrachium. The carpus should extend
Avulsion fracture of the supraglenoid tubercle
 approximately 10 to 20 degrees beyond vertical (overex-
Luxation of the scapulohumeral joint
tension). The collateral ligaments of the carpus are evalu-
 Fracture of the scapulohumeral joint 
ated by placing varus and valgus stresses with the carpus
 Biceps tenosynovitis
in full extension. There is normally more varus and valgus
Medial glenohumeral ligament instability
motion in the carpus than in the other hinge-type joints.
 Mineralization of the supraspinatus tendon
The carpus should be placed in a normal walking position
Contracture of the infraspinatus muscle
Osteochondritis dissecans of the caudal head of the humerus
and pressure placed on the foot to evaluate for carpal
Osteoarthritis
hyperextension syndrome, which is associated with damage
      
(Figure 10-14). In early hyperextension injuries, there may
be pain and reduced fexion of the carpus. The accessory
swelling. The examiner should palpate the medial and
 carpal bone should be evaluated for fractures or changes
lateral styloid processes. Swelling and pain in the meta-
associated with chronic osteoarthritis.
physeal region may indicate hypertrophic osteodystrophy
The radius and ulna are assessed for angular limb defor-
in a young, large-breed dog. Pain and swelling in this
mities, and their entire lengths are palpated for pain and
region in an older dog may indicate the presence of
190
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
y uoow jo ahuei e yonoui paoeld si sndies aul tl-ot aanbt
the limb placed in a walking position, dorsal pressure is placed on
Figure 10-16  Simultaneous palpation of both elbows allows for
the detection of subtle abnormalities, such as mild joint effusion. The
placements of hands and fingers are essentially mirror images of each
other on the right and left elbows. Effusion of the caudolateral com-
partment in a 6-month-old large-breed dog may indicate the pres-
ence of an ununited anconeal process, whereas effusion of the
 Caniomedial joint compartment may indicate a fragmented medial
coronoid process or osteochondritis dissecans of the medial condyle
of thehumerus.
of motion, especially fexion, almost always indicates the
presence of osteoarthritis. The medial and lateral humeral
epicondyles and heads of the radius and ulna are palpated.
The collateral ligaments of the elbow joint are evaluated
with the elbow fully extended. The distal extremity is
 grasped and varus and valgus stresses are applied to evalu-
 ate the collateral ligaments. The elbow and carpus are then
fexed to 90 degrees and the distal limb is intemally and
extermally rotated. With this maneuver, it is possible to
 intermally rotate the distal extremity and apply digital pres-
Figure 10-15  The radius and ulna are palpated. If pain is elicited
in the midshaft of the radius in a skeletally immature large-breed
m sop uu un uof aun jo uod gipa ay uo ans
dog, panosteitis is suspected.
medial coronoid problems, pain may be elicited. Swelling
in the caudolateral aspect of the elbow may indicate joint
effusion associated with an ununited anconeal process,
osteosarcoma. Lameness and pain on palpation of the
while swelling on the medial aspect of the elbow joint may
diaphyseal region of the radius or ulna in a young large-
indicate osteochondritis dissecans of the medial humeral
breed dog may indicate panosteitis (Figure 10-15).
condyle or a fragmented medial coronoid process of the
The elbow is a difficult joint to assess because three
ulna. With digital pressure, the effusion may be displaced,
bones are articulating together, and many soft-tissue struc-
but the effusion reappears after the digital pressure is
tures originate in the region of the elbow. It is helpful to
released.
simultaneously palpate both elbows to detect subtle differ-
 The humerus is palpated for swelling and pain that may
ences between them, such as mild joint effusion (Figure
result from panosteitis or neoplasia. Caution should be
10-16). The range of motion in fexion and extension is
exercised in interpreting pain when palpating the region of
determined, and the joint is evaluated for crepitus. Any loss
the radial nerve (Figure 10-17). Direct pressure on the
Chapter 10 
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
191
Figure 10-17  Caution should be exercised when palpating the
Figure 10-18  Pain caused by extension of the shoulder joint in a
distal humerus to be certain that compression of the radial nerve by
skeletally immature large-breed dog is consistent with osteochondri-
the examiner is not causing pain and discomfort. The general area of
tis dissecans of the caudal head of the humerus.
the radial nerve is indicated by the finger.
nerve may elicit a painful response unrelated to any patho-
logic finding of the humerus. Anatomically, an imaginary
line drawn along the dorsal border of the antebrachium and
continued to the humerus with the elbow held in mild
fexion will approximate the location of the radial nerve as
it crosses over the humerus.
The scapulohumeral or shoulder joint should be fexed
and extended. The relationship of the acromial process to
the greater tubercle of the humerus should be palpated. An
abnormality of this relationship may indicate a shoulder
luxation, either medial or lateral. In the absence of trauma,
 pain on extension of the shoulder joint of a young dog is
almost pathognomonic for osteochondritis dissecans of the
caudal aspect of the humeral head (Figure 10-18). Simi-
larly, pain may be elicited in a dog with osteochondritis 
Figure 10-19  Pain caused by shoulder flexion and simultaneous
dissecans if the shoulder joint is simultaneously fexed and
extension of the elbow is likely due to biceps tenosynovitis. Direct
intermally rotated. Pain may be elicited with simultaneous
palpation of the region of the biceps tendon just medial to the greater
fexion of the shoulder joint and extension of the elbow if
tubercle of the proximal humerus may also be painful.
biceps tenosynovitis is present (Figure 10-19). This maneu-
ver places increased stress on the biceps tendon as it tra-
verses the bicipital groove in the prox imal humerus. Direct
palpation of the biceps tendon in this region, located cranial
 medial pressure on it to prevent movement of the scapula.
and medial to the greater tubercle, may also elicit pain.
The examiner then grasps the limb at the level of the distal
In addition, varus and valgus stresses should be applied
humerus using the opposite hand. With the elbow and
to the shoulder to check the collateral support. Increas-
shoulder held in extension, the shoulder joint is abducted
 ingly, medial glenohumeral ligament instability is being
to its physiologic limit (Figure 10-20). Normal dogs have
recognized. The examiner uses the thumb and forefinger
an abduction angle of 30-35 degrees, whereas dogs with
of the same hand to grasp the acromion process and place
medial glenohumeral instability have increased abduction
192
Section IlI
Patient Assessment and Management
Other Tips
In general, the best systematic approach to the orthopedic
examination is to examine the normal limbs first and the
affected limb last. In many cases subtle problems in other
limbs may be masked or not detected if attention is initially
placed on the most obvious problem. Also, many animals
become tense throughout the body if they experience dis-
comfort as a result of palpating a painful area on the
affected limb, and a thorough, accurate examination
may no longer be possible. Tranquilization and sedation
should be avoided until after the initial examination
 Shoulder abduction is performed to detect the pres-
 has been completed so that discomfort during palpation
Figure 10-20
ence of medial glenohumeral instability. Note that the shoulder and
is not masked. Similarly, it is best to avoid antiinfamma-
elbow joints are held in extension while the shoulder is abducted.
tory drugs for 24 to 48 hours before examination.
Diagnostic joint blocks should also be considered. These
can be helpful in prioritizing problems if more than one
joint is involved, such as in osteoarthritis of the tarsocrural
joint and chronic rupture of a cranial cruciate ligament.
Tranquilization may facilitate examination of large, ath-
letic dogs in which muscle tone or an anxious patient
results in difficulty in assessing certain aspects of the
examination, such as an Ortolani sign or cranial drawer
motion.
Arthrocentesis
In some cases, arthrocentesis of one or more joints may be
performed by a veterinarian. The joint should be identified
and will typically have some effusion or an increased quan-
tity of synovial fuid. The area should be clipped and pre-
pared using aseptic technique. A 20- or 22-gauge needle
and 3-mL syringe are used. The affected joint should be
fexed and extended several times before arthrocentesis.
This helps to dislodge any bacteria from the synovium if
an infection is suspected. The needle is inserted without
the syringe attached, and the veterinarian waits for syno-
vial fuid to drop into a small EDTA tube. The needle
Figure 10-21 Palpation of the scapula is performed to evaluate for
should be positioned downward to take advantage of
fractures or, rarely, luxation of the scapula.
 gravity to encourage the fow of synovial fuid. This avoids
direct aspiration of the joint and iatrogenic hemorrhage. If
no synovial fuid drips from the needle, then the syringe
is attached and gentle aspiration is attempted. The fuid
and usually pain at the end range of abduction. Dogs with
should be cultured if sepsis is suspected. Two samples are
chronic lameness of a forelimb, unrelated to medial gleno-
obtained, one for immediate culture, and the other for
humeral instability, with muscle atrophy may have
culture in blood culture media for 24 hours. This will allow
 increased shoulder abduction, but do not usually have pain
the recovery of relatively low numbers of bacteria to be
at the end range of abduction. In some dogs with chronic
detected. In many cases, only several drops of fuid may
scapulohumeral instability, it is possible to elicit a drawer
 be obtained, precluding a full cell count and evaluation.
motion of the humerus in relation to the scapula
However, cytology may be performed to determine relative
The scapula should be palpated for fractures or pain,
cellularity and the distribution of cell types. Synovial fuid
especially the spine of the scapula (Figure 10-21). The
analysis is most useful to differentiate infammatory and
body of the scapula should be moved in a dorsal direction
 noninfammatory joint disease. Table 10-1 indicates the
to determine if a scapular luxation exists, although this is
most common general joint conditions and the character-
a rare condition.
istics of synovial fuid analysis.
Chapter 10
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
193
Table 10-1
Synovial Fluid Changes in Canine Arthritis
Condition
Nucleated Cells/mm?
 Differential Mononuclear Cells
Differential Neutrophils
Normal
250-3000
94-100
0-6
DJD
1000-5000
88-100
0-12
Erosive (rheumatoid-like)
8000-38,000
20-80
20-80
Nonerosive
4400-371,000
5-85
15-95
Septic
40,000-267,000
1-10
90-99
DID, Degenerative joint dise ase.
From Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Brinker, Piermattei, and Flo's handbook of small animal orthopedics and fracture repair, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders.
Neurologic Examination
function, but may also indicate a spinal cord lesion or other
 neurologic conditions. For an animal to have normal
Dogs suspected of having a neurologic condition should
posture, normal peripheral sensory inputs must be pro-
 have a complete neurologic evaluation. In addition, during
cessed in the higher centers of the brain including the
evaluation of small animals for lameness or other muscu-
cerebrum, the cerebellum, and the brainstem. Conditions
loskeletal abnommalities, the neurologic system must
such as head tilts, tremors, or falling to one side may indi-
always be examined because some "lamenesses" are actu-
cate a problem in any one of these locations.
ally neurologic conditions. A complete neurologic exami-
Nonambulatory animals may be paretic or paralyzed.
nation should be performed to help determine the
Either condition causes obvious and markedly abnormal
contribution of the nervous system to the condition being
posture in patients. Paretic animals cannot walk without
evaluated, and to help identify other problems that may be
assistance, and although patients can still voluntarily move
occurring concurrently. In addition, a neurologic evalua-
their legs, limb motion is weak. A lesion causing paresis
tion should be performed in trauma patients, and owners
is considered less severe than one causing paralysis in
should be made aware of conditions before undertaking
which voluntary movement is no longer possible. Although
any treatment of traumatic musculoskeletal conditions. A
paresis may be caused by many conditions, it is often a
neurologic ex amination should be performed in a system-
sign of a less severe lesion than would be seen in a para-
atic, sequential mamner. By always performing a neuro-
lyzed animal. If a paretic lesion worsens, the condition
logic evaluation in a consistent fashion, the examiner can
often progresses to complete paralysis. The importance in
ensure that all aspects of the nervous system are evaluated
 differentiating paresis from paralysis comes into play when
and that nothing is omitted. The neurologic examination
determining prognosis. When examining quadrupeds with
should always be performed in a calm, quiet place with
spinal lesions, the examiner should keep in mind that
minimal distractions. It is important that the patient not be
paresis and paralysis do not always affect all four limbs
sedated or tranquilized before the examination to help
equally. When an animal is unable to use or move its limbs,
minimize erroneous interpretations of pain sensation or
it is said to be paralyzed. When an animal is unable to walk
reflexes.
because of paresis in all four limbs, the term tetraparesis
is used. Hemiparesis and paraparesis are terms used to
General Neurologic Examination
describe paresis on one side of the body or of the hindlimbs,
 The neurologic examination begins when an animal is first
respectively, while other limbs have normal function.
 presented to the hospital. The general appearance of the
These presentations are typically seen when a lesion affects
 patient may initially be evaluated at the time the history is
nerves to a particular limb without affecting the innerva-
taken, even before a physical examination is performed.
tion of other limbs, or when a lesion affects only one side
Behavior, posture, and voluntary movements should be
of the spinal cord. A typical example is a thoracolumbar
noted as the animal is allowed to freely move around the
yoq jo siseied io sisaeded on supeat aiong reuis
examination room. During this time, the interactions
hindlimbs while forelimb function remains unaffected.
between the patient and owner should be observed, as this
After the history is recorded and the general appearance
can give valuable information about the patient's menta-
of the animal is evaluated, the patient's gait should be
tion. An animal's behavior may be normal, aggressive,
evaluated if the patient is capable of ambulating and if
excited, apathetic, or depressed. A change in mentation
trauma to the vertebral column is not present. A harmess
should be noted because this may indicate abnormal brain
should be used for any patient in which head or neck
function or other problems. Posture and voluntary move-
lesions are suspected. In preparation for this aspect of the
ment may also indicate abnormal forebrain or brainstem
evaluation, a handler is instructed to gait the animal at a
194
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
walk and a trot. Although an ataxic or circling animal may
and do not rely on cerebral input for function. The refex
not need to be trotted, other conditions such as hypometria
arc consists of a sensory neuron that responds to the stretch
 or hypermetria may not be evident until the speed of the
of a muscle, and a motor neuron that in tum causes muscle
gait is increased. Gait evaluation should always be per-
contraction. In general, if only one limb is affected, a
formed on a surface with adequate traction and should
involve evaluation while the patient ambulates toward and
lesion usually produces bilateral deficits. The most reliable
away from the examiner. Several passes at a walk and trot
myotatic refex is the patellar refex. This refex is per-
should be performed to detect any minor deficits that may
formed with a relaxed patient in lateral recumbency and
be present. Special attention should focus on each limb and
the pelvic limb held in a slightly fexed position. With the
not just the limb or limbs in question to help ensure that
knee supported, the patellar ligament is briskly tapped with
all four limbs are properly examined. Some patients that
a pleximeter (Figure 10-22). As long as the leg is not
have severe ataxia or a tendency to circle can be difficult
already in full extension, suddenly stretching the patellar
to walk in a straight line. It may be beneficial in these
ligament evokes a refex arc that causes sudden extension
patients to allow them to ambulate freely around a large
of the stife. Typically, if this refex is diminished or absent,
confined space to more adequately characterize their gait.
an LMN lesion is localized to spinal cord segments L4 to
After behavior, posture, voluntary movements, and gait
L6 (femoral nerve) or to peripheral sensory or motor
have been assessed, the physical examination is initiated.
 nerves. If hyperrefexia is present, a UMN lesion involving
Palpation allows the examiner to inspect muscles, bones,
the spinal cord cranial to L4 is suspected.
and other soft tissues for subtle abnormalities. Palpation is
The cranial tibial refex is tested with the animal in the
p   aq m ss e  
same position as for the patellar refex. The pleximeter is
moving down the neck, and proceeding to the trunk and
used to strike the muscle belly of the cranial tibial muscle,
extremities. Again, by following the same procedure for
eliciting fexion of the hock. This refex is localized to the
each patient, the examiner minimizes omissions and is able
 L6 to L7 segments of the spinal cord (peroneal branch of
to perform a consistent evaluation. One side of the body is
the sciatic nerve). The gastrocnemius refex can then be
compared with the other to evaluate symmetry. In patients
tested while the animal is still in lateral recumbency. The
with one side or limb more severely affected, it may be
hock can be slightly fexed, and either the gastrocnemius
beneficial to palpate and examine the more normal side or
tendon can be struck or the muscle belly can be struck
limb first. Careful attention should be paid to muscle size,
eliciting extension of the hock. This refex involves the
tone, and strength. Deviation of joints or limbs, abnormal 
body carriage, or worn toenails could indicate a neurologic
 problem. Because intervertebral disk hermiation and other
forms of spinal cord trauma may be painful, the presence
 of pain during physical examination not only may help
identify possible differential diagnoses for a condition, but
also may help to localize the lesion.
Spinal Reflexes
Spinal refexes are used to test the sensory and motor
components of a refex arc. In general, reflexes may be (1)
decreased or absent (hyporefexia), indicating either partial
or complete loss of sensory or motor nerve function to a
particular region of the body (lower motor neuron [LMN]
disease); (2) normal, indicating that no neurologic abnor-
malities exist within the refex arc; or (3) increased or
exaggerated (hyperrefexia), indicating that the inhibitory
neurons from the brain and spinal cord cranial to the LMNs
((asas [nl uu nono adn) poe uaaq aa
In general, spinal reflexes are graded using the following
scheme: absent (0); decreased (+1); normal (+2); exagger-
ated (+3); or very exaggerated or clonus (+4).
Myotatic Reflexes
Myotatic reflexes are stretch refexes that cause muscle
Figure 10-22  A patellar reflex is elicited with the patient relaxed
contraction after the muscle is stretched. These are local
 and in lateral recumbency by tapping the patellar ligament with a
refex arcs that are used for body posture and movement
pleximeter.
Chapter 10
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
195
日
Figure 10-23 Eliciting a flexor reflex of a forelimb (A) and a hindlimb (8). Note flexion of the shoulder, elbow, and carpus in the forelimb, and
the hip, stifle, and hock in the rear limb.
L7-S1 segments of the spinal cord (tibial branch of the
stimuli and to allow withdrawal of the limb away from a
sciatic nerve). The cranial tibial and gastrocnemius refex
noxious stimulus. Briefy, the animal is positioned in lateral
are much less reliable than the patellar refex. If these
recumbency and the limb is positioned in a neutral posi-
refexes are present, the reflex arc is intact. However, the
tion. The animal should be relaxed and comfortable. A
inability to obtain a refex does not necessarily indicate that
 noxious stimulus is applied to the foot, stimulating sensory
there is no intact pathway.
neurons (Figure 10-23). Only the amount of stimulus
In the thoracic limb, the refexes tested include the
required to elicit a response should be used. Initially, the
extensor carpi radialis, triceps, and biceps refex. For
skin on a toe or between toes is pinched. If no response is
the extensor carpi radialis refex, the limb is held with the
elicited with a mild stimulus, a hemostat placed across the
elbow in slight fexion and the carpus slightly fexed as
nail bed of a toe is used before concluding that there is a
well. The muscle belly is struck, which should cause exten-
negative response. Both medial and lateral aspects of the
sion of the carpus. This refex is localized to spinal cord
foot should be tested. The motor pathways of fexor reflexes
segments C7-T1 (radial nerve). The triceps refex also tests 
are more complex than those of myotatic refexes because
these segments. The limb is held in the same position and
motor neurons for all fexor muscles in the affected limb
the triceps tendon is struck just proximal to its insertion,
are activated and the entire limb is fexed. An example is
resulting in contraction of the muscle. Finally, the biceps
a fexor refex of the pelvic limb of a dog, which causes
refex is tested by extending the elbow while palpating the
flexion of the hock, stifle, and hip.
biceps tendon just proximal to its insertion. The pleximeter
Autonomous Zones
is used to strike the examiner's finger, resulting in contrac-
tion of the biceps muscle. This reflex involves the segments
Because specific peripheral sensory nerves innervate
from C6-C8 (musculocutaneous nerve). Myotatic refexes
various portions of the limbs, the peripheral nerves and
in the thoracic limbs can be difficult to interpret, as many
their spinal cord segments may be evaluated to determine
normal animals have decreased responses. The fexor refex
the level of injury. In the thoracic limb, the dorsal surface
gives the most infonmation about nerve function in this
of the foot is innervated by the radial nerve (C7-T1), the
area.
medial surface of the antebrachium is innervated by the
musculocutaneous nerve (C6-8), and the caudolateral
Flexor Reflexes
surface of the foot is innervated by the ulnar nerve (C8-
Flexor refexes are used to evaluate nerve function in both
T2). In the pelvic limb, the most medial toe is innervated
the thoracic and pelvic limbs. These refexes are useful in
by the saphenous nerve, a branch of the femoral nerve
the normal animal to help prevent injury from noxious
(L4-L6), the plantar surface is innervated by the tibial
196
Section IlI
Patient Assessment and Management
branch of the sciatic nerve (L7-S1), and the rest of the foot
deficit in the cutaneous trunci response at a specific loca-
is innervated by the peroneal branch of the sciatic nerve
tion indicates a spinal cord lesion approximately two ver-
(L6-L7). Variable responses to noxious stimuli in different
tebral bodies cranial to the site of the skin pinch. The
regions of the limb help to localize the lesion to a particular
cutaneous trunci refex is most reliable in the middle of the
region.
back. Testing over the cervical, caudal lumbar, and sacral
regions is far less reliable.
Crossed-Extensor Reflex
The crossed-extensor reflex is a normal refex in a standing
Sensation
animal. The reflex causes extension of one limb when the
The presence or absence of sensation in each appendage
contralateral limb is fexed. In a recumbent animal, this
refex is normally inhibited by descending inhibitory path-
pected, pain sensation is usually absent only when volun-
ways. To elicit the refex, the animal is placed in lateral
tary motion is also absent. This typically occurs in the
recumbency, and the fexor reflex is evoked from the upper
presence of severe spinal cord injury. In general, if an
limb. Extension of the contralateral limb while the patient
 animal can move its limbs, sensation is usually present. In
is in lateral recumbency signals a lesion in the inhibitory
paralyzed animals the presence or absence of pain sensa-
 pathways or pathologic condition of the UMN.
tion is very important because absence of deep pain sensa-
tion may indicate severe and often irreversible spinal cord
Perineal Reflex
damage.
 The perineal refex is elicited by tactile stimulation of the
 Deep pain sensation is assessed concurrently with the
perineal region. It is important to test both the left and right
fexor refexes. Animals with severe damage to the spinal
side, as some lesions may cause only unilateral signs. The
cord cranial to the nerve cell bodies and peripheral nerves
normal response of this refex consists of contraction of the
of the tested fexor refex may still have an intact fexor
anal sphincter (anal winking) and ventral fexion of the tail.
refex, but may not transmit the signal to the brain for the
The sensory and motor components of this refex are inner-
 interpretation of pain. Intact pain perception is indicated
vated by the pudendal nerve; thus an absent or decreased
by a cerebral response to the pain, such as vocalization,
response indicates a lesion of the pudendal nerve or sacral
turming the head toward the stimulated limb, or an attempt
spinal cord segments S1-S3. Lesions in the sacral spinal
to move away from the stimulus. In very stoic patients, the
cord or pudendal nerves also often result in decreased
response may be seen as a cessation of panting or move-
urethral sphincter tone and an LMN bladder. This refex
ment of the eyes. The absence of deep pain perception
can also be noted when taking the temperature of the
usually indicates severe spinal cord damage, but it does not
patient during the initial physical examination.
indicate whether the lesion is UMN or LMN. The presence
of a hyperrefexic or hyporefexic fexor refex indicates
Cutaneous Trunci Reflex
whether the lesion is UMN or LMN. It must be emphasized
The cutaneous trunci refex (sometimes called the pannicu-
that a patient may still retain a positive fexor reflex, but
lus reffex) is a relatively complex reflex elicited by apply-
have loss of deep pain sensation. This situation occurs rela-
ing a noxious stimulus to the skin, which stimulates the
tively commonly in dogs with serious intervertebral disk
  n n a sa s gas
extrusion in the thoracolumbar region. Therefore a con-
autonomous zone (dermatome) of the dermis and elicits a
scious response must be obtained to determine if the pain
motor response, which is seen as a skin twitch. Typically,
pathway is intact.
fingers or hemostats are used to pinch the skin and dermis
Postural Reactions
just lateral to the dorsal midline, beginning in the area of
the sacrum and moving cranially until a response is elic-
 Postural reactions are used by animals to maintain an
ited. Where this response starts varies between patients, but
upright position and normal body posture. Under normal
usually is in the mid to caudal lumbar region. When the
circumstances, an animal knows the position of each limb
cutaneous trunci reflex is stimulated, a reflex arc is initi-
in space and will appropriately shift its weight to avoid
ated, with the afferent nerves of that particular region of
falling. Postural reactions involve spinal refexes, as well
the skin stimulated and a signal transmitted to the spinal
as input from higher centers, such as the brain and spinal
cord. The signal is transmitted cranially to the C8-T1
cord, to maintain proper body position. Several postural
spinal cord segments, where the nerves synapse with the
reactions should be tested during a complete neurologic
efferent nerves of the lateral thoracic nerve. The impulse
examination. Although these tests involve different limbs,
causes contraction of the cutaneous trunci muscles to elicit
all test the integration of brain, spinal cord, and peripheral
a skin twitch. Spinal nerve roots to autonomous zones
nerves. Abnormal postural reactions indicate a neurologic
travel from cranial to caudal; therefore this refex usually
 abnormality, but provide the examiner with limited infor-
tests spinal cord segments or nerves approximately two
 mation regarding the specific location of the lesion. Other
vertebral bodies cranial to the noxious stimulus. Thus a
portions of the neurologic ex amination will help to localize
Chapter 10
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
197
Figure 10-24   Hopping performed to assess postural reactions in a
Figure 10-25  Wheelbarrowing to assess proprioceptive function of
forelimb.
the forelimbs.
the lesion. Common postural reaction tests are described
in the following sections.
Hopping
Hopping may be performed on thoracic and pelvic limbs.
The animal is supported, and weight is placed on one limb
with the other limbs supported so they bear no weight
(Figure 10-24). The animal is then moved laterally in a
smooth, quick fashion. The animal should hop on the limb
to prevent falling and collapse. Caution should be used in
animals with muscle weakness because these animals
might have a normal postural reaction to hopping, but may
 not have the muscle strength to support their weight. In
these situations, the animal may be supported to allow
hopping, even if it is weak. In larger dogs hopping may be
Figure 10-26  Hemiwalking.
tested by supporting a thoracic limb completely and
hopping the animal in the thoracic region using the pelvic 
Hemiwalling
limbs as a pivot. This technique allows for adequate testing
of the response, without the examiner having to fully
The hemiwalking test is performed by lifting ipsilateral
support the patient's weight. This can be repeated in the
forelimbs and hindlimbs of the patient, forcing weight
pelvic limbs, using the thoracic limbs as the pivot point.
bearing on the other two contralateral limbs (Figure 10-26).
Wheelbarrowing
The dog is moved laterally and should be able to walk on
two legs without falling. Weak animals may require some
Wheelbarrowing is performed by lifting the caudal
support.
abdomen and pelvic limbs of the dog and allowing weight
bearing on the forelimbs (Figure 10-25). In this position,
Conscious Proprioception
a dog with nonmal neurologic function should be able to
Conscious proprioception is used to test an animal's aware.
move forward as the dog is pushed forward. Muscle weak-
ness of limb position in space without visual input. It is
ness may affect wheelbarrowing and postural reactions,
unnatural for a dog to walk or stand on the dorsum of the
requiring some support.
paw. To test conscious proprioception, a knuckling test is
198
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
input is via the visual pathways rather than the tactile
sensation of the paw.
Cranial Nerve Examination
A brief cranial nerve examination should be performed
during a neurologic evaluation. Animals possess 12 cranial
nerves (Table 10-2). These nerves are mainly involved with
functions of the head, and abnormal function may indicate
a brain lesion. As with other neurologic tests, cranial nerve
examination should be performed in a systematic manner
and usually does not add more than a few minutes to the
examination. Cranial nerve examination is briefy dis-
cussed; the nerves evaluated are indicated in parentheses
after each portion of the test.
The patient's head is inspected for muscle atrophy and
abnormal jaw tone (cranial nerves VTI [facial nerve] and
V [trigeminal nerve], respectively). While the eyes are
covered, the skin around the ears, eyes, and nose is stimu-
lated to elicit a twitch or other facial movement (cranial
nerves V and VIl). The lateral and medial canthus of each
eye is stimulated to elicit a blink response. A menace
Figure 10-27   Conscious proprioception is evaluated by knuckling
over the dorsum of the paw. A neurologically normal patient will
response is elicited by quick hand movements toward each
quickly right the paw to a proper position.
open eye. Caution must be used in this interpretation, as
an air current created by the examiners hand has the poten-
tial to stimulate a response as well as if the examiner
unintentionally touches the whiskers of the patient. In adult
performed on each of the four limbs. With the animal sup-
animals, anticipation of ocular injury should cause momen-
ported, the paw is picked up and turmed over so that the
tary closure of the affected eye (cranial nerves II [optic
dorsum of the paw contacts the ground (Figure 10-27).
nerve] and VII). The menace response is a learmed response
Generally, normal animals immediately pick up the paw
and is generally not able to be elicited until approximately
and place it into a normal position. Normally, a patient will
10-12 weeks of age. A pupillary light response is tested by
not stand on the dorsum of the paw to support weight. If
shining a bright light into each eye while monitoring for
the paw is not properly replaced, a neurologic deficit is 
pupillary constriction (cranial nerves II and MI [oculomo-
usually present. In general, animals with mild neurologic
tor nerve]). Direct and consensual pupillary light responses
lesions may have proprioceptive deficits, but may not
should be tested. To elicit a physiologic nystagmus
show other obvious abnonmal signs; in some cases, motor
response, the patient's head is moved from side to side.
activity may remain relatively normal until the lesion
The fast phase of the nystagmus should be in the direction
progresses.
of the movement (cranial nerves Ill, IV [trochlear nerve],
and VI [abducens nerve]). The mouth is then opened and
Tactile Placing
the gag refex is tested (cranial nerves IX [glossopharyn-
Tactile placing tests are performed by covering the eyes,
geal nerve] and X [vagus nerve]). At the same time, sym-
lifting the dog off of the ground, and bringing the forelimbs 
 metry of the tongue should be observed, which also can
toward a table or stable surface. After sensing the surface,
occur when the patient licks (cranial nerve XII [hypoglos-
the normal response to a tactile placing test is to immedi-
sal nerve]). Palpation of the neck muscles for the presence
ately place both forelimbs onto the surface in a weight-
 of atrophy helps to evaluate cranial nerve XI (accessory
bearing position. A normal tactile placing response relies
nerve). The sense of smell may be tested by monitoring for
on normal sensory and motor pathways of the thoracic
a response to a food odor such as a favorite treat positioned
limbs. Also, normal cerebrocortical function is required to
near the nose (cranial nerve I [olfactory nerve]), although
receive and process the information.
this refex is rarely tested.
Visual placing tests are performed in the same manner
Interpreting the Neurologic Examination
as a tactile placing test except that the patient's eyes are
 not covered. During this test, it is normal for a suspended
After the neurologic examination is complete, the results
animal to reach for a surface even before touching it.
of each individual test should be reviewed to help deter-
Although this test still relies on a normal cerebral cortex
mine the presence or absence of a neurologic abnormality
and intact motor function to the thoracic limbs, sensory
and to help the examiner to localize the lesion. In general,
Chapter 10
Orthopedic and Neurologic Evaluation
199
Table 10-2
Cranial Nerves and Their Functions
CN I: Olfactory nerve
Sensory pathway for the sense of smell
CN II: Optic nerve
Sensory pathway for vision and pupillary light refexes
CN IMI: Oculomotor nerve
Motor pathway to all extrinsic ocular muscles except the lateral rectus,
retractor bulbi, and dorsal oblique muscles
Motor pathway for pupillary constriction
CN IV: Trochlear nerve
Motor pathway to the dorsal oblique muscle of the eye
CN V: Trigeminal nerve
Motor pathway to masticatory muscles
Sensory pathway to the mouth and face
CN VI: Abducent nerve
Motor pathway for the lateral rectus and dorsal oblique muscles of the eye
CN VII: Facial nerve
Motor pathway to the muscles of facial expression
 Sensory pathway for taste to the rostral two thirds of the tongue and the
palate
CN VII: Vestibulocochlear nerve
Vestibular portion—Proprioceptive role for equilibrium and posture
Cochlear portion—Sensory role in hearing
 CN IX: Glossopharyngeal nerve
Sensory and motor innervation for swallowing and the gag refex
Sensory pathway for taste to the caudal third of the tongue
CN X: Vagus nerve
Sensory and motor innervation for swallowing, the gag refex, laryngeal
function, and vocalization
CN XI: Spinal accessory nerve
Motor pathway to the muscles of the neck
CN XTI: Hypoglossal nerve
Motor innervation to the muscles of the tongue
 CN, Cranial nerve.
C1-C5
C6-T2
T3-L3
L4-S3
UMN Forelimbs
LMN Forelimbs
Nomal Forelimbs 
 Nomal Forelimbs
UMN Rear Limbs
UMN Rear Limbs
UMN Rear Limbs
LMN Rear Limbs
Figure 10-28  Appearance of upper motor or
lower motor neuron signs associated with
- If lesion is L4-L5, LMN
lesions of various spinal cord segments or their
signs to femoral nerve
nerve roots.
distribution
-If lesion L6-S2, Normall
 femoral nerve function, LMN
to sciatic nerve
animals with progressive neurologic disease initially have
some cases, the clinical signs may be more obvious in the
decreased proprioception, followed by loss of motor func-
hindlimbs because the spinal tracts to these limbs are
tion, and, in severe cases, a patient may progress to loss of
located more peripherally in the ventral spinal cord, where
superficial and finally, deep pain. If patients recover, pain
compression by a space-occupying mass, such as a pro-
sensation generally returms first, followed by retum of
 truding disk, may occur. Lesions of spinal cord segments
some motor function, and with near-complete recovery,
or nerves of C6-T2 will cause LMN signs to the forelimbs
 proprioceptive function returns last.
and UMN signs to the hindlimbs. The forelimbs will be
Interpretation of the neurologic examination is impor-
normal if the lesion is caudal to T2. Lesions between T3
tant to localize the lesion so that additional diagnostic tests
and L3 will result in UMN signs to the hindlimbs. Lesions
can be performed to evaluate a particular area. The hall-
located from L4 to S3 will result in LMN signs to the
marks of LMN signs are hyporefexia, weakness, and
hindlimbs.
reduced resting tone of muscles, and a decreased ability to
generate tone with limb movement. The indications of
Ancillary Tests
UMN signs are hyperrefexia, maintenance of strength,
increased resting tone of muscles, and spasticity of the
 Thorough orthopedic and neurologic examinations help
limbs.
to isolate the area of interest to a smaller region. This
Lesions of spinal cord segments or nerves of C1-C5
ultimately saves time and expense and will likely result
result in UMN signs to all four limbs (Figure 10-28). In
in a more accurate diagnosis. Ancillary tests to aid
200
Section Ill
Patient Assessment and Management
in a definitive diagnosis include radiographs, magnetic
tests such as MRI or CT. These studies may give enhanced
resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT),
resolution and information, particularly of soft tissue struc-
 myelography, electrodiagnostics, and nuclear medicine
tures, and of the three-dimensional nature of conditions.
studies.
 Nuclear studies may indicate regions of infammation and
Radiographs are the most commonly used test. It is
 metabolic activity in soft tissues or bone, but are available
important to always take at least two views at 90-degree
 in only a few locations.
angles. Most commonly, lateral and cranial-caudal views 
are obtained of the region of interest. Comparison films of
REFERENCE
the opposite limb may be useful to evaluate subtle lesions.
 1. Cook JL, Renfro DC, Tomlinson JL, Sorensen JE: Measure-
Occasionally, stress views of the tarsus or carpus may be
ment of angles of abduction for diagnosis of shoulder instabil-
helpful. Specialty clinics and university teac hing hospitals
ity in dogs using goniometry and digital image analysis, Vet
may have the capability to perform advanced diagnostic
Surg 34:463-468, 2005.
Canine Locomotion Analysis
Robert L. Gillette and T. Craig Angle
t is important to understand the intermal and extemal
of the skeletal system or any disruption of the neuromus-
factors of locomotion. A complete clinical assessment
cular system may result in an inability to carry out certain
and rehabilitation program depend on an in-depth
dynamic and static responsibilities. Asymmetries may
knowledge of the biomechanics of locomotion. Biome-
develop between the angular displacements of joints,
chanics is the study of the mec hanics of a biological system
which produce discrepancies in timing and displacement
and includes kinematic and kinetic principles. Kinematics
of the limbs. This may lead to inefficient locomotion and/
refers to motion, whereas kinetics involves the forces asso-
 or lameness.
ciated with motion. Locomotion has been compared with
 The skeletal segments and joints of the quadruped are
a symphony orchestra in that "all parts must blend into a
repetitively accelerated, decelerated, and loaded with
harmonious pattem—from the gentle sway of the head and
various force magnitudes. Depending on the geometry of
tail for balance to the coordinated efforts of each limb and
the articular surface and the tissues surrounding ajoint, and
muscle to accomplish its special function. Conversely, also
the load involved, each joint moves through a specific
like an orchestration, if all movements are not attuned to
range of motion. There is a coordinated activation of neu-
the whole, a major fault should be evident."
romuscular components to rhythmically act on skeletal
segments to produce fuid and symmetric motion about
Locomotion
each joint. Neuromuscular components must produce con-
centric, eccentric, and isometric muscle contractions in a
Previous biomechanical research has enhanced our under-
synergistic fashion. These muscle contractions must also
standing of canine locomotion and thus warrants an
be at optimal lines of action to apply forces to skeletal
-o jo sad Ard omi  zuondsp ydap-u
structures for efficient propulsion and force absorption.
tion are gait and nonrepetitive motions. Gait is a series of
Skeletal structure position is directly infuenced by the
repetitive motions that include walk, trot, pace, gallop, and
neuromuscular system and must maintain optimal joint
swim. Nonrepetitive motions do not occur in sequence and
angles and joint velocities to facilitate locomotion. Any
include single events such as jumping. movement initia-
alteration in motion of one joint by extemal devices,
tion, and sitting. Nonrepetitive motions have received some
 disease, injury, inflammation, or surgery may disrupt the
focused research attention and are important to understand
fow and fuidity of locomotion.? Also, joint motion can be
for clinical evaluations because forces and  structural
indirectly altered psychologically by stimuli such as pain.
stresses can be at their greatest levels during these motions.
All of the aforementioned alterations can be present in any
By understanding the dynamics of gait and nonrepetitive
quadruped, such as the dog.
motions, clinicians can better diagnose and treat injuries 
Locomotion can be affected by the intermal factors pre-
and diseases
viously mentioned and by certain extemal factors. First,
Locomotion requires a synergistic effort of the bones,
movement can be affected by the textural properties (e.g.
joints, and neuromuscular systems to move, stop, and
vegetation and soil content) of the surface. A hard, soft,
stabilize the body in the presence of sensory input.
smooth, rough, and/or slippery surface affects movement
Locomotion depends on sensory input, and the sensory
by infuencing traction and sensory input. Second, the
input determines how various static and dynamic respon-
angle or incline of a surface and the direction (i.e., up or
sibilities of the musculoskeletal systems are assigned. The
down the incline) in which the dog is traveling affects
musculoskeletal system is constantly distributing body
movement and locomotion. Third, the curvature of a path
weight, absorbing forces, maintaining posture, maintaining
such as running around a tum can directly infuence the
balance, and transferring the center of gravity over the base
forces experienced by the dog. A curvilinear path subjects
of support. The ability to properly carry out these static
the dog to centrifugal and centripetal forces that the dog
and dynamic responsibilities is what produces efficient and
must withstand and compensate so as to stay balanced and
fuid locomotion. Any dysfunction in one joint or segment
continue with a sound gait. Fourth, a fuid environment can
201
202
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
affect movement by applying resistance to motion and
is divided into three parts. The leg first swings backward
buoyancy on the body. Finally, on a treadmill, the base of 
as a result of the propulsive action; the muscles then swing
support passes under the center of gravity, whereas the
it forward for locomotion, and then bring it backward and
center of gravity passes over the base of support over-
down as it returms to the ground. Each one of these phases
 ground. The specific way in which a treadmill affects neu-
 applies different forces on the limb's bony structure and
romuscular patterns has not been studied, but its opposition
musculature. Variations in these phases help the clinician
in relation to support during overground locomotion is
when diagnosing lameness.
worth pointing out. Thus, there are both intermal and exter-
A stride is defined as the cycle of body movements that
 nal factors to consider when evaluating locomotion.
begins with the contact of one foot and ends when that foot
 again contacts the ground. There are various forms of gait
Gait
that are defined by how the body moves during each
stride.6 Symmetric gaits include the walk, trot, and pace.
The gait describes a particular series of joint, segment, and
The trot is a two-beat diagonal gait in which the move-
whole-body movements used for locomotion. The tempo-
ments of one stride have the diagonal fore and hind limbs
rospatial dynamics of each gait determine its type such as
 in support followed by the other two limbs in support
a swimming stroke,4 walk, trot, pace, or gallop. The tem-
(Figure 11-2). In this gait, the right side and left side of the
 porospatial dynamics of a gait can be infuenced by surface
body move symmetrically, or the two sides mirror each
properties, surface incline, ground movement (i.e., tread-
Other.
 mill), submersion in water, and whether or not the dog is
Asymmetric gaits include the rack, gallop or canter. In
 traveling in a linear or curvilinear path.
asymmetric movement the sides move differently. The
A gait is made up of a series of repeated strides. Within
gallop is the gait typically used by dogs that are running
a stride, each limb goes through a step cycle. A step cycle
ys!u omi pue saseud yuoddns omi seu lI t'spaads ysy 1e
includes a stance phase and a swing phase (Figure 11-1).
phases in each stride (Figure 11-3). The gallop can have
The stance phase is the period in which the foot is in
either a right or a left lead. In left-lead dogs the feet contact
contact with the ground. The first part of the stance phase
the surface in a clockwise fashion. The left front leg comes
occurs when the braking forces take place as a result of
into contact first, followed by the right front foot in the
surface contact. This is followed by the second part of the
front support phase. The dog then leaves the ground in the
stance phase in which there is a period of propulsion. The
front flight phase. The next foot to make contact is the right
swing phase is the period in which the foot is in the air. It
 rear foot, followed by the left rear foot in the rear support 
B
Figure 11-1 A, The stance phase. Braking forces occur at initial impact and continue until the center of gravity transfers over the fulcrum.
Propulsive forces predominate for the remainder of the stance phase until the foot leaves the surface. B, The swing phase. Initially the leg swings
caudally after the foot leaves the ground. It then swings cranially, until it begins the last caudal swing, which ends when the foot touches the
surface.
Chapter 11
Canine Locomotion Analysis
203
phase. The dog then propels forward, leaving the ground a
is the movement that is used to begin all gaits. The forces
second time in the rear fight phase, after which the
of nonrepetitive motions are often higher than most normal
yanoy saos sop peal-usu v paeadai uese si aouanbas
gaits such as the trot, and it is possible that noncontact
the same sequence but contact is in a counterclockwise
injuries may occur during nonrepetitive motions. The
rotation. This gait is described as a double suspension-
motions yield not only high forces but also high rates of
rotary gallop. The canter is slower than the gallop and is a
force application to musculoskeletal tissues. Nonrepetitive
three-beat gait, characterized by a "lead" forelimb, with
motions generally involve a wide range of joint motion and
two limbs moving separately and two as a diagonal pair.
segmental alignments with high force outputs and impacts.
The pattern of footfalls with a dog cantering in a left lead
From a clinical standpoint, it is important to understand
is right hind, left hind and right fore together, followed by
these movements because they can cause injuries or can be
the left forelimb reaching furthest forward. The opposite
used to reveal injuries that might not be noted on a routine
series of footfalls would occur when a dog is cantering on
clinical exam involving a trot.
the right lead. There is only one fight phase in the canter
when all four limbs are off the ground, and it occurs just
Structural Definitions
after the forelimbs leave the ground. The canter, sometimes
 called a lope, is an endurance gait and is sometimes used
Movement is balanced throughout the whole body in a
by sled dogs. Some of the larger dogs that have a wider
normal healthy animal. In the neuromusculoskeletal
body structure, such as the Rottweiler or Saint Bermard,
system, the two sides of the body mirror each other and
use the canter as their preferred running gait.
are symmetric. An understanding of body symmetry is the
key to analyzing gait abnormalities and lameness. Whether
Nonrepetitive Motions
palpating the dog during a physical examination or observ-
Little research exists evaluating nonrepetitive motions.
ing the dog's movement, the right side of the body should
Therefore there have been no scientifically accepted defini-
be symmetric to the left side.
tions of the movements (e.g., jumping and movement ini-
The dog's structure consists of axial and appendicular
tiation). One paper describes jumping? and another
 sections, which are divided into segments when analyzing
describes movement initiation.9 Understanding these
motion. The axial vertebral column is made up of many
movements is important; for example, movement initiation
joints and is divided into anatomic segments. The cranial
segment is the head, followed caudally by the neck (cervi-
 cal), thoracic, abdominal (lumbosacral), and tail segments.
The appendicular segments are the front legs and the back
legs. These are subdivided into smaller segments by the
joints: shoulder, elbow, carpus, hip, stife, tarsus, and pha-
langes. Locomotion as a whole is a result of the individual
movements of these segments. How each of the segments
and joints is used is determined by two factors. The first
factor is the relationship of the dog's center of gravity to
the surface, and the second is the type of movement that
the body is performing.
Conformation
A major factor that affects how the body moves and
receives forces is conformation. Conformation is the sym-
metry, size, and shape of various body regions relative to
each other or in general appearance. Improper body design
predisposes a structure to injury. Gait analysis reveals
certain characteristics of a dog's conformation. This plays
 an important role in breeding programs. Sound movement 
Figure 11-2  The trot. The limbs in light brown are in the stance
contributes to the health and normal life span of all dogs.
phase, while the dark brown limbs are in the swing phase.
Locomotion can vary for different breeds,6 but in a
Figure 11-3  The gallop, with the dog in the right lead.
204
Section Ill
Patient Assessment and Management
symmetric gait, like the trot, the movements of one side
ability to view an animal in motion, but cannot determine
should still mirror the movements of the other side. A
 the forces involved in gait and identify specific neuromus-
conformational abnormality usually creates an abnormal
cular activity; therefore, we must employ kinematic and
gait. Any abnormal gait should first be assessed for a con-
kinetic analysis tools for a more complete description of
fonmational cause. Lameness of this type may not be
gait.11
related to pain but to a structural fault. Conformational
 abnormalities that can lead to musculoskeletal problems
Subjective Kinematic Analysis
should be eliminated from breeding programs. If incorrect
Kinematic analysis is one of the oldest methods to evaluate
movement, or lameness, is not a result of compensation
movement of the musculoskeletal system. In 1888, Muy-
because of conformational abnormalities, other factors
bridge used stroboscopic photography to show the stride
 must be infuencing the movement, such as an injury.
of racing greyhounds and hound dogs running at various
speeds.12 Subjective kinematic analysis is the most common
Center of Gravity
diagnostic tool to assess lameness. The clinician evaluates
In the dog, 60% of the dog's weight is carried by the front
the dog by observing gait and/or nonrepetitive motions and
limbs and 40% of the weight is carried by the back limbs
looks for abnormal kinematics. When analyzing move.
while standing.7 This results in the center of gravity (COG)
ment, a clinician should define the mechanical system
 being at the mid-chest level behind the scapula in the dog.
under analysis. The mechanical system can be the dog as
The placement of the COG results in the front legs being
a whole or a specific joint or limb.
associated more with braking forces, whereas the rear legs
To describe the components that make up a gait or
are more associated with propulsive forces on a level
motion, the movements of the joints, individual segments,
surface. Moving uphill shifts the balance of forces to the
and body as a whole are observed. These are interpreted in
back legs and moving downhill shifts the forces to the front
terms of time, distance (i.e., degrees or meters), speed,
legs. An uneven or varying surface produces a variety of
consistency, and accuracy. The trot, which is a symmetric
force alterations that depend on the body's position. For
 gait, provides a good visual presentation of movement for 
this reason, all general analysis should be performed on a
the clinician to diagnose lameness. If a gait abnormality is
 level, even surface that provides proper traction.
present, the movements of one side are different from the
other side.
Impact Forces
 The observations should be conducted before any physi-
How a dog runs determines how the body receives the
cal palpation. First observe the animal while it is at rest,
forces of surface impact. A dog that uses the double-
looking  for conformational abnormalities or abnonmal
suspension rotary gallop has high-impact forces on the
stances. For example, does the dog seem to hold one leg
front legs as they contact the ground. This is because as
up or put most of its body weight on a particular leg? After
the limbs contact the ground, the entire weight of the body
these observations are noted the animal is analyzed while
as well as the added braking and propulsion forces must
moving. If able, trot the patient in a straight line toward
be absorbed by the limbs. These forces have a greater effect
and away from the clinician. Next it should be assessed
on the lead leg than the non-lead leg. In the breeds that use
moving in a straight line from the right side and then the
the canter when they run, the impact forces are distributed
left side. Then it should be observed moving in a circle,
differently. The forces of impact are distributed more
clockwise then counterclockwise.
evenly between the front and back legs.
Movements of the body as a whole should be assessed
for any major gait deficits first. Then the step cycle of each
Locomotion Analysis
leg should be evaluated to determine which phase of the
cycle is deficient. If the lameness appears at foot contact
In the past two dec ades, technologic advances in computer-
 Only, or the stance phase is shortened, the lameness can be
assisted gait analysis have aided our ability to quantita-
associated with impact or support. An example of a struc-
tively define temporospatial gait characteristics. This has
ture that presents with this type of gait abnormality is the
assisted researchers and clinicians in gaining a better
paw. The tissues in this area are the pads and skin, bones,
understanding of canine locomotion. Subjective evaluation
ligaments, joint capsule, and tendons. The entire limb
of canine gait has been used for many years. However, our
should be examined using physical palpation to locate
ability to perceive minute details during the gait cycle can
which tissues are involved.
be very difficult, and in some respects, impossible, even
Most obvious abnormalities can be detected with sub-
for the most talented gait specialist. During a subjective
jective gait analysis. A dog with a lesion causing severe
evaluation, a clinician is only able to perceive a few kine-
sharp constant pain carries the limb and keeps the weight
matic variables at a time, but a kinematic or kinetic analy-
 off it. A dull aching pain produces a limp during gait. A
sis system can capture, analyze, and store hundreds of
lesion that produces a small pain that occurs in certain
observations per second. In addition, clinicians have the
phases of locomotion allows the dog to adjust its gait for
Chapter 11
Canine Locomotion Analysis
205
A
160
150.02
143.88
Left
140
120
100
dolow
80
69.09
66.08
65.8665.97
61.27
59.1
60
45.5643.36
42.98
42.6
40
20
 Shoulder
Elbow
Carpus
Hip
Knee
Tarsus
B
160
Left 
140
131.58
 Right 
120
94.29
100
loti
80
63.2_61.54
54.71
54.14
60
51.81
45.9
46.36
35.9
37.9638.96
40
20
 Shoulder
Elbowr
Carpus
Hip
Knee
Tarsus
Figure 11-4 A, The chart shows actual range-of-motion values of sound dogs during a trot. B, The chart shows the actual range-of-motion
values of a dog with restricted carpal movement.
relief. The quadruped has the ability to minimize pain by
one biomechanical and the other psychological. Biome-
altering movement in such a way that the abnormality may
chanically, if a condition is untreated the compensatory
 be unnoticeable.13 This altered gait can lead to subsequent 
movements can lead to other injuries in the back or limbs.
compensatory problems.
Psychologically, chronic pain can lead to behavioral
The normal trot is a balance of movement by the whole
problems.
 body (Figure 11-4, A). Minor pain can create an imbalance
Quantitative Kinematic Analysis
in the system. For example, synovitis of the right carpal
joint affects not only the joint of injury, but may also affect
Quantitative kinematic analysis quantifes the positions,
the left hip and left tarsus (Figure 11-4, B). An altered gait
velocities, accelerations, and angles of anatomic points,
affects how the forces of movement act on the musculo-
segments, and joints in space. Kinematic analytic systems
skeletal structure. In addition to appendicular changes, the 
track anatomic markers through different planes of space
axial skeleton is affected. It is the frame through which this
and time and reveal their respective x, y, and z positional
alteration is transferred. This can initiate two problems,
values. From the positional values, software programs can
206
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
use mathematical formulas to calculate linear or angular
greater tubercle of the humerus, the dorsal aspect of the
velocities and accelerations; therefore these systems assign
scapular spine, the lateral aspect of the distal fifth digit of
numeric values to motion for quantitative gait analysis.1
the rear paw, the tarsus, the stifle, the greater trochanter of
Some academic institutions currently have laboratories that
the femur, and the dorsal iliac crest. Both sides of the body
can perform motion or gait analysis. These laboratories
are digitized. These data points are used to quantify seg-
usually are equipped with a three-dimensional motion
mental and linear movement (Figure 11-6).
analysis system used for research or clinical analysis.
The clinician can evaluate the data from both sides for
Information about the animal's motion can assist in lame-
asymmetry. When assessing gait and joint movement at
 ness diagnosis, assess rehabilitation progress, and possibly
the trot, any differences between the two sides may be
assess athletic potential. Veterinary medicine is just begin-
used to evaluate lameness. When using proper methodol-
ning to evaluate how motion analysis can raise the stan-
 Ogy, two-dimensional gait analysis is valid and reliable. It
dards of clinical care. This is a rapidly growing feld that
requires only one video camera. It is important to only
will extend the boundaries of knowledge of patients’ neu-
evaluate the gait cycle directly in front of the camera. Two-
romusculoskeletal systems.
dimensional analysis systems are more economical than
Traditionally these systems are too costly for use in
three-dimensional systems, allowing more practitioners an
opportunity to use this tool.
to operate. An altermate method is two-dimensional gait
 In addition, filming outside of the laboratory is possible.
analysis.14 Refective markers are placed over anatomic
Videotapes may then be evaluated by a laboratory, allow-
 points (Figure 11-5). The subject is then trotted with its
ing further benefits of computer-assisted video gait
right side to the camera and then with its left side to the
analysis.
camera. The movement is filmed by a video camera system.
 Future kinematic studies should include obtaining more
The video clip is entered into a computer and each of the
 information on different breeds. This may help define con-
refective markers are digitized and recorded. The points
formation standards for breeding purposes. Increasing the
generally digitized are the lateral aspect of the distal fifth
number of dogs analyzed with diagnosed musculoskeletal
digit of the front paw, the carpus, the elbow, the acromion/
pathologies helps to determine parameters that are associ-
ated with those specific etiologies. After these parameters
are determined, these methods may be used to quantify
response to treatment.
Professionals, trainers, and owners should be educated
on the use of computer-assisted video gait analysis. The
more information that is distributed the greater the poten-
tial to benefit from the knowledge gained about animal
locomotion.
Kinetic Analysis
Kinetic (force) analysis quantifies the forces of locomotion
by using measurement systems to evaluate kinetic vari-
ables, including peak vertical, braking, propulsive, and
horizontal forces; vertical, braking, and propulsive
impulses; strain within various tissues; rates of loading;
temporal gait characteristics; and pressure distributions of
the paw. There are many different methods and systems
used to evaluate kinetic variables. Most of the systems used
are ground-based (e.g., force plate and force mats) kinetic
systems and measure orthogonal ground reaction forces
(i.e., mediolateral force, craniocaudal force, and vertical
force) resulting from paw impact during the stance phase of
gait. Other systems, such as strain gauges, measure strain
 Of different tissues when stress is applied during gait.11
 The force plate can be used to measure ground reaction
forces (GRFs) exerted on the limbs. The forces are mea-
sured in three orthogonal components: the vertical (z)
plane, cranial-caudal (y) plane, and medial-lateral (x) plane
Figure 11-5  Reflective markers placed on the dog before filming.
(Figure 11-7). The force plate is usually embedded in a
Markers are seen during locomotion.
pathway for the test subjects to pass over. As the paw
Chapter 11
Canine Locomotion Analysis
207
Maximum|Minimum
Range
Shoulder R
151.228
110.243
40.986
 Shoulder L
152.974
118.156
34.818
Elbow R
149.462
75.421
74.040
Elbow L
155.255
95.657
59.598
Carpus R
250.092
79.376
170.716
Carpus L
228.575
106.408
122.168
Hip R
143.813
108.155
35.658
Hip L
146.587
106.966
39.621
 Knee R
162.950
99.115
63.835
Knee L
157.884
103.896
53.988
Tarsus R
151.265
99.403
51.861
Tarsus L
161.181
98.810
62.372
A
Hgure 11-6  Video capture of gait from a dog using a 2-D video capture system. Kinematic data may be acquired from dogs working in the field.
Continued
comes into contact with the plate, GRFs are measured. The
and then a positive force from propulsion. The x-forces
plate is connected to a computer that acquires the data for
play a minimal role in gait evaluation. The biphasic z-force
analysis. The data can be used to assess how the forces of
is not seen in the trot, presumably because of decreased
the body are transferred through the limb. For analysis, the
contact time and the lack of a heel strike and toe-off in the
data from one limb can be compared with data collected
dog. There is a single loading peak for each limb strike in
Over time or other limb data from the subject.
the z-plane (Figure 11-8, A). The y-forces are biphasic,
The measurements are made and read as force exerted
with braking and propulsive components (Figure 11-8, B).
over time. The contact time depends on the velocity of the
The contact time of the walk is longer than that of the trot,
subject. As the velocity increases, the contact time
but the z-force of the trot is twice the force of the walk, as
decreases. For example, the paw contact time for the walk
a result of the increase in velocity, and the limb support
is longer than the contact time in the trot. The walk has a
differences between the walk and the trot.
biphasic z-force for each limb strike, which is similar to
A technique has been reported for measuring ground
that of humans. The frst peak is associated with the braking
aul se'ssop go sped med [enpiaiun uo anssaid poeuo
forces that occur at initial impact, and the second peak is
force plate measures the ground reaction forces transferred
a result of the propulsive forces. This is also seen in the y
through the entire paw. To assess how the paw receives the
plane, with an initial negative force from the braking phase,
GRFs, each individual digit may be assessed. This is done
208
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
 Shoulder
Elbow
175.000
160.000
165.000
140.000
155.000
120.000
145.000
135.000
100.000
125.000 +
80.000+
0.000
0.400
0.800
1.200
1.600
2.000
0000
0.400
0.800
1.200
1.600
¥2.000
Time (sec)
Time (sec)
Left
 Right
Left
Right
Carpus
Hip
150.000
210.000
130.000
160.000
110.000
110.000
90.000
+000'09
70.000 +
0.000
0.400
0.800
1.200
1.600
2.000
0.000
0.400
0.800
1.200
1.600
2.000
Time (sec)
Time (sec)
Left
Right
Left
Right
Stifle
Tarsus
160.000
150.000 -
140.000
130.000
110.000
120.000
90.000
100.000
70.000 +
80.000+
0.000
0.400
0.800
1.200
1.600
2.000
0.000
0.400
0.800
1.600
2.000
Time (sec)
Time (sec)
Left
 Right
Left
 Right
Head vertical displacement
Hip vertical displacement 
1.650
1.600 -
1.550
SP
1.450
1.500
1.350
1.400 -
1.250 +
1.300 十
0.000
0.400
0.800
1.200
1.600
2.000
0.000
0.400
0.800
1.200
1.600
2.000
Time (sec)
Time (sec)
B
Left
Right
Left
Right
Figure 11-6, cont'd Symmetry of Joint Motion may be evaluated with Kinematic data acquisition systems. For example, the right elbow, tarsus.
and stifle joints have reduced ROM compared to the left side.
Chapter 11
Canine Locomotion Analysis
209
Figure 11-7 Ground reaction forces act on the foot in three orthog-
Onal planes (x, y, and z).
150 -
125
Apoq/N,
75
(100*
50-
Force
25
-25
-50-
20
40
60
801000
20
40
60
80100
A
Percent stance
150-
125-
100
(100*N/body
75-
50
25
Force
-25-
-50 -
0
20
40
60
20
40
60
80100
B
Percent stance
Figure 11-8 A, Force plate data showing measurement of the z force during surface contact at the trot. B, Measurement of y force taken
during the trot.
210
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
by attaching a force-sensing resistor to each individual
and distributed, the greater the potential to benefit from the
weight-bearing pad. One unexpected finding in one study
 knowledge gained regarding animal locomotion.
was that the greatest pressures were on digital pads 3 and
5, and pads 2 and 4 had the least amount of pressure.' It
REFERENCES
 had previously been thought that adjacent digits 3 and 4
1. Roy WE: Examination of the canine locomotor system, Vet
were the pads of greatest pressure. This tec hnique of mea-
Clin North Am 53-70, 1971.
surement can be used for evaluating bandaging methods,
2. Gillette RL, Angle TC: Recent advancements in canine loco-
prosthetic devices, and surgical manipulations for alleviat-
motor analysis: a review, Vet J 178:165-176, 2008.
ing pressures.
3. Eward C, Gillette RL, Eward W: Effects of unilaterally
restricted carpal range of motion in kinematic gait analysis
Pressure Measurement Systems
of the dog, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot 16:58-163, 2003.
4. Marsolis GS, McLean S, Derrick T et al: Kinematic analysis
Pressure mat systems are made up of many pressure
sensors. When a dog walks over the mat, visual graphics
of the hind limb during swimming and walking in healthy
 of pressure distributions of the paw appear on the computer
dogs and dogs with surgically cotrected cranial cruciate liga-
ment rupture, J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:739-743, 2003.
screen. These systems quantify high and low pressure areas 
5. Grogan JW: The gaits of horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc
of the paw, relative or actual vertical forces involved in the
118:112-117, 1951.
stance phase, and temporal characteristics of the stance
 6. Hildebrand M: Symmetrical gaits of dogs in relation to body
phase. Pressure mats come in different sizes. Pressure mats
build, J Morphof 124:353-360, 1968.
in combination with a laptop computer provide a conve-
 7. Zebas CI, Gillette RL, Hailey RL et al: Kinematic descriptors
 nient portable kinetic data collection system.1
of the running gait in the greyhound athlete. In Marshall RN,
Wood GA, Elliott BC, et al, eds: Xllth Intermationat Confer-
ence on Biomechanics, Perth, Australia: University of
Western Australia, 469-470, 1991.
Summary
 8. Alexander RM: The mechanics of jumping by a dog (Canis 
familiaris), J Zool, Lond 173:549-573, 1974.
Locomotion analysis is a helpful analytic tool for the clini-
9. Angle TC, Gillette RL, Wiemar W: (Dissertation) Kinematic
cian, technician, handler, or owner. It is a good indicator
anatysis of two natural surfaces on the canine sprint start,
of the status of the musculoskeletal system. The evaluator
2009.
should have a good understanding of the individual compo-
 10. Elliot RP: The new dogsteps, New York, 1983, Howell Book
nents of locomotion, anatomy, conformation, and the influ-
House.
ence of extermal factors. It is important to remember that
 11. Gillette RL, Angle TC: Recent advancements in canine loco-
center of gravity and conformation influence how ground
motor analysis: a review, Vet J 178:165-176, 2008.
reaction forces interact with the body. New technologies
12. Muybridge E: Animals in motion, New York, 1957, Dovet.
have advanced our ability to evaluate motion and forces.
13. Nunamaker DM, Blauner PD: Normal and abnormal gait. In
Newton CD, Nunamaker DM, eds: Textbook of small animat
Veterinarians, physical therapists, breeders, owners, and
orthopaedics, Ithaca, NY, 1985, IVIS.
 trainers all can potentially benefit from the recent advances
14. Gillette RL: (thesis) Validation of a two-dimensional anatysis
in locomotion analysis. Improved capabilities for data col-
of limb symmetry in the trot of Labrador Retrievers, 1998.
lection, storage, and analysis, in combination with advances 
15. Rumph PF, Marghitu DB, Gillette RL et al: (abstract) A
 in personal computer technology, have provided an oppor-
technique for measuring ground contact pressure on indi-
tunity for these analytic techniques to be used in the respec-
viduat paw pads of dogs, Proceedings of the Annual Meeting
tive areas of interest. The more information that is gathered
of the American Association of veterinary Anatomists, 1998.
The Physical Rehabilitation
Evaluation
David Levine, Denis J. Marcellin-Little, Marti Drum,
and Cassy Englert
 treatment plan with established perioperative and postop-
scientific basis in humans and companion animals.
erative pain management protocols. Although the clinical
It has numerous clinical applications in the restora-
signs present in many dogs with orthopedic or neurologic
tion, maintenance, and promotion of optimal physical
 r       s
function. It is beneficial in helping people recover from
repair, a well-designed physical rehabilitation program
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction, fracture stabili-
may accelerate the recovery, may prevent permanent dis-
-nlu 1auo Aueu pue Aiagins [euds “Aiagins quof uonez
 ability, and may help prevent future re-injuries.
ries or diseases.?- It also improves function in a variety of
Patients with movement disorders, weakness, pain, and
patients with soft tissue injuries, osteoarthritis, total joint
limited endurance are candidates for physical rehabilita-
arthroplasty, stroke, and chronic lower back pain through-
tion. Examples of conditions include dogs recovering from
Out their lives.6-10
orthopedic or other surgeries, dogs with osteoarthritis, ten-
In providing physical therapy the goal is to restore,
donitis, or other soft tissue injuries. After a medical diag-
maintain, and promote optimal function, optimal fitness.
nosis is available, the therapist evaluates several aspects of
wellness, and quality of life as they relate to movement
the patient's health, particularly the health of the cardio-
disorders and health. In dogs, this may include treating
pulmonary, neurologic, orthopedic, and integumentary
patients during their recovery from orthopedic surgical
systems. The more specific the medical diagnosis, the more
procedures, such as femoral head ostectomy, monitoring
directed will be the care. For example, the medical diag-
weight loss programs, strengthening specific muscle
nosis for a patient may be osteoarthritis of the elbow and
 groups, and helping to manage chronic conditions, such as
the physical rehabilitation diagnosis for that patient may
osteoarthritis, or progressive conditions, such as degenera-
be limited fexion and extension with cranial and caudal
-juu io quaaid on s! siseydua nofeu y Auedoahu aan
joint capsule tightness. These factors may limit function in
mize the onset, clinical signs, and progression of
terms of gait; improving elbow range of motion through
impairments, functional limitations, and disabilities that
specific treatment interventions may improve the func-
may result from diseases, disorders, conditions, and inju-
tional status of the patient. In the practice of physical
ries. Examples in people include designing and delivering
therapy for humans, the areas evaluated include aerobic
treatment programs for patients with problems such as
capacity, balance, arousal, cognition, environmental barri-
pneumonia, multiple sclerosis, diabetes, cerebral palsy.
ers, ergonomics, posture, gait, pain, range of motion, pros-
Jower back pain, or frozen shoulders.1.-14
thetic requirements, and assistive and supportive devices.
 Most of these parameters may be evaluated in dogs.
Treatment Philosophy
 Physical rehabilitation in veterinary medicine follows
the same principles. The therapist collects functional infor-
Physical therapists use a variety of treatment interventions
mation by evaluating the dog's physical fitness, orthopedic,
such as stretching, targeted massage, passive range of 
and neurologic health. This may be done in conjunction
motion, and joint mobilization. They also use electrical and
with or after the veterinarian's evaluations. There is overlap
thermal modalities and therapeutic exercises to help
in these evaluations, but although the veterinarian evaluates
patients reach their goals. These treatments work synergis-
the patient to obtain a medical diagnosis and to prescribe
tically to effectively achieve the therapeutic goals. When
medical or surgical treatment plans, the therapist evaluates
designing a treatment plan, the therapist should be aware
the patient to create a physical rehabilitation treatment
 of the scientific evidence supporting the use of each modal-
plan. This evaluation includes the assessment of muscle
ity and exercise for the problems being treated. For
mass, joint motion, joint stability, and pain. For example,
example, when treating postoperative edema, ice has been
Joss of range of motion may be present with elbow dyspla-
proved to be beneficial, whereas certain other therapies
sia, whereas loss of sensation and muscle atrophy may be
are unproven. The therapist should integrate the individual
observed with radial nerve injuries.
211
212
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
Physical rehabilitation plays an important role in pre-
pain and motion of joints. The therapist evaluates discom-
vention of and recovery from injury. Educating owners in
fort and the condition of injured and abnormal tissues, such
 proper warm-up and cool-down techniques, for example,
as excessive laxity or restriction of motion as a result of
may help prevent orthopedic injuries during training or
scar formation (Table 12-1). The therapist collects this
competition. Owners may have a substantial emotional and
information to understand how these limitations affect
financial investment in their dogs and are generally very
function and how they may be targeted during therapy.
willing to assist in carrying out rehabilitation programs
To help determine the cause of articular, muscle, or
when properly instructed.
connective tissue restrictions in motion, the examiner
assesses the end feel. The end feel is the sensation imparted
Physical Rehabilitation Evaluation
to the examiner's hands at the end of the range of motion
of the tissue being examined (Figure 12-1).'6 The normal
The physical rehabilitation evaluation involves the evalua
end feel for most joints is imparted by the joint capsule
tion of active motion during various gaits and while per-
 and is a refection of the slight elasticity of that capsule.
forming specific activities, such as stair climbing. The dog
Abnormal end feels are described in Table 12-2.
should be evaluated at a walk, trot, and gallop if the patient
A typical rehabilitation evaluation form (Figure 12-2)
is able and it is safe to do so. The evaluation also includes
allows the evaluator to easily document the pertinent parts
the assessment of function at rest, including posture,
 of the evaluation and be able to refer back to them as treat-
balance, and strength. Balance may be assessed by per-
ment progresses. It may also be used as a form of com-
forming various perturbation maneuvers such as pushing
munication between the rehabilitation practitioner and the
the dog off balance and assessing the dog's response.
referring veterinarian (RDVM).
Balance is further tested by evaluating overall coordina-
tion, gait, and whether or not the patient falls. Propriocep-
Rehabilitation Candidates
tion during ambulation is tested by evaluating toe dragging.
knuckling, awkward stepping, and limb carriage and place-
All dogs that have neurologic or orthopedic problems are
ment. Strength is tested by evaluating muscle mass and the
candidates for rehabilitation, particularly hunting and
ability to perfonm normal activities. For example, hip
working dogs and those dogs that perform strenuous physi-
extensor strength may be assessed by observing the dog
cal activities, such as agility, racing, feld trials, police
when it rises. The evaluation continues with assessment of
activity, and Schutzhund. Rehabilitation also applies to
Table 12-1
Specific Tissue Assessments during the Physical Rehabilitation Evaluation
Tissue
Parameters
Anomalies
Potential Causes
Muscle
Mass/size
Atrophy
Denervation, disuse, contractures
Hypertrophy
 Increased training and conditioning
Increased
Edema, hematomas, neoplasia
Tone
Increased
Spasm, guarding, denervation (upper motor neuron)
Decreased
Denervation (lower motor neuron)
Pain
Acute pain
Tear, myositis, spasm
 Chronic pain
Tear, contracture, spasm, referred neurogenic pain
Pain
Acute pain
Tendonitis, strain
Chronic pain
Tendonitis
Tension
Increased
Adhesion, contracture
Joints
Motion
Loss
Contracture, periarticular fibrosis or adhesions, effusion
Abnonmal
Subluxation, luxation
 Pain
Acute pain
Sublux ation, luxation, infection
Chronic pain
Osteoarthritis
Ligaments
Stability
 Decreased
 Sprain, rupture
Increased
Adhesion, contracture
Pain
Acute pain
 Sprain
Chronic pain
Adhesion
Chapter 12
The Physical Rehabilitation Evaluation
213
B
C
Figure 12-1  This Labrador retriever is recovering from an open surgical lavage for treatment of a large hematoma and infection after extra-
capsular stabilization of a torn cranial cruciate ligament. A physical therapist evaluates range and end-feel with stifle extension (A) and flexion
(B), the presence of cranial drawer (C), and swelling and adhesions of tissue planes (D) in the operated area.
dogs recovering from surgery. For example, range of
various fractures with and without surgical repair, spinal
motion exercises may be used after repair of a fracture of
disk decompression, neurologic conditions such as fibro-
the distal femur in a puppy to prevent quadriceps tie-down.
cartilaginous embolic myelopathy, ligamentous instabili-
Also, a reconditioning program may be instituted after a
 ties, overuse injuries, muscular imbalances, chronic pain,
and weight loss and general conditioning. Weight manage-
returm the patient to its previous status. Some of the
ment is quickly becoming a common reason for referral to
common conditions appropriate for rehabilitation include
rehabilitation. Obesity in dogs can lead to many of the
surgery for cranial cruciate ligament rupture, patellar luxa-
preceding orthopedic injuries, pain, and general health
tion stabilization, femoral head and neck ostectomy (FHO),
concerms. The rehabilitation practitioner commonly uses a
214
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
Table 12-2
 Anomalies in End Feel Assessed during the Physical Rehabilitation Evaluation
Type of End Feel
Definition
Potential Causes
Example
Capsular
Slight elasticity
Normal joint
Normal shoulder extension
Finm capsular
Decreased elasticity
 Periarticular fibrosis,
Loss of stifle extension following cranial
adhesions
cruciate ligament rupture
Springy
Increased bounce
 Joint effusion, joint mouse
Always abnormal
Soft tissue
Motion limited by
 May be normal or caused
 Normal hip fexion
approximation
soft tissues
by swelling
Empty
End of motion
 Pain
Intraarticular fracture
cannot be reached
Hard
Abrupt stop
Bone on bone contact,
 Chronic quadriceps contracture following
mature contractures
 distal femoral physeal fracture
variety of therapeutic exercises, including an underwater
prescribes the specific type, intensity, duration, frequency.
treadmill to exercise obese or overweight dogs because the
and progression of these exercises. Exercises are generally
buoyancy of the water decreases joint stress while increas-
initiated with a low intensity and duration that increases
ing the metabolic rate for successful weight loss (Figure
progressively as healing progresses and tissue strength
12-3).  Rehabilitation  for  weight management  works 
 increases. It is also important to have established treatment 
best when done in conjunction with the referring veterinar-
goals or end points to guide progress.
ian's recommendations regarding diet and medication if
 The therapist may also develop preventive strategies for
necessary.
patients. These include monitoring the dog's weight, moni-
toring foor surfaces at home, having a preseason training
Developing a Physical Rehabilitation
period in athletic dogs, developing proper warm-up and
Plan of Care
cool down periods, recommendations for adequate rest
between strenuous exercise sessions, and monitoring trans-
Based on the results of the medical history and diagnosis,
portation between locations. For example, a dog with
as well as the physical rehabilitation evaluation, a clear,
osteoarthritis of the stife may benefit from weight loss, a
evidenced-based plan of care is developed and imple-
judicious exercise plan with frequent exercises of short
mented. In some instances, the plan of care is designed
duration on soft surfaces, a padded surface to sleep, and a
using evidence-based conclusions from human studies and
careful strategy of pharmacologic management, including
having knowledge of the anticipated tissue responses to
analgesic  medications  and  disease-modifying  osteoar-
therapy in dogs. The therapist chooses the treatment plan
thritic agents.
that has the fastest, most predictable positive outcome on
the patient. Acute postoperative edema, for example, may
Re-Evaluation and Assessment
be treated using ice, bandaging, and pain-free passive
range of motion. As the acute infammation subsides,
The rehabilitation practitioner should regularly assess the
gradual resumption of activity may be combined with hot
 dog's response to treatment, both during and after each
 packs or ultrasound therapy. The plan of care is subse-
session. During each session, the practitioner looks for
quently modified based on frequent reassessments. Patients
adverse responses such as increased lameness or unwill-
may be treated as inpatients in the hospital or as outpatients
ingness to weight bear on a particular limb, fatigue, and
in rehabilitation centers. The plan of care must be unique
 increased anxiety. If any of these are apparent during a
to the patient and must take into account all abnormal find-
 treatment session, the session may be altered or stopped.
ings and other factors, including the severity of the anoma-
The overall treatment plan also may be modifed if neces-
lies, the age and disposition of the dog, the expectations
sary. Many times, the dog will be given several days to rest
for future performance, the urgency of the recovery, the
and recover before continuing rehab. Following each
available equipment and technical skills of the clinicians,
session, the owners are instructed to watch for increased
and the cost of treatment. A typical plan of care may
fatigue or abnormal pain behavior at home and to notify
include a choice of thermal and electric modalities and
 the practitioner and/or referring veterinarian if it does not
specifc exercises aimed at strengthening with gradual rein-
resolve within 24 hours. In addition to observing response
troduction of specific physical activities. The therapist
to rehabilitation, objective measurements and functional
Chapter 12
The Physical Rehabilitation Evaluation
215
University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Science 
Veterinary Physical Rehabilitation
INITIAL EVALUATION Date:
Chief Complaint:
Weight:
Diagnosis:
 Surgery Date:
 Attending /
RDVM:
Affected Limb: RFLFRRLRN/A
SUBJECTIVE AND HISTORY
General appearance and disposition:
 Onset of problerm/injury:
 Past pertinent medical history:
Home environment/Baseline activity level:
Diet/medications/supplerments:
Additional Information and Owner goals:
OBJECTIVE FINDINGS
=narmal sance/na Iameness
5=narmal srenglh/coardinalian
1=slighlly abnormal slance (PwB)
1=Slighl ar inlermillenl lameness 
no abvious dysunclian
2=moderalaly abnormal slanoa (Pwe-TWB)
2=Obvious waighl bearing lameness
4=can sland Io supporl 
3=severealy abnarmal slanca ( TTwB-NWB)
3=Savere weighl bearing lameness
minimal paraparesis and alaxia
3=can slard lo supporl bul freq. slumbes and (alls
5=Canlinuous non-waighl bearing lameness
mikd paraparesis and alaxia
2=unabka la sland ar supporl; wilh assislanca moves
limbs readily bul fraq. slumbes/mod alaxia and
parasis
1=unabk lo sland ar supparl; slighl movemenl when
 supporled by lha lail; severa parasis
=absenoe af purposeful movemenl: lelra- ar
parapkgic
Rehab Orthopedic Measures
Lameness stance (0-4; 0=normal: Pre-op_
Post-op
Current
Lameness walk (0-5; 0=normal): Pre-op_
Post-op.
Current,
Lameness trot (0-5; 0=normal):Pre-op_
Post-op
Current
Figure 12-2  Rehabilitation evaluation form. Courtesy University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine.
Continued
216
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
Rehab Neurologic Measures
Neurologic Grading Scheme (0-5; 0=normal): Pre-op.
Post-op
Current
Gait
 Standing limb position:
 Siting limb position:
Willingness to raise contralateral limb: YES
NO
RELUCTANT
UNABLE
Force Plate: YES
NO
Analysis Results:
Skin/lncision:
Discoloration:
Temperature to touch:
Other:
 Swelling/Edema/Muscle Mass
Circumference of limb: Affected
_cm Unaffected
_cm Site & Position:
Comments:
Additional measurements (if taken):
Range of Motion
Joint (normal range)R Flex/Ext 
L Flex/Ext
End Feel/Comments Test Position
Carpus (32-196°)
Elbow (36°-166°)
Shoulder (57*-165°)
Tarsus (38°-165°)
了
Stifle (41°-162°)
Hip (50°-162°)
Pain/Comments:
 Functional Assessment
 Palpation
Special Tests and Results
Figure 12-2, cont'd
Chapter 12
The Physical Rehabilitation Evaluation
217
ASSESSMENT
PLAN/ RECOMMENDATIONS
 Short-term goals (time frame)
Long-term goals (time frame)
 Evaluator Signature/Date
Figure 12-2, cont'd
218
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
Figure 12-3 A 6-month-old Labrador retriever is recovering from extracapsular stabilization of his left stifle joint after avulsion of his cranial
cuciate ligament. The dog is undergoing static weight shifting exercises (A), walking in an underwater treadmill (B), trotting on a treadmill (C).
and walking with an elastic band eliminating the external rotation present in his right pelvic limb during the recovery period (D).
assessments are regularly performed and documented.
the ability to perform tasks such as neuromuscular electri-
 Measurements, such as joint range of motion, muscle girth,
cal stimulation or other treatments. The care must be super-
and lameness assessments at a walk, trot, or gallop, are 
vised and coordinated by the clinicians who assess the
frequently assessed and related to changes in function. A
patient, decide who will perform the treatments, and deter-
functional questionnaire also may be used at the beginning.
mine how the treatment plan should be modifed over time,
during, and end of a course of rehabilitation. In all cases,
including increases or decreases in exercise duration and
close communication is maintained between the rehabilita-
frequency, and initiating or discontinuing modalities. Feed-
tion practitioners and referring veterinarian regarding the
back (i.e., the severity of current clinical signs and the
 dog's treatment plan, changes to treatment plan, and overall
presence or absence of new clinical signs) must be col-
progress.
lected from all involved in the dog's care, and adjustments
 in the patient care plan must be communicated to all
Delivery of Care
 involved.
The owner, trainer, therapist, therapist assistant, and others
REFERENCES
may deliver aspects of the physical rehabilitation plan of
1. Guide to physical therapist practice, ed 2, Phys Ther 81:9-
care. Some tasks may be delegated to the owner. Other
744, 2003.
more technical tasks should be performed by the therapist.
 2. Shelbourne KD, Nitz P: Accelerated rehabilitation after
Specifically owners may administer some exercises to their
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction, Am J Sport Med
18:292-299, 1990.
Chapter 12
The Physical Rehabilitation Evaluation
219
 3. Sherrington C, Lord SR: Home exercise to improve strength
10. Aure OF, Hoel Nilsen J, Vasseljen O: Manual therapy and
and walking velocity after hip fracture: a randomized con-
exercise therapy in patients with chronic low back pain: a
trolled trial, Arch Phys Med Rehabil 78:208-212, 1997.
randomized, controlled trial with l-year follow up, Spine
4. Moffet H, Collet JP, Shapiro SH et al : Effectiveness of inten-
28:525-532, 2003.
sive rehabilitation on functional ability and quality of life
11. Ntoumenopoulos G, Presneill JJ, McElholum M et al: Chest
after first total knee arthroplasty: a single blind random-
physiotherapy for the prevention of ventilator-associated
ized controlled study, Arch Phys Med Rehabil 85:546-556,
pneumonia, Int Care Med 28:850-856, 2002.
2004.
12. Di Fabio RP, Choi T, Soderberg J et al: Health-related quality
 5. Ostelo RWJG, de Vet HCW, Waddell G et al: Rehabilitation
of life for patient with progressive multiple sclerosis: infu-
after lumbar disc surgery (Cochrane review). The Cochrane
ence of rehabilitation, Phys Ther 77: 1704-1716, 1997.
Library, issue 2, Oxford, UK, 2002, Update Software.
13. Baker LL, Chambers TR, DeMuth SK et al: Effects of electri-
6. Yeung EW, Yeung SS: A systematic review of interventions 
cal stimulation on wound healing in patients with diabetic
to prevent lower limb soft tissue running injuries, Br J Sport
ulcers, Diabetes Care 20:405-412, 1997.
Med 35:383-389, 2001.
14. Engsberg JR, Ross SA, Park TS: Changes in ankle spasticity
7. Chu KS, Eng JJ, Dawson AS, Harris JE et al: Water-based
 and strength following selective dorsal thizotomy and physi-
exercise for cardiovascular fitness in people with chronic
cal therapy for spastic cerebral palsy, J Neurosurg 91:727-
stroke: a randomized controlled trial, Arch Phys Med Rehabit
732, 1991.
85:870-874, 2004.
15. Brosseau L, Yonge KA, Robinson V et al: Thermotherapy for
 8. Dias RC, Dias JM, Ramos LR: Impact of an exercise and
treatment of osteoarthritis. Cochrane Database of Systematic
wal king protocol on the quality of life for elderly people with 
Reviews 2003, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD004522. doi:
OA of the knee, Physiother Res Int 8:121-130, 2003.
10.1002/14651858.CD004522.
 9. Munin MC, Rudy TE, Glynn NW et al: Early inpatient reha-
16. Cyriax JH: Textbook of orthopaedic medicine, vol 1: Diag-
bilitation after elective hip and knee arthroplasty, J Am Med
nosis of soft tissue lesions, ed 8, London, 1982, Balliere
Assoc 279:847-852, 1998.
Tindall.
13
Assessing and Measuring
Outcomes
Darryl L.Millis and David Levine
ssessing the outcome of treatments, including
that has been studied and used extensively in human reha.
 physical rehabilitation, is essential to determine
bilitation.' The person is asked to stand up from a standard
 how an animal is progressing and to assess the
chair and walk a distance of 3 meters, tum around, and
effectiveness of treatment protocols. Review of data and
walk back to the chair and sit down again. This test involves
evaluation of protocols are necessary so changes can be
 a number of tasks, such as standing from a seating position,
initiated to improve outcomes. Assessments should consist 
walking, tuming, stopping, and sitting down, which are all
of objective data whenever possible because owners and
A  n    a ss 
veterinarians often believe a patient is doing better than the
mobile. Normal time required to finish the test is between
data suggest. In addition, documentation of progress is
7 and 10 seconds. Similar tests could be developed for
important to provide incentive for owners to continue reha-
dogs, but because the TUG depends on a person's mental
bilitation and justify continued treatment.
ability and understanding of what is expected, it must
Several measurements are useful for assessing out-
be modified for dogs. (Dogs competing in some sporting
comes, including the ability to perform functional activi-
events such as fly-ball may be an exception because of their
ties of daily living, gait analysis, pedometers, joint function,
training and understanding of what is expected.) Neverthe-
 muscle mass and strength, body composition, pain assess-
less a dog can be timed during a test of rising from a sitting
ment, impressions of owners and veterinarians, returm to
position, walking on leash for a distance, tuming, and then
function, and quality of life.
sitting. For the average house pet other objective activities
that could be measured include how far a dog can walk or
Activities of Daily Living
 trot on a leash before needing to sit or lay down. These can
all be compared over time to assess function and mobility.
Activities of daily living (ADLs) can be defined as the
activities the animal must perform independently on a
Gait Analysis
daily basis. Despite the best treatments, rehabilitation facil-
ities, and personnel, some conditions are so serious that
Weight Bearing at a Stance
complete recovery cannot be expected. In these situations,
the owner must be informed of a reasonable expected
 Evaluation of a dog's stance gives information regarding
outcome. The rehabilitation goals should be realistic and
willingness to place complete weight on an affected limb.
should concentrate on performing basic life functions, such
ssauauel Pu Aia fquo io aqsa ou aany Aeur sop Aue
as eating and drinking with no or minimal assistance,
at a walk or trot, but will not bear equal weight on the limbs
changing body positions without assistance, rising from a
when standing. Weight bearing at a stance may be assessed
sitting position, and walking outside to urinate and defe-
by observing the placement of a foot in relation to the
cate with no or minimal assistance. In some cases even
contralateral front or rear foot. In severe cases the dog may
these goals may not be met. Progress may be slow but it
hold the foot completely or partially off the ground. More
should be recorded and rehabilitation plans should concen-
commonly the dog places a moderate amount of weight on
trate on activities to help achieve these rehabilitation goals.
the foot but not complete weight. The toes may point out
The expected ADLs of working animals undergoing
and when the limb is gently pushed forward it may be
rehabilitation, such as guard dogs, police dogs, and assis-
moved more easily than the contralateral limb when it is
tance dogs for the disabled, should be discussed and clearly
gently pushed. Altermatively the evaluator may place both
understood at the initial evaluation. A dog that is expected
hands under the fore or rear feet with the palm facing the
to work for 8 consecutive hours may need intensive reha-
pads, and the relative amount of weight bearing may be
bilitation often progressing up to several hours/day to
assessed. Weight bearing at a stance may be incorporated
ready it to returm to work.
into global lameness scores.
Measurements of ADLs are sometimes difficult. The
An inexpensive method of acquiring more quantitative
timed get up and go (TUG) test is a measure of mobility
information regarding weight bearing at a stance is to have
220
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
221
Box 13-1
Lameness Evaluation at a Walk
and a Trot
Lameness Evaluation at a Walk
0 Walks normally
1 Slight lameness
2 Obvious weight-bearing lameness
3 Severe weight-bearing lameness
4 Intermittent non-weight-bearing lameness
 5 Continuous non-weight-bearing lameness
Lameness Evaluation at a Trot
0 Trots normally
 1 Slight lameness
 2 Obvious weight-bearing lameness
 3 Severe weight-bearing lameness
 4 Intermittent non-weight-bearing lameness
5 Continuous non-weight-bearing lameness
Figure 13-1  Measure of static weight-bearing forces using a com-
puterized stance analyzer (Petsafe, Knoxville, TN).
a dog stand with each limb on common household scales.
in a straight position. Following these guidelines results in
It is important to be certain that the dog is standing squarely
very consistent data collection and has very good correla-
in a standard position, with each limb on a scale. Dogs
tion with ground reaction forces measured with a force
should also undergo a period of acclimation to the scales
plate.4.5
so that data collection is valid. Scales should be calibrated
Lameness Scores
periodically to standard weights to be certain that accurate
weights are recorded. One study found that bathroom
Lameness scores are a vital clinical outcome assessment
scales were a reliable, simple, and cost-effective objective
tool. The walk and trot are the gaits most commonly evalu-
method for measuring static weight bearing in dogs with
ated because the speed of the limbs during movement is
Osteoarthritis in the hindlimbs.?
easier to assess without specialized equipment, and these
Computerized devices are available that simultaneously
gaits are symmetric, making identification of a lame limb
measure static weight bearing of all four limbs (Figure
easier. The reader is referred to the chapter on orthopedic
13-1). As with any test, proper data collection is crucial to
and neurologic evaluation for information regarding iden-
obtaining reliable information. One study of various condi-
tification of lameness. It is important to separate the walk
tions during data collection concluded that to achieve con-
from the trot when scoring lameness. Dogs are generally
sistent results, one standard method of conditions during
less lame at a walk because less force is placed on the limb
data collection should be used.? Factors to consider include
 at this less strenuous gait. Trotting may accentuate a lame-
the position of the handler, proximity to walls, and local
ness that is mild to moderate at a walk because of the
environment. We recommend having the dog in a quiet
 greater forces placed on the limb with increased velocity.
environment with minimal noise or distractions, with the
Having separate lameness scores for the walk and trot
dog facing either the center of the room or directly toward,
allows finer discrimination of gait analysis and may be
but some distance away from, a wall. Any other walls
 more sensitive for detecting subtle improvements during
should be at least 3 to 6 feet from the dog. It is critical that
rehabilitation (Box 13-1).
the dog stand squarely and symmetrically, with each foot
Although lameness scales are simple, commonly used,
in the middle of pressure pad. In most cases, lifting the
and inexpensive, they may not be accurate in evaluating
dog's back or front limbs off the ground temporarily and
subtle or mild lameness. One study compared a numerical
then placing them back on the ground will result in square
scale and visual analog scale (VAS) with ground reaction
limb placement. The head and neck should be relaxed in a
forces and concluded that subjective scoring scales do not
 neutral position and facing straight ahead. We have found
that dogs respond well to having the handler facing forward
induced lameness.° Agreement of experienced evaluators
and straddling the dog over its back. Another option is for
with ground reaction forces was low unless lameness was
the handler to squat or kneel directly in front of the dog.
severe. In addition each observer had his or her own indi-
The handler's hands can then help to guide the dog's head
vidually unique scale. Therefore observers must stay the
in a straight position, being careful to avoid touching the
same during the evaluation of a patient for accurate analy-
dog; the hands merely act as blinders to help keep the head
 ses. Another study of induced hind limb lameness of dogs
222
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
found that subjective evaluation of lameness varied greatly
 between different observers, and there was poor agreement 
with objective ground reaction force measurements.?
Similar results regarding estimating the severity of lame-
ness using a VAS have been found in dogs with fragmented
coronoid processes. However, owners may not be able to
assign a valid VAS score.? Therefore, this form of evalua-
tion is better performed by people experienced in evaluat-
ing lameness and pain.
An altermative approach may be to use a questionnaire
to assess pain and lameness in dogs. One study evaluated
a variety of questions using a VAS and found significant
correlation with peak vertical force and vertical impulse.10
 Responses to questions recorded on a standard 10-cm VAS
that had significant correlation with ground reaction forces
included:
· Overall owner assessment for preceding month
· Mood of dog during preceding month
 Attitude of dog during preceding month
· Frequency of postures of a happy dog
· Change in amount of daily activity
Figure 13-2  Measurement of ground reaction forces using a force
Willingness to play voluntarily
plate.
How often dog gets exercise
Stiffness when arising for the day
 Stiffness at end of the day (after activities)
lameness evaluation is important in assigning values.
·Indicates lameness when walking
Finally, various pain indexes may be useful in assessing
·Pain when turming suddenly while walking
treatment effects in dogs with osteoarthritis. However,
The Helsinki Chronic Pain Index also found mood, play,
there is relatively poor correlation with ground reaction
locomotion while walking and troting, getting up, diff-
forces, likely because a variety of functional items other
culty moving after rest, and difficulty moving after major
than just lameness are assessed by owners when using
activity to be valuable in helping to identify dysfunction
indexes.
with osteoarthritis.1 Vocalization, galloping, jumping, and
laying down are other activities that help identify dogs with
Kinetic (Force Plate) Analysis of Gait
osteoarthritis.
Kinetic evaluation of gait involves the measurement of
A Canine Brief Pain Index (CBPI) has also been devel-
ground reaction forces with a force plate or platfonm
oped to evaluate chronic pain in dogs with osteoarthritis,
(Figure 13-2). It is an objective, repeatable measure of
and consists of 11 questions related to pain, function, and
weight bearing on limbs when proper technique is used for
overall impression of quality of life; a 10-point scale is
data collection. Lameness can be compared over a period
used to indicate the severity of the condition for each of
of time without relying on memory of previous assess-
the 11 questions.2 While the CBPI is able to detect
ments because data may be stored on a computer. Although
improvement in pain scores of dogs with osteoarthritis
measurement of ground reaction forces is a reliable and
after treatment with an NSAID,3 there is not significant
well-accepted method of determining the degree of weight
correlation of CBPI scores with ground reaction forces as
bearing on the limbs, it is an artifcial situation, and some 
measured with a force platform, suggesting that owners
dogs may display different clinical signs in a home envi-
evaluate things other than lameness in assessing improve-
ronment. Force platform systems are available at many
 ment with treatment.14
veterinary colleges and some private practices. It is impor-
In summary, although lameness scores are commonly
tant that appropriate software be used for quadruped
used and clinically useful in some circumstances, care
 animals.
must be used in interpreting the scores. In general, agree-
 Force plates use either strain gauges or piezoelectric
ment among individuals making assessments is greatest in
crystals. The force plate is either mounted on a platform
dogs with severe lameness and no lameness. There is gen-
or embedded in the foor so that it is even with the surface
erally poor agreement in mild cases of lameness, and there
of the foor. A runway of adequate length is essential. Most
is poor correlation of lameness scores with objective mea-
systems have timer lights that are triggered as the handler
surement of ground reaction forces using a force platform.
 and dog approach and cross the force plate to allow the
VAS scores may offer some advantages, but experience in
calculation of mean velocity and acceleration. Control of
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
223
velocity and acceleration within appropriate parameters is
minimize intertrial variability, although there is little or no
essential for repeatable data collection, because these
difference in measured forces between experienced han-
 greatly affect the force placed on each limb. The force plate
dlers. The handler should be between the dog's head and
is connected to a computer that calculates ground reaction
shoulder, and the dog should be gaited without undue
forces. Force plates may also be embedded in treadmills
tension or pulling on the leash. The dog should not alter
so that consecutive footfalls can be recorded, with the gait
the gait, throw its head, tum the head, lunge, or make other
being very rhythmic. However, some systems may not be
sudden movements as it approaches and crosses the force
able to accurately evaluate braking and propulsion forces.
plate or pressure mat. The head carriage should be in a
 Pressure pads or mats are also used for evaluation of
neutral position to avoid shifting weight to the front or rear
canine gait. Many commercially available systems have an
limbs.
adequate number of sensors to detect ground reaction
In general, dogs bear approximately 30% of their body
forces with reasonable accuracy. One advantage is that they
weight on each front limb and 20% on each rear limb while
can measure data from several consecutive footfalls.
 in a standing position with the limbs placed squarely under 
Another advantage is the ability to determine stride length,
the body. Walking at a velocity of 0.7 to 1.0 m/sec results
cadence, and average velocity.
 in forces equivalent to approximately 60% of body weight
The most useful forces measured are the peak vertical
on each forelimb and 40% on each rear limb in a medium
force (Zreak) and vertical impulse (Zimpuse) (Figure 13-3).
to large dog. Increasing the velocity to a trot of 1.7 to
Other forces that may be useful are the peak braking
2.0 m/sec results in weight bearing of 100% to 120% of
(YA peak) and propulsion (Ye Peak) forces and braking
body weight on each forelimb and 65% to 70% of
(Ya Impuse) and propulsion (YBimpuse) impulses (Figure 13-4).
body weight on each hindlimb in a similar size dog.
Medial-lateral forces (Xeak) and impulse (Ximpuse) are
Reduced weight bearing on an individual limb may result
likely too small and variable to be clinically useful. Forces
in mild weight shifts to the other limbs.
may be measured during stance, walking, or trotting.
 It is essential that appropriate technique be used during
Kinematic (Motion) Analysis of Gait
data collection. In addition to consistent velocity and accel-
 Kinematic or motion analysis of gait is a powerful tool that
 ssa s r dxa  s 
can be used to measure fexion and extension angles of
100
75
Figure 13-3  Graphic depiction of peak vertical force
Z
50
(Zpeak) and vertical impulse (Zim pulse).
Zimpulse
25-
Zimpulse
Forelimb
 Rear limb
0
1000
100
Percent stance
 Forelimb
Rear limb
25
YB
YA
Yp
Peak
Peak
mpulse
Figure 13-4 Graphic depiction of peak braking
(Ya Peak) and propulsion (Ys Peak) forces and braking
(Ya mpuse) and propulsion (Ys Impuse) impulses.
Peak
-25
[
100
0
100
Percent stance
224
Section IlI
Patient Assessment and Management
during stance phase. Stride length and frequency also varied
significantly after cruciate rupture. A change in the patterm
of joint movement appeared to occur in which the hip and
hock joints compensated for the dysfunction of the stifle
joint.
 Knowledge of kinematic parameters may allow more
effective rehabilitation of patients following surgery or
those with chronic conditions. In particular, changes that
are noted during the course of treatment may allow for
 stepping up the level of activity, or more important, may
signal changes that occur in other joints as a result of
fatigue or overuse. Knowledge of these data may help
 prevent injuries to other joints or limbs. Recently, studies
have been conducted to evaluate joint motion during thera-
Figure 13-5  The dog is instrumented for kinematic assessment of
peutic exercises.16-21 The kinematics of various therapeutic
joint motion and stride characteristics.
exercises are discussed in the biomechanics of rehabilita-
tion chapter.
Kinetic and kinematic gait analysis techniques have
been combined using an inverse dynamics technique to
joints during gait, stride length, and other parameters of
estimate net joint moments and power. This technique has
stride. It is usually combined with kinetic gait analysis.
been used to evaluate tibial plateau leveling osteotomy and
There is limited availability of three-dimensional kine-
a lateral fabella-tibial technique to stabilize stife joints in
a cranial cruciate ligament transection model,2 Labrador
sophisticated and expensive. Two-dimensional systems are
retrievers with and without cranial cruciate ligament
less expensive, but they do not capture rotation and circum-
disease,23 and forelimb joints.24 This form of gait evalua-
duction of limbs during gait, although simple fexion and
tion is time-consuming and requires specialized software,
extension of joints may be captured.
but it can provide valuable information.
Attention to detail is critical for kinematic gait analysis.
Most systems use a number of reflective devices that are
Pedometers
attached to the dogs at very specific anatomic points to
Most outcome assessment measurements are performed in
allow repeatable data collection at different times (Figure
a clinic in which equipment and personnel are located.
13-5). Motion of the markers in relation to the joints is
 However, in many cases, the animal temporarily becomes
determined with a series of cameras interfaced with a com-
more active in the clinical environment as a result of travel-
puter. Software for quadruped animals allows reconstruc-
ing, exposure to other animals, and being in a strange
tion of a walking "stick figure" on the computer screen.
enviromment. In these situations the dog often appears to
The software is then used to calculate a number of mea-
 be better than has been reported in the home environment.
surements, including fexion and extension angles of joints
A pedometer may give some indication of a dog's activity
during gait, angular velocity and acceleration of joints, and
level in its home environment. Most pedometers have a
stride length and frequency.
 pendulum that swings back and forth with the normal gait
Noninvasive, computer-assisted, three-dimensional kine-
cycle and indicates the number of steps taken. In our expe-
matic gait analysis has been used to study lameness associ-
rience pedometers may be up to 85% to 90% accurate with
ated with cranial cruciate ligament rupture in dogs.5
regard to counting the number of steps taken by a dog. One
Dynamic fexion and extension angles and angular velocities
study confinmed that pedometers are reasonably accurate,
were calculated for the hip, stife, and hock joints. Distance
with the exceptions that at a walk, pedometers overesti-
amd temporal variables were also determined. Mean fexion
e ui ti Aaxide q ss go raqu a pa
and extension curves were developed for all joints, and the
and medium dogs and underestimated actual number of
changes in movement that occurred over time after cruciate
a yano sesaop rs u t ixoe Aq sdss
rupture were compared. Each joint had a characteristic
researchers found that no significant differences between
patterm of fexion and extension movement that changed
pedometer-recorded and actual number of steps were
with cruciate rupture. The stife joint angle was more fexed
detected when dogs trotted or ran, our experience has been
throughout stance and early swing phase of stride and failed
that the step count is artificially increased when dogs run
to extend in late stance. Angular velocity of the stife joint
Or climb stairs.
was damped throughout stance phase, with extension veloc-
Proper placement of the pedometer is crucial. We have
ity almost negligible. The hip and hock joint angles, in
found that placing the pedometer just proximal to the
contrast with the stife joint angle, were extended more
elbow most accurately indicates the number of steps taken
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
225
Figure 13-6  Proper placement of a pedometer is crucial. Placing
the pedometer just proximal to the elbow is one method that has
been used to count the number of steps taken.
Figure 13-7  Joint angles of flexion and extension are measured
using a goniometer.
(Figure 13-6). In the study by Chan et al., however, pedom-
eters were worm around the dog's neck by means of an
adjustable lightweight chain.?5 However, we have found
that when dogs shake their head or scratch their neck, the
Joint Function
step count on the pedometer is artificially increased.
Because pedometers may not be not accurate in all dogs,
Joint motion may be evaluated using both objective and
it is recommended that the dog be walked 100 steps; the
subjective assessments. The primary motion of a joint is
number of steps indicated by the pedometer is compared
the movement of bones as a whole, such as occurs with
to see if the pedometer is reasonably accurate to record a
stifle fexion, and is termed physiologic or osteokinematic
dog's activity level. An additional test to determine accu-
motion. The quantity of joint fexion and extension motion
racy is to place the pedometer and then allow the dog to
is measured using a goniometer (Figure 13-7). Unlike
have free activity while 100 steps are counted. Because the
human range-of-motion measurements, the actual geomet-
pedometer may double-count when the dog is trotting.
ric angles are measured in dogs because the many different
running, or going up and down stairs, it is used only as a
 body types and conformation in individual dogs make esti-
semiquantitative indicator of home activity. Environmental
mation of the neutral or "O-degree" position difficult. Mea-
conditions are another major factor in the activity of dogs.
suring the actual angle eliminates the need to estimate the
Dogs that spend some time outdoors may not be as active
"nonmal"' standing angle; therefore there are no negative
if it is raining or cold, or the weather is otherwise inclem-
 angles.
ent. Therefore comparative assessments should be made on
 The maximum angles of extension and fexion are those
 days when the weather is as similar as possible.
angles of greatest joint excursion. Normal angles of
Recently, accelerometers have been used to estimate
maximum fexion and extension have been reported for the
activity in dogs. Because of the differences in technology
Labrador retriever and cat (see Appendix 1).3o.3 Excellent
between pedometers and accelerometers, placement at
inter-tester and intra-tester reliability was reported in those
various sites on dogs can give acceptable results. One study
studies. In addition, measurements made in dogs and cats
found that placement on a collar in the ventral neck region
 had very good correlation with measurements made from
gives acceptable results for home activity monitoring.?°6 In
radiographs.30.31
addition, accelerometers were able to distinguish the inten-
 Measuring maximum angles may involve some discom-
sity of activity in dogs.?7 Another group found that the use
fort. An animal experiencing discomfort is unlikely to use
of accelerometers was able to detect an increase of 20% in
the limb at those angles while ambulating. Therefore mea-
home activity after treatment for osteoarthritis, while
suring the comfortable range of motion may be more clini-
placebo-treated animals had no increase in activity.?* Activ -
cally applicable. To measure the comfortable range of
ity and location may also be monitored relatively inexpen-
motion, the joint is slowly fexed until the first indication
sively using GPS technology for pets.29
of discomfort, such as tensing the muscles, pulling the limb
226
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
away, or turming the head slightly, is noted. The joint is
full extension to prevent inadvertent intermal or extermal
then slowly extended until the first indication of discomfort
rotation of the joint that may be mistaken for varus or
is noted. These angles are recorded. The mean of three
valgus movement. Breed and age differences exist regard-
independent measurements is used to be certain that the
ing normal varus and valgus motion, especially in young
measured angles are reproducible. Physical rehabilitation
animals, so comparison with the contralateral normal limb
may influence the return of joint motion following surgery,
 is helpful.
such as cranial cruciate ligament stabilization surgery, and
 Hip joint laxity is most commonly assessed in young,
joint motion is associated with function; therefore, measur-
growing dogs as an indication of early hip dysplasia. Sub-
ing joint motion is important.
jective assessment is commonly performed using the Orto-
The quality of joint motion is more subjective and
lani maneuver to create subluxation of the hip joint. A
involves the assessment of joint biomechanics, crepitus,
more quantitative method of assessing hip joint laxity is
and pain during motion. The more subtle motions occur-
the use of PennHIP, in which controlled pressure is applied
ring at the surface of the joints are termed accessory or
to the hip joint to create subluxation. A radiograph is made
arthrokinematic motions. Examples of these motions are
with the coxofemoral joint in this position, and measure-
glide (slide), roll, spin, distraction or traction, and com-
ments are made to quantify the degree of laxity, known as
pression or approximation. Glides are shear or sliding
the hip distraction index. The hip distraction index has
motions of opposing articular surfaces. A normal amount
correlation with the development of hip dysplasia in some
of glide occurs in normal functioning joints. Glides at joint
breeds of dogs.
surfaces often are imposed interventions using joint mobi-
Stife joint laxity is clinically assessed by palpating for
lization techniques to regain normal motion in a joint with
cranial drawer motion. There should be no drawer motion
pathology. Joint surface geometry, soft tissue resistance,
in normal dogs, with the exception of puppies, which have
and extermal forces all affect glide. Rolls involve one bone
some drawer motion that comes to an abrupt stop at the
rolling on another, such as the femoral condyles rolling on
end of drawer. Methods to quantify drawer motion, which
the tibial plateau. Gliding motion in combination with
are not commonly used in dogs, include measurement of
rolling is needed for normal joint motion. Spins are joint
direct cranial drawer, quantitative cranial tibial thrust, and
surface motions that result in continual contact of a single
use of instrumented devices.3? Direct cranial drawer is
area of articular cartilage on adjacent articular cartilage
determined by simply marking the position of the tibial
within a joint. Distraction or traction accessory motions are
tuberosity with the stife in reduction on a piece of graph
tensile (pulling apart) movements between bones. Com-
paper, and then remarking the position of the tibial tuberos-
pressive or approximation accessory motions are compres-
ity with full cranial drawer. Caution must be used to prevent
sive (pushing together) movements between bones. The
motion of the femur and to keep the marking device per-
quality of the end feel during joint motion may indicate
pendicular to the graph paper. Quantitative cranial tibial
abnormalities such as restriction by fbrous tissue, excess
thrust is measured in a similar fashion, except that the stifle
joint capsule, bone, or cartilage. Crepitus is often associ-
am (algue supuns Aensn) uonisod paxy e u nday s!
ated with surface irregularities in articular cartilage or peri-
the hock is fexed. This results in cranial displacement of
articular changes, such as occur in osteoarthritis. The
the tibial tuberosity if the cranial cruciate ligament is rup-
aanq uonour quof sunnp paeded smidao jo suonesuas
tured. Marks are made on graph paper with the tibia in a
been described as being similar to crinkling a piece of cel-
reduced position and with the tibia in full cranial tibial
lophane. Other sensations such as cracking, snapping, Or
thrust. Care is taken to keep the caudal aspect of the femur
popping may indicate abnormalities such as a tom
in contact with a solid surface so the only motion that
meniscus.
occurs is the cranial displacement of the tibia.
Instrumented devices for knee-drawer tests have been
Joint Laxity
used in humans to measure shifts of the tibial tuberosity
Assessment of joint laxity in dogs is generally limited to
relative to the patella.3-3s The total anterior and posterior
qualitative evaluation, although some quantitative evalua-
 displacement produced by anterior and posterior loads of
tions have been performed. In general joint laxity may
20 Ib is measured from a reference position. Studies have
occur as a result of developmental conditions (e.g., hip
evaluated the effects of variables on the accuracy and
dysplasia), trauma, or pathologic degeneration of liga-
reproducibility of anterior-posterior drawer measurements.
 ments such as the cranial cruciate ligament.
Reproducibility is principally affected by deviations in
Damage to collateral supporting structures is most
subject positioning. In addition to drawer motion, inadver-
easily assessed by placing varus and valgus stresses on the
tent knee fexion and tibial rotation may occur and result
affected joint. The joints most commonly affected with
 in incorrect measurements, despite attempts to prevent
collateral ligament damage include the hock, stife, carpus,
 these. The effects of different observers, time sequences,
elbow, and shoulder. The digits are occasionally involved.
different days, and muscle relaxation have been studied
Assessment is most accurate when the joint is placed in
and contribute to error rates of 5% to 15%. Stress
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
227
radiography, a relatively sensitive method of measuring
drawer motion, has been used to compare instrumented
systems in humans with tears of the anterior cruciate liga-
ment (ACL). In one study stress radiography was superior
to instrumented arthrometer testing for determining cruci-
ate ligament status.36 Similar studies have not been per-
formed in dogs, but instrumented knee-drawer devices are
difficult to use in dogs and require practice to obtain repro-
ducible results. Pediatric devices may be easier to use
because the smaller size may allow a better fit of the instru-
ment to the dog's limb.
Muscle Mass and Strength
Assessment of muscle is important in physical rehabilita-
tion. Muscle mass, muscle strength, and muscle injury may
be assessed to help evaluate the patient's progress. Regain-
ing muscle mass and strength following injury is important
joints and other soft tissues. The degree of muscle atrophy
is also a reasonable indication of limb use. Therefore
Figure 13-8  A measuring tape with a spring tension device is used
careful attention to muscle assessment provides a great
to measure limb circumference. Use of this instrument allows
 deal of information regarding the progress of the rehabili-
the consistent placement of tension on the tape when making
tation patient.
measurements.
Muscle Mass
Muscle mass measurements are a useful outcome measure
Limb position is important. Full fexion of the stife
in veterinary rehabilitation. Muscle mass indicates limb
results in greater thigh circumference measurements as
use and is associated with muscle strength. Muscle mass 
compared with measurements made with the limb placed
may be estimated with limb circumference measurements,
at a functional standing angle or with the stife fully
ultrasoumd, computed tomography (CT), magnetic reso-
extended (Figure 13-11). Extension of the joint causes the
 nance imaging (MRI), and dual-energy x-ray absorptiom-
muscle bellies to elongate, whereas flexion results in short-
etry (DEXA).
ening and bunching of muscle bellies, creating greater
Measurement of limb circumference is an indirect
thigh circumference. Measurements made in awake dogs
method of assessing changes in muscle mass and is inex-
with the stifle extended are not significantly different from
pensive, quick, and easily performed on clinical patients.
those made following heavy sedation, as long as the dogs
Acceptable results depend on using standard, repeatable
 are not overly tense, probably because the muscles are in
methods of measuring limb circumference. A measuring
an elongated position when the stife is extended (Figure
tape with a spring tension device is useful in measuring
13-12). Thigh circumference measurements are sensitive
limb circumference to improve consistent tension on the
 enough to detect muscle atrophy 2 weeks after stifle surgery
tape when making measurements (Figure 13-8).
(Figure 13-13). Similar measurements may be obtained by
 One study evaluated the effect of limb position, clipping
 independent evaluators as long as standard technique is
hair, sedation, and different evaluators on thigh circumfer-
used and the evaluators practice before obtaining actual
ence measurements at two different locations before and
measurements.
 sa  r s s as r
The association of limb circumference with actual
mined by measuring from the tip of the greater trochanter
muscle mass is important if it is to be useful in the evalu-
to the distal aspect of the lateral fabella. Circumference
ation of rehabilitation patients. Human male cadavers were
was determined at points equal to 50% and 70% of thigh
subjected to comprehensive anthropometry and weighing
length, measuring from the greater trochanter distally.
of all skeletal muscle.3α Limb circumference had good cor-
Measurements were technically easier when made at the
relation with total skeletal muscle mass for the forearm
70% location because the skin of the fank did not impede
(r = .96), mid-thigh (r = .94), calf (r = .84), and midarm
 measurements (Figure 13-9). Clipping had little effect on
(r = .82).
thigh circumference measurements, but dogs with short
Thigh circumference also has significant correlation
hair coats were used (Figure 13-10). Measurements may
with actual muscle mass in dogs (Figure 13-14). Even
be affected to a greater extent in dogs with long hair.
 greater correlation may be obtained when thigh length is
228
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
50% vs. 70%
Thigh circumference
39
38
(cm)
34
Thigh
33
32
31
50%
70%
Thigh location
Figure 13-9 Thigh circumference measurements at the 50% and 70% thigh length. Although the 50% leg has greater thigh circumference
because of greater muscle mass in that location, the measurements are technically more difficult at that location in some dogs because of the 
presence of the skin of the flank.
Effect of Clipping Hair
40
38
Unclipped
 Clipped 
[cm]
36
mference
34
32
30
circuI
28
Thigh
26
24
22
20+
50%
70%
Thigh location
Figure 13-10  Clipping the hair has little effect on thigh circumference measurements in dogs with short hair coats. The effect of clipping
would likely be greater in dogs with long hair.
Effect of Limb Position
40
38
 Flexed
Standing
(cm)
 Extended
32
30
28
26
Thigh
24
22
20 +
50%
70%
 Thigh location 
Figure 13-11  Thigh circumference is less with extension of the stifle because the muscles are elongated. Flexion of the limb results in greater
 thigh ircumference, but the measurements are more difficult because of shortening of the hamstring muscles and difficulty in applying the tape
measure.
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
229
Awake vs. Sedated
 Thigh Circumference
35
Awake
(cm)
 Sedated
30
25
circur
20
Thigh
15
10-
 Standing
Flexed
Extended
Figure 13-12 Measurements made in awake dogs with the stifle extended are not significantly different from those made following heavy
papuaixa si ais ayi uay uoitsod patehuoja ue ui ane salosnw ayi asnesaq Aigeqoid 'asuai Alan iou si luajied aul j! uoepas
Effect of Surgery
70% Thigh Length
36
Presurgery
34
Postsurgery
(cm)
circumference
26
24
22
20
Standing 
Flexed
Extended
Figure 13-13  Thigh circumference measurements are sensitive enough to detect muscle atrophy 2 weeks after stifle surgery, indicating that
this technique may be useful as a simple, cost-effective method of assessing limb mass.
Correlation Between Thigh
Circumference and Actual Thigh
Muscle Mass
40
r. = 0.78
r2 = 0.61
35
(cm)
P<0.001
circumference
25
20
15
Thigh 
10
5
0+
500
700
006
1100
1300
1500
Actual Thigh Muscle Mass (g)
Figure 13-14  Thigh circumference has significant correlation with actual thigh muscle mass in dogs.
230
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
also considered and the volume of a cylinder is calculated.
with concentric layers of skin, fat, muscle, and bone.45
Although this method is simplistic because the thigh is not
However, approximations of thigh muscle CSA may
a true cylinder, the volume of a cylinder is easy to calculate
underestimate the fat-plus-skin compartment when cali-
and this estimate of muscle mass may be more clinically
pers are used.
useful. Similar principles likely exist for circumference
Although thigh circumference has been used as an
measurements of other limbs. Currently we prefer per-
effective method of measuring muscle size to evaluate the
forming thigh circumference measurements with the hair
effect of an injury or effectiveness of an intervention, some
short or clipped, the limb held in an extended position, at
studies in humans have shown this technique to be unreli-
70% of the length of the thigh, and with the animal relaxed,
able under certain conditions. Therefore other methods of
but not necessarily sedated. In the forelimb the length is
measuring muscle size may be useful. Such modalities,
measured from the proximal aspect of the olecranon to the
although costly, include ultrasound scans, DEXA, CT, or
distal aspect of the lateral styloid process; the limb circum-
MRI of muscles.
ference is measured at a point that is 20% of the limb
One study investigating the validity and reliability of
length as measured from the proximal aspect of the lateral
measuring human quadriceps CSA with ultrasound scan-
epicondyle of the humerus.
ning at the level of the mid-thigh found it to be a reliable
Limb circumference measures are commonly used in
method.*6 In a similar study, thigh circumference and
people to assess muscle atrophy, but relatively little is
segment volumes of the thigh were more strongly corre-
known regarding circumference measurement changes fol-
lated to anterior versus posterior thigh musculature (when
lowing knee injury and subsequent surgery. One study
corrected for skinfold thickness) when B-mode ultrasound
compared thigh and calf circumference measurements of
scanning was used.43
 affected and unaffected extremities before and after knee
The question of whether various evaluation techniques
surgery for patients with acute and chronic knee injuries.39
are sensitive enough to detect changes in muscle mass was
There were significant differences between affected and
 addressed in a training study of men.47 Men were exposed
unaffected extremities at both the presurgery and postsur-
to conditions designed to elicit differential hypertrophic
 gery time periods of the acute and chronic groups. The bulk
adaptations following 21 sessions of squat training. A
of the circumference measurement differences existed
control group did no formal physical training. Tests used
before surgery for both groups. In another study, the intra-
to evaluate muscle size included thigh circumference and
rater and inter-rater reliability of lower extremity circum-
quadriceps femoris and hamstring thicknesses via B-mode
ference measurements in humans recovering from ACL
ultrasound. Thigh circumference and quadriceps femoris
reconstructive surgery demonstrated high correlation (0.82
 thickness were greater in groups that trained compared to
to 1.0 and 0.72 to 0.97, respectively) for both the involved
than in controls.
 and uninvolved sides in several locations.40
Magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomogra-
Measurement of thigh circumference may be biased by
phy are promising reference methods for quantifying
the expectations of observers.4 Use of anatomic landmarks
whole body and regional skeletal muscle mass. In people,
and a tape measure with a spring tension device may help
anm and leg skeletal muscle CSA estimates obtained by
to minimize bias of the evaluator because the location of
standard MRI and CT methods had good correlation with
the measurement and the end tension of the tape can be
corresponding cadaver  values.4  Magnetic resonance
standardized. A relatively small change in limb circumfer-
imaging used to estimate muscle CSA also had good cor-
ence may indicate much greater loss of muscle mass. A
relation with actual cross-sections of anatomic specimens
study of people with chronic unilateral patellofemoral pain
asn ay auodns fsuons ssupuy asauL sts'saipms iayo u!
indicated that although symptomatic limbs had significant
of MRI and CT as methods to determine appendicular
reductions in limb circumference, very small reductions in
skeletal muscle mass in vivo.
thigh circumference (1%) were associated with significant
Neurogenic muscle atrophy induced by crushing the
reductions in muscle size (13%).42
sciatic nerve was examined using CT in dogs.5° The CT
The thickness of the skin and subcutaneous tissues may
number and CSA in denervated muscles decreased 1 to 2
be another factor affecting thigh circumference measure-
weeks after denervation and were significantly less after 3
ments.43 One investigation developed an equation using
weeks. Examination with CT may be useful to evaluate
circumference and skinfold measurements for estimating
neurogenic muscular atrophy.
anatomic cross-sectional area (CSA) of the quadriceps,
Some work has compared various methods of muscle
hamstrings, and total thigh muscles.4 Derived equations 
mass estimation in people. For example, the CSA and
using midthigh circumference and anterior thigh skinfold
volume of the quadriceps femoris muscle using MRI was
assessment may be of value for estimating muscle CSA
compared with B-mode ultrasound.51 There was no signifi-
values when more sophisticated procedures are not avail-
cant difference in the CSA estimates or volume estimates
able. Other studies have made similar assumptions that a
when ultrasound and MRI were compared at several sites
cross-section of the thigh could be represented as a circle
of the thigh.
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
231
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry is another noninva-
Although muscle mass is clearly associated with muscle
sive method of measuring lean tissue mass, but the estima-
strength, the type and strength of this relationship are less
tions are generally limited to the whole body or an entire
clear. The use of limb circumference measurements as an
limb because it is difficult to determine lean tissue mass of
indication of muscle strength in humans is somewhat con-
relatively small regions. Although CT and MRI have been 
troversial. A predictive model was developed to evaluate
used to measure limb circumference and have the advan-
the relationship of peak knee fexion and extension torque
tage that the area of large muscles may be measured, the
production to thigh circumference.56 The authors con-
equipment is expensive and interpretation must be per-
cluded that peak knee torque production can be predicted
formed by a person trained in these diagnostic modalities.
with significant accuracy (r² = .78 to .87). A similar study
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry is somewhat less expen-
assessed the correlation of maximal isometric force pro-
sive, and less training is required for interpretation of data,
duction of leg extensor muscles of elite human weight
although patient positioning is critical to obtain accurate
lifters with thigh circumference.57 Maximal isometric force
results.
had significant correlation with thigh circumference, but
The accuracy of DEXA for measuring total body fat-
surprisingly not with the mean muscle fiber area of the
free mass and leg muscle mass at four leg regions was
vastus lateralis muscle. The CSAs of fat, muscle, and bone
assessed in people.52 Computed tomography of the legs 
tissues of limbs as well as maximal voluntary isokinetic
was also performed. Fat-free mass and muscle mass by
strength were measured in men and women in another
DEXA was positively associated with CT at all four leg
study.$ Anatomic CSAs were determined by ultrasound of
regions (r² = .86 to .96), but the correlation of muscle mass 
the upper arm and thigh. The isokinetic strength of the
with DEXA was higher than with CT in three regions. A
elbow and knee extensor and fexor muscles was measured
comparison of DEXA with MRI to evaluate estimates of
using an isokinetic dynamometer. There was significant
muscle and adipose tissue in human lower limb sections
correlation between CSA and strength in all muscle groups
indicated high agreement between DEXA and MRI for
except for the elbow extensors of the men and the elbow
muscle, but less so for adipose tissue.53
fexors of the women.
Another study correlated thigh circumference, muscle
 CSA by MRI, and isokinetic strength in patients 48 months
Muscle Strength
usyuais n snm araul s Aunu Tv iy Aragns ie
 Little investigation has been perfonmed in dogs regarding
1.8% decrease in thigh circumference, an 8.6% decrease
in quadriceps CSA area by MRI, and a 10% decrease in
in making such measurements in animals. One study of
average quadriceps torque in the involved extremities as
Beagle dogs measured muscle strength as indicated by
compared with the uninvolved extremities. A positive cor-
measuring maximum isometric extension torque of the
relation was found between MRI CSA and quadriceps and
hindlimb.54 This required general anesthesia, a surgical
 hamstring peak torque in involved and uninvolved extremi-
approach to the thigh of the dog, placement of a stimulat-
ties. A positive correlation among thigh circumference,
ing electrode near the femoral nerve, and instrumentation
quadriceps, and hamstring peak torque was found in unin-
of the limb to measure muscle torque while the muscle was
volved extremities but not in operated extremities. Another
electrically stimulated. Such invasive procedures are not
study assessed whether measurements of thigh circumfer-
clinically applicable. However, maximum isometric exten-
ence of patients undergoing unilateral meniscectomies and
sion torque had strong correlation with muscle fiber diam-
rehabilitation exercises would be an indicator of muscle
eter obtained from biopsies of the vastus lateralis muscle.
power.f° In this study muscle power was not predicted from
Obtaining muscle biopsies is an invasive procedure,
thigh circumference measurements. Another study also
although less so than the technique for determining muscle
found that the changes in muscle strength were not directly
 torque, and less instrumentation is required.
correlated to limb circumference. In this study isometric
Other studies of muscle strength of humans may provide
quadriceps strength and thigh circumference were deter-
information that may be applicable to dogs. One study
mined in humans before and after a unilateral strength-
determined the relationship between selected anthropomet-
training protocol of the quadriceps muscles for 5 weeks.61
ric dimensions and strength in resistance-trained athletes.SS
 There were no significant changes in the untrained thighs.
Athletes were measured following the completion of a
The trained quadriceps increased their isometric strength
10-week resistance training program for one-repetition
by 15%, whereas they changed their CSA by only 6%.
max imum lifts. The highest relationships existed between
 Quadriceps hypertrophy was underestimated by measure-
estimates of regional muscle mass (arm circumference,
ments of thigh circumference. Nevertheless CSA measure-
arm muscle CSA, and thigh circumference) and lifting
ments may indicate improvement in strength produced by
training.
in a lift, the greater was the predictive accuracy from struc-
Although limb circumference may be associated with
tural dimensions.
muscle power and strength in some situations, other factors
232
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
may affect muscle strength besides muscle size. A single
pathologic conditions, injuries, or poor conditioning. Mor-
measurement of circumference in both thighs of subjects
phometric techniques such as body condition scoring
with unilateral injury may not be adequate to assess muscle
systems, commonly used in clinical practice, are simple,
function, but serial measurements over time may be of
inexpensive, and generally reasonably accurate. Body con-
value as an index of muscle power. One study assessed the
formation is assessed from the side and the dorsal aspect;
relationship between thigh circumference and muscle
the animal is also palpated over certain regions. These
strength and power in noninjured and injured human sub-
profiles are then compared with a standard and a body
jects.62 The correlation between the torque produced at the
condition score is assigned (Figure 13-15). Other morpho-
knee by the knee extensors and fexors and a single thigh
metric measures, including tape measurements of body
circumference measurement was not significant. In con-
areas, such as the cranial thoracic region and abdomen, are
trast, repeated measurements over a 6- to 8-month period
somewhat useful for assessing body composition, but
showed a significant relationship between change in thigh
ou e Aau 'sop ui ad poq ui uona an go asng
circumference and change in quadriceps power.
 be better than body condition scores.64
Although body condition scores are clinically useful,
Muscle Injury
they are not as precise as other methods of noninvasive
Evaluation of muscle injury during rehabilitation may
 body composition assessments, such as DEXA analysis.64
 provide important information, especially as it pertains to
These units (Figure 13-16) measure lean body mass, fat,
prevention of overuse injuries. Magnetic resonance spec-
and bone mineral and are accurate within 2% of actual
troscopy (MRS) and MRI are powerful tools to study tissue
 measurements. In addition many software programs allow
biochemistry and provide precise anatomic visualization of
the generation of body composition of various portions of
soft tissue structures.63 These techniques may be used to
the body, such as the left and right forelimbs and rear
study exercise-induced muscle injury. Magnetic resonance
limbs. Although generally considered the gold standard for
 an n   rs s 
 the noninvasive assessment of body composition, animals
of inorganic phosphate to phosphocreatine (Pi/PCr) after
must be sedated or anesthetized to obtain information.
eccentric exercise. This increase could be due to either
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry units are relatively
increases in extracellular Pi or resting muscle metabolism.
expensive and are limited to institutions at this time.
Increased Pi/PCr is also seen during training programs and
 Skin caliper measurements, although having relatively
may indicate persistent muscle injury. Increased resting Pi/
good correlation to body composition in humans, are gen-
PCr with injury is not associated with altered metabolism
-ip jo asnoaq sdeuad 'ssop u nyasn Aiaa pou Aia
during exercise. Elevations in resting Pi/PCr have been
ences in subcutaneous tissues and fat distribution.64 Other
used to show increased susceptibility of dystrophic muscle
methods of assessing body composition, such as diagnostic
to exercise-induced injury. Progressive clinical deteriora-
ultrasound, electrical impedance, and isotope dilution
tion in dystrophic dogs is marked by impaired muscle
using the deuterium oxide method, have insufficient inves-
metabolism, and the presence of low oxidative muscle
tigation, require specialized equipment, or are limited to
fibers not seen in normal dogs. Unfortunately MRS is not
research institutions.
commonly available for use in animals.
Magnetic resonance imaging shows changes following
Pain Assessment
eccentric exercise that last up to 80 days after injury and
 can refect muscle edema as well as longer lasting changes
Assessment of pain and discomfort is important in the
in the characteristics of cell water. Magnetic resonance
physical rehabilitation of animals. Excessive discomfort
imaging shows the precise localization of the injured area.
 may prevent or slow progress during treatment, but objec-
Thus MRS can provide information on the metabolic
 tive measurement of pain is difficult in animals because
response to injury, whereas MRI provides information
they do not verbalize the level of pain that they may be
regarding the site and extent of the injury. These tools are
 experiencing. Therefore pain assessment scores or ques-
promising as aids in understanding  exercise-induced
tionnaires are generally used to evaluate behaviors that are
muscle injury.
believed to be associated with pain and discomfort (Box
13-2). In addition, ordinal or VASs are sometimes used in
Body Composition
which owners are asked how painful they believe their
pet is. Some physiologic parameters, such as heart rate,
Assessment of body condition is important in rehabilitation
respiratory rate, and blood pressure, have been used to
patients because obesity has been associated with the exac-
evaluate pain in the acute postoperative period, but these
erbation of some conditions, such as osteoarthritis. In addi-
are generally not as useful for assessing pain in chronic
tion many companion animals are obese or overweight,
conditions.
and this may affect performance and health. Conversely
Multiple studies have examined the validity and clinical
poor muscle mass may indicate inadequate nutrition,
usefulness of pain scales and pain questionnaires. The
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
233
Nestle PURINA
BODY CONDITION
SYSTEM
Ribs, lumbar vertebrae, pelvic bones and all bony prominences
 evident from a distance. No discernible body fat. Obvious loss 
NIHI
of muscle mass.
Ribs, lumbar vertebrae and pelvic bones easily visible.
No palpable fat. Some evidence of other bony prominence.
tOo.
Minimal loss of muscle mass.
Tops of lumbar vertebrae visible. Pelvic bones becoming 
 prominent. Obvious waist and abdominal tuck.
Ribs easily palpable,withminimal fat covering.Waist easily
noted, viewed from above.Abdominal tuck evident.
A
E
Ribs palpable without excess fat covering.Waist observed
D
behind ribswhen viewed from above.Abdomen tucked up
whenviewed from side.
Ribs palpable with slight excess fat covering. Waist is
discernible viewed from above but is not prominent.
Abdominal tuck apparent.
Ribs palpable with difficulty; heavy fat cover. Noticeable fat
AI
deposits over lumbar area and base of tail. Waist absent or
HEA
barely visible. Abdominal tuck may be present.
Ribs not palpable under very heavy fat cover, or palpable
only with significant pressure.Heavy fat deposits over lumbar
area and base of tail. Waist absent. No abdominal tuck.
Obvious abdominal distention may be present.
Massive fat deposits over thorax, spine and base of tail.
Waist and abdominal tuck absent. Fat deposits on neck
and limbs. Obvious abdominal distention.
TheBODYCONDITIONSYSTEMwas developed at theNestlePurinaPetfCareCenter and has been
validatedasdocumentedinhefollwingpublications:
Mob
entandValidationofaBodyConditionScoreSystemforDogs.ConinePractice
Kealy,et.al.Effectsof DietRestriction on LifeSpan and Age-RelatedChanges inDogs.JAVMA 2002;
220:1315-1320
Call 1-800-222-VETS (8387),weekdays, 8:00 a.m.to 4:30p.m.CT
NestlePURINA
Figure 13-15 Body condition scores may be assigned to patients. The patient is assessed from the side and the dorsal aspect and the confor-
mation is compared to a standard. (Body condition score courtesy lams Co., Dayton, OH.)
234
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
intensity and numbered. The observer chooses the item
within each category that best describes the dog's behavior
and the scores are summed. The University of Melboume
Pain Scale incorporates heart rate, respiratory rate, and
behavioral responses, such as response to palpation, activ-
ity, mental status, posture and vocalization. This scale is
 most useful in acute postoperative patients.69
Painful behavior in dogs may be indicated by whining,
crying. or other forms of vocalizing when the animal
 moves or the affected body part is manipulated. Holding
an affected limb in a tightly fexed or guarded position is
frequently noticed after surgery. Animals may be particu-
larly resentful of palpation and manipulation of the area.
in the back of a run or in the cormer of a room with little
Figure 13-16  A dual-energy X-ray absorptiometer may be used to
desire to rise and move about. This may be a protective
measure lean body mass, fat mass, and bone mineral content.
 mechanism to avoid further injury and pain from moving
about. The degree of pain in these patients is frequently
underestimated because of their quiet nature.
Box 13-2  Simple Pain Assessment Score
Impressions of Owners and Veterinarians
0 No signs of pain during palpation of affected joint
1 Signs of mild pain during palpation of joint
 Dogs and cats have different personalities and may respond
 2 Signs of moderate pain during palpation
3 Signs of severe pain during palpation
very differently to various therapies. It is important for
 individuals who best know patients to evaluate their prog-
4 Dog will not allow examiner to palpate joint
ress. For example, owners are often very aware of subtle
changes in their pet's behavior. Although it is somewhat
difficult to quantify these changes, these subjective find-
canine brief pain inventory (CBPI) is based on the human
ings often provide the therapist with important information
Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) and has been shown to be reli-
regarding patient progress. If possible, the changes should
-bdas e u pue zt'snuoanso yim saop u pea pue aiqe
be as objective as possible, such as recording the amount
rate study on osteoarthritic dogs was shown to be sensitive
of time a pet spends playing rather than resting, measuring
enough to detect changes in pain with nonsteroidal antin-
 the distance that an animal is able to walk before needing
fammatory (NSAID) use.'3 The CBPI has also been vali-
 to rest, or evaluating the length of time a neurologic patient 
 dated for use in dogs with bone cancer.65
is able to stand unassisted.
The Helsinki chronic pain index (HCPI) was created to
Owners should keep a log of daily activities to further
assess chronic pain in dogs'l (Table 13-1) and was found
 define the progress of the patient at home. This may also
to be a valid and reliable tool for assessment of chronic
provide incentive for owners to continue a home rehabilita-
tion program if they can see the progress that is made from
caution should be used with any subjective evaluation of
week to week and month to month. Poor compliance is a
pain in dogs with osteoarthritis. One study compared sub-
common reason for failure of a patient to progress. Regu-
 jective evaluation of dogs receiving a placebo for the treat-
larly checking the log gives the veterinarian and owner an
ment of osteoarthritis and found that caregivers indicated
opportunity to evaluate the patient's progress, as well as
that 40% of patients improved when evaluated by subjec-
make alterations to the rehabilitation program that account
tive measures, while measurement of ground reaction
for an owner's ability to provide continued home care. In
forces indicated no improvement.67
addition, videotaping the patient's activity on a regular
Other studies have evaluated the usefulness of question-
schedule allows comparisons to be made over relatively
naires to evaluate acute pain in dogs. A short form of the
long periods of time.
Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Scale was able to iden-
tify those patients that required analgesic treatment from
Return to Function
those that did not.6 This pain scale evaluates six behavioral
categories including vocalization, attention to wound,
Retum to function is perhaps the best indication of a suc-
mobility, response to touch, demeanor, and posture/activity.
cessful outcome following treatment of an acute or chronic
Descriptions of the severity of each category are provided,
condition. The desired level of function depends on the
and the items are placed in increasing order of pain
intended use of the patient, which varies from a highly
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
235
Table 13-1
Pain Assessment in Dogs with Chronic Osteoarthritis
SCORES FOR
SCORES FOR
DOGS WITH CHD
CONTROL DOGS
Question Topic
Median
Range
Median
Range
P Value
POSITIVE BEHAVIOR
Appetite
0
0-3
0
0-2
0.59
Mood*
1
0-3
0
0-1
<0.001
Frequency of contact with human family members
1
0-2
0
0-2
0.086
Frequency of tail wagging
1
0-3
0
0-2
0.013
Activity
1.5
0-4
1
0-3
0.052
Play and games*
1
0-4
0
0-1
<0.001
NEGATIVE BEHAVIOR
Excessive panting
1
0-4
0-2
<0.001
Licking of lips
0
0-4
0
0-3
0.97
Vocalization (audible complaining)*
1
0-3
0
0-1
<0.001
Vocalization when stretching hind legs caudally
2
0-4
0
0-1
<0.001
Aggressiveness toward humans
0
0-3
0
0-2
0.88
Aggressiveness toward other dogs 
2
0-3
1
0-3
0.47
Aggressiveness toward dogs in its own pack
1
0-4
1
0-2
0.09
 Submissiveness in the pack
1.5
0-4
2
0-4
0.27
LOCOMOTION
Walking*
1
0-3
0
0-1
<0.001
Trotting*
1.5
0-4
0
0-1
<0.001
Pacing
1
0-4
2
0-4
<0.001
Galloping*
1
0-4
0
0-1
<0.001
Jumping*
2
0-4
0
0-1
<0.001
Climbing stairs
2
1-4
0
0-1
<0.001
Descending stairs
2
0-4
0
0-2
<0.001
Laying down*
2
0-4
0
0-1
<0.001
Getting up*
2.5
0-4
0
0-1
<0.001
Difficulty moving after rest*
2
0-4
0
0
<0.001
Difficulty moving after major activity *
3
1-4
0
0-1
<0.001
Chronic pain index (sum of answers to 11 questions)
19
7-35
2
S-0
<0.001
*Question selected for inclusion in chronic pain index. Values of P < 0.o05 were considered significant.
 Comparison of 25 questionnaire answers (scores, 0-4) provided by owners of 41 dogs with pain associated with canine hip dysplasia (CHD) with those provided by
owners of 24 dogs with no pain.
From Hielm-Bjorkman AK, Kuusela E, Liman A, et al: Evaluation of methods for assessment of pain associated with chronic osteoarthritis in dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
222:1552-1558, 2003.
trained working dog or racing greyhound to a house pet.
For example, it is unreasonable to expect an elderly
Some outcomes are relatively easy to quantify, such as
arthritic dog to retum to competitive coursing, but it may
winning a race in the same class that the animal raced in
be reasonable to expect the dog to be able to play ball for
before an injury or being able to perform a particular task
short periods of time. In addition, expectations may need
in the case of a working dog. Others are more nebulous,
to be altered if the response to treatment is better or worse
such as a retum to acceptable house pet function. Regard-
than expected. In severely affected neurologic patients,
less of the desired outcome, reasonable expectations must
reasonable expectations should center on functional activi-
be set based on the severity of the condition being treated,
ties of daily living, such as being able to climb stairs to get
and this must be conveyed to the owner to avoid future
in and out of the house, go outside to eliminate with
 disappointment when a higher level of function is expected
minimal or no assistance, and take short walks with the
than may be achieved.
owner.
236
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
Functional scales are used extensively in human medi-
BoX 13-31
Functional Scoring System in Dogs
cine and rehabilitation in orthopedics, neurology, cardio-
with Acute Spinal Cord Injuries
pulmonary, pain, child development, and other areas.
Functional scoring systems for specific injuries may be
The five stages of recovery of use of pelvic limbs in dogs with
useful, such as a functional stife score. Such scoring
spinal cord injuries. Each stage is subdivided on the basis of
systems have been used for outcome assessment in people
recovery patterns (i.e., yielding a scale of 0 to 14). Dogs were
recovering from ACL surgery because an ACL may result
considered as weight-bearing when the full weight was born
in functional disability. Two of the most commonly used
with joints extended for at least two steps (ie., standing alone
was not considered weight-bearing).
measures are the Lysholm Knee Scale and the Cincinnati
 Knee Rating Scale.70.71 Although these scales are well vali-
Stage 1
dated in humans, the optimal method to measure the degree
of functional disability is unknown in dogs. A useful
1 No pelvic limb movement with deep pain sensation.
system in dogs likely should incorporate limb use, lame-
2 No pelvic limb movement but voluntary tail movement.
ness, stance, pain, muscle atrophy, range of motion, joint
Stage 2
effusion, drawer motion, and functional activities to evalu-
 3 Minimal non-weight-bearing protraction of the pelvic limb
ate limb function following cranial cruciate ligament
(movement of 1 joint).
surgery (Table 13-2). A subjective and functional rating
4 Non-weight-bearing protraction of the pelvic limb with >1
system in people related six activity levels to pain, swell-
joint involved <50% of the time.
 ing, giving-way, and overall activity.72 In this study, activity
 5 Non-weight-bearing protraction of the pelvic limb with >1
level, symptoms, clinical laxity, meniscal damage, lower
joint involved >50% of the time.
limb alignment, tibiofemoral crepitus, patellofemoral
Stage 3
factors, rehabilitation, and patient compliance were identi-
 6 Weight-bearing protraction of pelvic limb <10% of the time.
fied as risk factors for future joint arthrosis.
7 Weight-bearing protraction of pelvic limb 10% to 50% of the
Other functional tests that have been used in humans
time.
may be applied to dogs, with modification. For example,
 8 Weight-bearing protraction of pelvic limb >50% of the time.
one study of people assessed the sensitivity of four differ-
Stage 4
ent types of one-legged hop tests to determine alterations
 9 Weight-bearing protraction 100% of the time with reduced
in lower limb function in ACL-deficient knees.73 Compari-
strength of pelvic limb. Mistakes >90% of the time (e.g.,
sons were made between limb symmetry as measured by
crossing of pelvic limbs, scuffng foot on protraction,
the hop tests and muscle strength, symptoms, and self-
standing on dorsum of foot, falling).
assessed function. Statistical trends were noted between
10 Weight-bearing protraction of pelvic limb 100% of the time
abnormal limb symmetry on the hop tests and low-velocity
with reduced strength. Mistakes 50% to 90% of the time.
quadriceps isokinetic test results. The time and distance
11 Weight-bearing protraction of pelvic limb 100% of the time
with reduced strength. Mistakes <50% of the time.
that a dog will walk on the rear limbs with the forelimbs
elevated (dancing) may provide similar information.
Stage 5
 Several easy to administer functional scoring scales have
 12 Ataxic pelvic limb gait with normal strength, but mistakes
been developed for dogs with spinal cord injuries including
>50% of the time (e.g., lack of coordination with thoracic
limb, crossing of pelvic limbs, skipping steps, bunny-
one for acute injuries?4 (Box 13-3), and another that is
hopping, scuffing foot on protraction).
based on the normal neurologic ex amination?s (Box 13-4).
13 Ataxic pelvic limb gait with normal strength, but mistakes
An example is Figure 13-17 where dogs with intact deep
made <50% of the time.
pan recovered faster and to a greater degree than dogs
14 Normal pel vic limb gait.
without deep pain.
From Olby NJ, De Risio L, Munana KR, et al.: Functional scoring system in dogs
with acute spinal cord injuries. Arm I Vet Res 62:1628, 2001.
Quality of Life
Health-related quality of life in dogs with cardiac
Questionnaires to assess the quality of life of dogs have
 disease has also been investigated.? Three humdred and
been an area of recent study. Dogs with spinal cord injuries
sixty dogs were evaluated by veterinarians and scored in
have been studied and a questionnaire was developed and
terms of clinical signs of cardiac disease. Owner question-
evaluated for owner-perceived quality of life. Results of
naires were significantly correlated with the FETCH
this study?6 suggest that this questionnaire can be used to
(Functional Evaluation of Cardiac Health) questionnaire
obtain owner-perceived quality of life assessments. A
and with the ISACHC (Intermational Small Animal Cardiac
follow-up study77 evaluated owner-perceived quality of life
Health Council) classification. Results of this study suggest
that the questionnaire is a valid and reliable method for
was that ambulation was the factor that owners perceived
assessing quality of life in dogs with cardiac disease.
as having the biggest impact on quality of life.
       
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
237
Table 13-2
 Proposed Stifle Function Scale
Category
Section
Findings
Maximal Score
Score
Limb use at a Trot
Normal
 No lameness and weight bearing on all strides
10
10
Mild disuse
Lame but weight bearing on >95% of strides 
6
Moderate disuse
Lame but weight bearing on >50% and <95%
4
of strides
Severe disuse
 Lame but weight bearing on <50% and >5% of
2
strides
Very severe
Continuous non-weight-bearing lameness or
disuse
weight bearing on <5% of strides
Limb use at a Walk
Normal
 No lameness and weight bearing on all strides
10
10
Mild disuse
 Lame but weight bearing on >95% of strides 
6
Moderate disuse
Lame but weight bearing on >50% and <95%
4
of strides
Severe disuse
Lame but weight bearing on <50% and >5% of
2
strides
Very severe
Continuous non-weight-bearing lameness or
disuse
weight bearing on <5% of strides
Lameness at a trot
None
Normal locomotion 
10
10
Slight
Trots with a slight (barely perceptible)
8
lameness, but strides appear to have normal
length
Mild
 Trots with a mild lameness, but strides appear
6
to have normal length
Moderate
Trot with a moderate (obvious) lameness or a
4
 shortened stride length on affected side when
trotting, but is bearing weight on that limb
Severe
Is intermittently non-weight-bearing on that
2
limb when trotting
Very severe
 Is completely non-weight-bearing on that limb
0
when trotting
Lameness at a walk
None
Nonmal locomotion
10
10
Slight
Walks with a slight (barely perceptible)
8
lameness, but strides appear to have normal
length
Mild
Walks with a mild lameness, but strides appear
6
 to have normal length
Moderate
Walks with a moderate (obvious) lameness or
4
shortened stride length on affected side, but
is bearing weight on that limb
Severe
 Is intermittently non-weight-bearing on that 
2
limb when walking
Very severe
 Is completely non-weight-bearing on that limb
0
when walking
Stance
Normal
 Stands with equal weight on both pelvic limbs
10
10
Mild asymmetry
Bears less weight on the affected pelvic limb or
6
limb trembles when standing
Moderate
Puts limb down for balance but bears weight
3
asymmetry
<10% of normal weight
Severe
Does not bear weight on affected limb while
0
asymmetry
standing
Continued
238
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
Table 13-2
Proposed Stifle Function Scalecont'd
Category
Section
Findings
 Maximal Score  Score
 Stair climbing
Normal
No difficulty
5
5
Mild
Has slight diffculty climbing steps
3
Moderate
Skips steps or bunny hops
1
Severe
Cannot climb stairs
0
Sitting and standing
Normal
 Easily goes from a sitting to standing or a
5
5
standing to sitting position. Sits and rises
squarely.
Mild
 Sits or stands with some difficulty (slight
 hesitation or delay)
Moderate
Sits or stands with difficulty (hesitation or
2
delay)
Severe
Cannot sit or stand without assistance
0
Dancing
Nonmal
Moves freely forward and backward
5
Mild anomaly
 Resists moving forward and backward
3
Severe anomaly
 Unable to bear weight on pelvic limbs during
0
forward and backward dancing motion
Pain response
None
 No pain response is elicited during palpation of
5
5
(palpation)
the joint
Mild
Mild pain response (i.e., head tuming) is
3
elicited during palpation of the joint
Moderate
 Moderate pain response (i.e., slight
2
vocalization, increased reaction) is elicited
during palpation of the joint
Severe
Severe pain response (i.e., immediate reaction,
0
loud vocalization, attempt to bite) is elicited
during palpation of the joint
Stife Effusion
None
No effusion of stifle
5
Mild
 Slight loss of patella ligament distinctness
3
Moderate
Patella ligament not distinct
2
Severe
 Cannot distinguish patella ligament due to
1
effusion
Muscle atrophy
None
Normal muscle mass
10
10
Mild
If disease is unilateral, thigh girth is 0% to 5%
6
smaller than the opposite limb. Otherwise, a
slight atrophy of the biceps femoris or other
thigh muscles is noted/palpated.
Moderate
If disease is unilateral, thigh girth is 6% to 10%
smaller than the opposite limb. Otherwise, a
moderate atrophy of the biceps femoris or
other thigh muscles is noted/palpated.
Severe
If disease is unilateral, thigh girth is >1 1%
0
smaller than the opposite limb. Otherwise, a
severe atrophy of the biceps femoris or other
thigh muscles is noted/palpated.
Joint motion*
Normal or
Extension 160° or more
5
(extension)
increased
Mild loss
Extension 150° to 1599
3
Moderate loss
Extension 140° to 1499
1
Severe loss
Extension <139°
0
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
239
Table 13-2
 Proposed Stifle Function Scale-
P,1u03-
Category
Section
Findings
Maximal Score Score
Joint motion*
Nonmal
Flexion 45° or less
5
S
(fexion)
Mild loss
Flexion 46° to 50°
3
Moderate loss
Flexion 51° to 60°
1
Severe loss of
Flexion >60°
0
fexion
 Drawer Motion or
None
 Less than 2 mm
5
S
 Cranial Tibial
Mild
2-4 mm
3
Thrust (for TPLO
Moderate
5-7 mm
1
or TTA)
Severe
.7 mm
Total score
100
*Jaegger G, Marcellin-Little DdJ, Levine D: Reliability of goniometry in Labrador retrievers. Am J Vet Res 63:979-986, 2002.
14
14
12
12
10
10
8
8-
另
6
4
1
50
100
50
100
Time (days)
Time (days)
Figure 13-17  Typical course of recovery of pelvic limb function during a 3-month period in five dogs with spinal cord injuries that were
nonambulatory paraparetics or paraplegics with intact deep pain sensation (left) and without deep pain sensation (right). Recovery scores are
based on the system described in Box 13-3. (A score of 0 is poor, with no limb movement or deep pain; a score of 14 is best, with recovery of
normal pelvic gait.) (From Olby NJ, De Risio L, Munana KR, et al.: Functional scoring system in dogs with acute spinal cord injuries. Am / Vet Res 
62:1628, 2001.)
Box 13-4
Texas Spinal Cord Injury Score for Dogs
Gait?
Proprioceptive Positioning
0 Absent response
1 Intact limb protraction with no ground clearance
1 Delayed response
 2 Intact limb protraction with inconsistent ground clearance
2 Normal response
3 Intact limb protraction with consistent ground clearance
Nociception
(>75%)
 0 No deep nociception
4 Ambulatory, consistent ground clearance with moderate
 1 Intact deep nociception, no superficial nociception
paresis-ataxia (will fall occasionally)
 2 Nociception present
 5 Ambulatory, consistent ground clearance with mild paresis-
ataxia (does not fall, even on slick surfaces)
6 Normal gait
aGround clearance refers to the ability to lit the limb off of the ground when it is being protracted.
Popriocetive positioning is performed by suporting the dog's weight and genty placing the dorum of the paw onthe ground.A delayed reponse is indicate by
a >2-second lag between paw placement and correction.
Deep nociception is measured by cross-clamping the distal limb or nail bed with hemostats. Superficial nociception is tested by pinching the interdigital webbing with
hemostats.
From Levine Gl, Levine JM, Budke CM, et al: Description and repeatability of a newly developed spinal cord injury scale for dogs. Prev Vet Med 89:121-127, 2009.
240
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
Table 13-3
 Descriptive Terms Used in the Development of a Quality of Life Scale in Dogs with
Chronic Pain
Domains
Negative Descriptors
Positive Descriptors
Activity
Apathetic, apprehensive, lackluster,
 Active, boisterous, bouncy, energetic, lively,
lethargic, listless, reluctant, sleepy.
 playful, tireless
slowed, sluggish, tired weary
Comfort
Complaining, groaning, moaning, pained,
Comfortable, stretching
sore, stoic, uncomfortable
Appetite
Off food, picky (with regard to food)
Enthusiastic about food, greedy, interested in
food, thirsty
Extroversion-
Detached, quiet, subdued, unresponsive,
Affectionate, bold, curious, eager, excitable,
introversion
unsociable, withdrawn
friendly, fun loving, nosy, outgoing, sociable
Aggression
Aggressive, grumpy, irritable, territorial or
Good-natured, even tempered, placid
protective
Anxiety
Anxious, cautious, distressed, frightened,
Accepting, easygoing, laid-back
nervous, panicky, strained, uneasy, upset
Alertness
 Depressed, dull, confused, uninterested
Alert, bright, inquisitive, interested, keen,
obedient
Dependence
Attention seeking, clingy, comfort seeking.
Confi dent, independent 
 pathetic or pitiful
 Contentment
Miserable, sad, sorrowful, resigned, unhappy
Contented, happy
Consistency
Inconsistent
Consistent
Agitation
Agitated, crying, disturbed, panting, restless,
Calm, at ease
unsettled, whining
Posture-mobility
Awkward, limping, stiff
Athletic, fit, relaxed
Compulsion
Compulsive
No terms
From Wiseman-Orr ML, Nolan AM, Reid J, Scott EM: Development of a questionnaire to measure the effects of chronic pain on health-related quality of life in dogs. Am
J Vet Res 65:1077-1084, 2004.
 determine the quality of life for dogs with chronic pain.79
3. Phelps HA, Ramos V, Shires PK et al: The effect of measure-
These types of measures may guide decision making and
ment method on static weight distribution to all legs in dogs
treatment interventions (Table 13-3).
using the Quadruped Biofeedback System, Vet Comp Orthop
Traumatot 20:108-112, 2007.
4. Hicks DA, Millis DL, Arnold GA et al: Comparison of
weightbearing at a stance vs trotting in dogs with rear fimb
Summary
tameness. Proc 32nd Annual Conference of the Veterinary
Orhtopedic Society, 2005.
Assessment of patients is important to document the ben-
5. Millis DL, Westling M, Westling W: Comparison of weight-
efits of a rehabilitation program and help to improve pro-
bearing at a stance vs trotting in dogs with lameness. Proc 7th
tocols. Assessment techniques may be relatively simple
International  Association  of  Veterinary   Rehabilitation  and
and inexpensive, or more elaborate with expensive equip-
Physical Therapy Meeting. Vienna, Austria, August 2013.
ment. New assessment techniques must be developed to
6. Quinn MM, Keuler NS, Lu Y et al: Evaluation of agreement
allow adequate comparison of a patient's progress over
between numerical rating scales, visual analogue scoring
time and make specific changes in protocols to ac hieve the
scales, and force plate gait analysis in dogs, Vet Surg 36:360-
best possible outcome.
367, 2007.
7. Waxman AS, Robinson DA, Evans RB et al: Relationship
between objective and subjective assessment of limb func-
REFERENCES
tion in normal dogs with an experimentally induced lame-
1. Yeung TS, Stratford PW, MacDermid JC: The timed up and
ness, Vet Surg 37:241-246, 2008.
go test for use on an inpatient orthopaedic rehabilitation
8. Burton NJ, Owen MR, Colborne GR et al: Can owners and
ward, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 38:410-417, 2008.
clinicians assess outcome in dogs with fragmented medial
 2. Hyytiinen HK, Molsa SH, Junnila JT et al: Use of bathroom 
'681-881:27 pomum41 dou0 duo5 1ea tsssoid piouo1o
scales in measuring asymmetry of hindlimb static weight
2009.
bearing in dogs with osteoarthritis, Vet Comp Orthop Trau-
 9. Hielm-Bjorkman AK, Kapatkin AS, Rita HJ: Reliability and
matol 25:390-396, 2012.
yalidity of a visual analogue scale used by owners to measure
Chapter 13
Assessing and Measuring Outcomes
241
chronic pain attributable to osteoarthritis in their dogs, Am J
without cranial cruciate ligament disease, Vet Surg 39:513-
Vet Res 72:601-607, 2011.
522, 2010.
 10. Hudson JT, Slater MR, Taylor L et al: Assessing repeatability
 24. Nielsen C, Stover SM, Schulz KS et al: Two-dimensional
and validity of a visual analogue scale questionnaire for use
link-segment model of the forelimb of dogs at a walk, Am J
in assessing pain and lameness in dogs, Am J Vet Res
Vet Res 64:609-617, 2003.
65:1634-1643, 2004.
25. Chan CB, Spierenburg M, Ihle SL et al: Use of pedometers
 11. Hielm-Bjorkman AK, Kuusela E, Liman A et al: Evaluation
to measure physical activity in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
of methods for assessment of pain associated with chronic
226:2010-2015, 2005.
osteoarthritis in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:1552-1558,
26. Hansen BD, Lascelles BDX, Keene BW et al: Evaluation of
2003.
an accelerometer for at-home monitoring of spontaneous
12. Brown DS, Boston RC, Coyne JC et al: Development and
activity in dogs, Am J Vet Res 68:468-475, 2007.
psychometric testing of an instrument designed to measure
 27. Yam PS, Penpraze V, Young D et al: Validity, practical utility
chronic pain in dogs with osteoarthritis, Am J Vet Res 68:631-
and reliability of Actigraph accelerometry for the measure-
637, 2007.
ment of habitual physical activity in dogs, J Small Anim Prac
13. Brown DS, Boston RC, Coyne JC et al: Ability of the Brief
52:86-92, 2011.
Canine Pain Inventory to detect response to treatment in dogs
 28. Brown DC, Boston RC, Fatrar JT: Use of an activity monitor 
with osteoarthritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 233:1278-1283,
to detect response to treatment in dogs with osteoarthritis,
2008.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 237:66-70, 2010.
14. Brown DS, Boston RC, Falrar JT: Comparison of force plate
 29. How to track a lost animal. We tested three GPS devices for
gait analysis and owner assessment of pain using the Canine
pets. Consumer Reports, May, 2012.
Brief Pain Inventory in dogs with osteoarthritis, J Vet Intern.
30. Jaegger G, Marcellin-Little D, Levine D: Reliability of goni-
Med 27:22-30, 2013.
ometry in Labrador retrievers, Am J Vet Res 63:979-986,
15. DeCamp CE et al: Kinematic evaluation of gait in dogs with
2002.
cranial cruciate ligament rupture, Am J Vet Res 57:120-126,
 31. Jaeger GH, Marcellin-Little DJ, DePuy V et al: Validity of
1996.
 goniometric joint measurements in cats, Am J Vet Res 68:822-
16. Millis DL, Hicks DA, Headrick JH et al: Kinematic assess-
826, 2007.
ment of selected therapeutic exercises in dogs. Proceedings
 32. Peacock J, Millis DL, Weigel JP: A comparative analysis of
 of the 16th Annual American College of Veterinary Surgeons 
two methods of cranial drawer quantitation in the canine
Symposium, Washington, DC, 2002.
stijfte. Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
17. Gassel AG, Millis DL, Schwartz P et al: Kinematic gait
Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Sun Valley, ID, 1999.
analysis of the pelvic limb: comparison of overground
 33. Edixhoven P et al: Accuracy and reproducibility of instru-
versus incline watking in l0 dogs. Proceedings of the
mented knee-drawer tests, J Orthop Res 5:378-387, 1987.
32nd Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Snowmass, CO,
34. Doupe MB et al: A new formula for population-based estima-
March 2005.
tion of whole body muscle mass in males, Can J Appt Physiot
 18. Headrick JH, Hicks DA, McEachern GL et al: Kinematics of
22:598-608, 1997.
watking over cavaletti rails compared to overground walking
35. Daniel DM et al: Instrumented measurement of anterior
in dogs. Proceedings of the 2nd World Veterinary Orthopedic
laxity of the knee, J Bone Joint Surg Am 67:720-726, 1985.
Congress/Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Key stone, CO, Feb
36. Hewett TE, Noyes FR, Lee MD: Diagnosis of complete and
2006.
partial posterior cruciate ligament ruptures: stress radiogra-
19. Hicks DA, Millis DL, Headrick JF et al: Computer-assisted
phy compared with KT-1000 arthrometer and posterior
kinematic evatuation of compensatory movements of the
drawer testing, Am J Sports Med 25:648-655, 1997.
lumbar spine associated with hind limb lameness in dogs
37. Millis DL, Scroggs L, Levine D: Variables affecting thigh.
with stijfe osteoarthritis. Proceedings of the 2nd World Vet-
circumference measurements in dogs. Proceedings of the 1st
 erinary Orthopedic Congress/Veterinary Orthopedic Society,
 International Symposium on Rehabilitative Phy sical Therapy
Keystone CO, Feb 2006.
Veterinary Medicine, 1999, p 157.
20. Stoller NB, Headick JH, Millis DL: Kinetics of jumping
 38. Martin AD et al: Anthropometic estimation of muscle mass 
dogs. Proceedings of the 32nd Veterinary Orthopedic Society,
in men, Med Sci Sports Exerc 22:729-733, 1990.
Sun Valley, ID, March 2007.
 39. Ross M, Worrell Tw: Thigh and calf girth following knee
21. Duant AM, Millis DL, Headrick JF: Kinematics of stair
injury and surgery, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 27:9-15, 1998.
ascent versus trotting in heathy dogs. Proceedings of the
40. Soderberg GL, Ballantyne BT, Kestel LL: Reliability of
33rd Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Big Sky, MT, March
lower extremity girth measurements after anterior cruciate
2008
ligament reconstruction, Physiother Res Int 1:7-16, 1996.
22. Headrick JF: A description of the movement of the canine
41. Maylia E et al: Can thigh girth be measured accurately: a
pelvic limb in three dimensions using an inverse dynamics
preliminary investigation, J Sport Rehab 8:43-49, 1999.
method, and a comparison of two techniques to surgically
42. Doxey GE: Assessing quadriceps femoris muscle bulk with
repair a cranial cruciate ligament deficient stife. PhD
girth measurements in subjects with patellofemoral pain,
Dissertation, University of Tennessee, 2012. http://trace
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 9:177-183, 1987.
 tennessee.edu/utk_graddi ss/1471/
43. Doxey GE: The association of anthropometric measurements
23. Ragetly CA, Griffon DJ, Mostafa AA et al: Inverse dynamics
of thigh size and B-mode ultrasound scanning of muscle
analysis of the pelvic limbs in Labrador retrievers with and
thickness, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 8:462-468, 1987.
242
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
44. Housh DJ et al: Anthropometric estimation of thigh
62. Cooper H et al: Use and misuse of the tape-measure as a
muscle cross-sectional area, Med Sci Sports Exerc 27:784-
means of assessing muscle strength and power, Rheumatot
791, 1995.
Rehabil 20:211-218, 1981.
45. Knapik JJ, Staab JS, Harman EA: Validity of an anthropo-
63. McCully K et al: The use of nuclear magnetic resonance to
metric estimate of thigh muscle cross-sectional area, Med Sci
evaluate muscle injury, Med Sci Sports Exerc 24:537-542,
Sports Exerc 28:1523-1530, 1996.
1992.
46. Howe TE, Oldham JA: The reliability of measuring quadri-
 64. Burkholder WJ: Precision and practicality of methods assess-
ceps cross-sectional area with compound B ultrasound scan-
ing body composition of dogs and cats, Compend Contin.
ning, Physiother Res Int 1:112-126, 1996.
Educ Pract Vet 23:1-10, 2001.
47. Weiss LW, Coney HD, Clark FC: Gross measures of exercise-
65. Brown DC, Boston RC, Coyne JC et al: A novel approach to
induced muscular hypertrophy, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
the use of animals in studies of pain: validation of the canine
30:143-148, 2000.
brief pain inventory in canine bone cancer, Pain Med 10: 133-
48. Mitsiopoulos N et al: Cadaver validation of skeletal
142, 2009.
muscle measurement by magnetic resonance imaging and
 66. Hielm-Bjorkman AK, Rita H, Tulamo RM: Psychometric
computerized tomography, J Appl Physiol 85:115-122,
testing of the Helsinki pain index by completion of a
1998.
questionnaire in Finnish by owners of dogs with chronic
49. Beneke R, Neuerburg J, Bohndorf K: Muscle cross-section
signs of pain by osteoarthritis, Am J Vet Res 70:727-734,
measurement by magnetic resonance imaging, Eur J App!
2009.
Physiol 63:424-429, 1991.
 67. Conzemius, Michael G, Evans, Richard B: Caregiver placebo
50. Orima H, Fujita M: Computed tomographic findings of
effect for dogs with lameness from osteoarthritis, J Amer Vet
experimentally induced neurogenic muscular atrophy in
Med Assoc 241:1314-1319, 2012.
dogs, J Vet Med Sci 59:729-731, 1997.
68. Reid J, Nolan AM, Hughes JML et al: Development of the
51. Walton JM, Roberts N, Whitehouse GH: Measurement of the
short-form Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Scale.(CMPS-
quadriceps femoris muscle using magnetic resonance and
SF) and derivation of an analgesic intervention score, Animat
ultrasound imaging, Br J Sports Med 31:59-64, 1997.
Welfare 16(S):97-104, 2007.
52. Visser M et al: Validity of fan-beam dual-energy X-ray
 69. Firth A, Haldane S: Development of a scale to evaluate pain
absorptiometry for measuring fat-ffee mass and leg muscle
in dogs, J Amer Vet Med Assoc 214:651-659, 1999.
mass: Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study—Dual-
70. Johnson DS, Smith RB: Outcome measurement in the ACL
Energy  X-ray Absorptiometry and Body  Composition
deficient knee-what's the score? Knee 8:51-57, 2001.
Working Group, J Appi Physiot 87:1513-1520, 1999.
71. Wright Rw: Knee injury outcome measures, J Am Acad
 53. Fuller NJ et al: Assessment of limb muscle and adipose tissue
Orthop Surg 17:31-39, 2009.
by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry using magnetic reso-
72. Noyes FR, McGinniss GH, Mooar LA: Functional disability
nance imaging for comparison, Int J Obes Retat Metab
 in the anterior cruciate insufficient knee syndrome: review of
Disord 23:1295-1302, 1999.
knee rating systems and projected risk factors in deterimining
54. Lieber RL et al: Growth hormone secretagogue increases
treatment, Sports Med 1:278-302, 1984.
muscle strength during remobilization after canine hindlimb
73. Noyes FR, Barber SD, Mangine RE: Abnormal lower limb
immobilization, J Orthop Res 15:519-527, 1997.
symmetry determined by function hop tests after anterior
55. Mayhew JL, Piper FC, Ware JS: Anthropometric correlates
cruciate ligament rupture, Am J Sports Med 19:513-518,
with strength performance among resistance trained athletes,
1991.
J Sports Med Phys Fitness 33:159-165, 1993.
74. Olby NJ, De Risio L, Muniana KR et al: Functional scoring
56. Gross MT et al: Relationship between multiple predictor
system in dogs with acute spinal cord injuries, Am J Vet Res
variables and normal knee torque production, Phys Ther
62:1624-1628, 2001.
69:54-62, 1989
75. Levine GJ, Levine JM, Budke CM et al: Description and
57.B
 Hakkinen K, Komi PV, Kauhanen H: Electromyographic and 
repeatability of a newly developed spinal cord injury scale
force production characteristics of leg extensor muscles of
for dogs, Prev Vet Med 89:121-127, 2009.
elite weight lifters during isometric, concentric, and various
76. Budke CM, Levine JM, Kerwin SC et al: Evaluation of a
sttetch-shortening cycle exercises, Int J Sports Med 7:144-
questionnaire for obtaining owner-perceived, weighted
151, 1986.
quality-of-life assessments for dogs with spinal cord injuries,
 58. Kanehisa H, Ikegawa S, Fukunaga T: Comparison of muscle
J Am Vet Med Assoc 233:925-930, 2008.
cross-sectional area and strength between untrained women
77. Levine JM, Budke CM, Levine GJ et al: Owner-perceived.
and men, Eur J Appt Physiol 68:148-154, 1994.
Weighted quality of life assessments in dogs with spinal cord
59. Arangio GA et al: Thigh muscle size and strength after ante-
injuries, J Am Vet Med Assoc 233:931-935, 2008.
rior cruciate ligament reconstruction and rehabilitation, J
78. Freeman LM, Rush JE, Farabaugh AE et al: Development
Orthop Sports Phys Ther 26:238-243, 1997.
and evaluation of a questionnaire for assessing health-related
60. Maylia E et al: Can muscle power be estimated from thigh
quality of life in dogs with cardiac disease, J Am Vet Med
bulk measurements: a preliminary study, J Sport Rehab 8:50-
Assoc 226:1864-1868, 2005.
59, 1999.
79. Wiseman-Orr ML, Nolan AM, Reid J et al: Development of
61. Young A et al: The effect of high-resistance training on the
a questionnaire to measure the effects of chronic pain on
strength and cross-sectional area of the human quadriceps,
health-related quality of life in dogs, Am J Vet Res 65:1077-
Eur J Clin Invest 13:411-417, 1983.
1084, 2004.
Rehabilitating the Painful
Patient: Pain Management in
Physical Rehabilitation
Steven M.Fox and Robin Downing
Divinum est opus sedare dotorum.
· Undermining the trust inherent in the family-pet
(Divine is the work to subdue pain.)
relationship
Gaten
 Tissue contraction/atrophy from disuse driven by pain
 Resentment on the part of the patient of all caregivers
lthough pain in canine patients is inevitable in the
 The transition/transformation from adaptive pain that
face of surgery, trauma, injury, osteoarthritis, and
serves a purpose to a maladaptive pain state in which
 So on, suffering is optional. It is well established 
the pain itself is pathologic
that uncontrolled pain is not only ethically problematic, but
An underlying tenet of veterinary medicine is “Do No
physiologically damaging as well.' In recent years pain
Harm,’ and this applies equally to physical rehabilita-
management modalities have been developed in human
tion. Fundamental to the success of any physical reha-
medicine to address the evolving understanding of the
 bilitation regimen is the control of pain. And fundamental
complexities of the pain experience. Many of these pain
to the success of controlling pain is the understanding
treatment strategies have been imported into veterinary
medicine. Pain and suffering should be sought out, the
appears to provide optimal outcome. The goal for suc-
cause identifed to the greatest degree possible, and allevi-
cessful integration of pain management and physical
ated when feasible.
rehabilitation is to build a pain management plan that
Canine physiotherapy/rehabilitation is a discipline that
allows for maximum comfort to open the door for
encompasses the application of physical therapy tech-
maximum movement.
niques (developed in humans) to dogs whose comfort and
function have been compromised in some way. A wide
Pain Processes
variety of modalities and methods can be applied, from the
most highly technical and advanced techniques used for
There are excellent sources for in-depth discussions of pain
complex orthopedic surgery recoveries, to simple thera-
physiology and pathophysiology.?4 Within the context of
peutic techniques that can be taught to pet owners for
physical rehabilitation it is important to have an under-
use at home. The overall goal is to restore, maintain,
standing of basic pain processes, as this information will
and promote optimal function, optimal fitness, wellness,
infuence treatment choices for individual patients. For
and quality of life as they relate to movement disorders and
instance, patients experiencing acute pain following ortho-
health.
pedic surgery have different needs than the elderly dog
Often the patient who presents for rehabilitation is
experiencing the chronic maladaptive pain associated with
reluctant to move and exercise. This reluctance may be
long-standing osteoarthritis. Practitioners must appreciate
caused by the patient's unwillingness, inability, or a com-
the differences among patients and their pain experiences
bination of these factors. It is important to understand that
so that they may create individualized pain management
 most of the dogs who are candidates for physiotherapy and
strategies. Likewise, practitioners must understand proper-
rehabilitation are painful. It is equally important to remem-
ties unique to different drugs and drug classes as well as
ber that as veterinary health care providers, we have an
these drugs' mode of action to create a targeted approach
obligation to provide compassionate care. If the pain of a
to pain.
rehabilitation patient is not appropriately or adequately
Adaptive and Maladaptive Pain
addressed, then physiotherapy will be problematic. Conse-
quences of unresolved pain may include:
Pain can be divided into two general categories recognized
 Unnecessary suffering for the painful patient
as adaptive and maladaptive. Adaptive pain protects the
Tissues that are unable to heal normally
body from injury and promotes healing by inhibiting activ-
Restriction of range of motion and other tissue dysfunc-
ity when injury has occurred. In contrast, maladaptive pain
tion from the infuence of pain signals
reflects pathologic activity of the nervous system—the
243
244
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
lingers, the harder it is to eradicate because of resultant
changes to both the peripheral and central nervous system.
 Chronic pain was traditionally defined as pain lasting
more than 3 or 6 months, depending on the source of the
 definition.&9 More recently, chronic pain has been defined
as “pain that extends beyond the period of tissue healing
and/or with low levels of identified pathology that are
insufficient to explain the presence and/or extent of pain:'10
There is no general consensus on the definition of chronic
pain. In clinical practice it is often difficult to determine
when acute pain has become chronic—when adaptive pain
crosses the threshold to become maladaptive.
Adaptive to Maladaptive Pain
A progression from adaptive to maladaptive pain can be
described as a spectrum composed of three major stages
or phases of pain, suggesting that different neurophysio-
logic mechanisms are involved, depending on the nature
 and time course of the originating stimulus.1 These three
phases are (l) the processing of a brief noxious stimulus,
(2) the consequences of prolonged noxious stimulation,
leading to tissue damage and peripheral inflammation, and
(3) the consequences of neurologic damage or changes,
 including peripheral neuropathies and central pain states.
This spectrum of architectural change within the nervous
system and the resultant pain pathology may be repre.
sented graphically as in Figure 14-2.
The jourmey of the nervous system toward maladaptive
pain is often described as windup. Windup describes
Figure 14-1I
 Examples of acute pain: surgery (A) or a needle
activity-dependent plasticity characterized by a progres-
insertion (B).
sive increase in action potential output from dorsal hom
neurons elicited during the course of prolonged, repeated
result of complex processes of neuronal plasticity—pain
-da u ees pdau o raq- uanba-m
as a disease state.5.6
tor critical to this process is the N-methyl-D-aspartate
Adaptive, everyday acute pain (Figure 14-1) is also
(NMDA) receptor. NMDA receptors are only activated in
known as nociceptive or physiologic pain and occurs when
the face of prolonged depolarization such as occurs with
noxious stimuli (mechanical, thermal, or chemical) are
chronic pain.4 Their activation can cause neural cells to
transduced into electrical signals that are then transmitted
daai  supudxa snu s'supua anauu mau pnos
to the spinal cord. These signals undergo modulation in the
tive felds of the painful patient. Accompanying windup.
spinal cord before being relayed to the brain, where the
less glutamate is required to transmit the pain signal and
conscious brain interprets these transmissions, resulting in
more antinociceptive input is required for analgesia. The
pain perception. Adaptive pain is purposeful. Dr. Frank
complexity of maladaptive pain and the phenomenon of
Vertosick states, "Pain is a teacher, the headmaster of
windup continues to provoke ongoing study. Studies
nature's survival school:"? Acute pain tends to be of rela-
have implicated activated microglia, norepinephrine (NE)
tively short duration and, if addressed properly, is relatively
levels, serotonin (5-HT) activity, as well as transient recep-
easy to treat.
 tor potential (TRP) receptors as playing a role in maladap-
Chronic maladaptive pain may result from sustained
 tive pain.
noxious stimuli such as ongoing infammation or profound
The rehabilitation practitioner must grasp the concept of
tissue damage, or it may be present independent of the 
 this transition from adaptive to maladaptive pain in order to
inciting cause. Regardless of its etiology, maladaptive pain
 understand how best to address the pain management needs
offers no or little useful biologic function or survival
of the patient that is presented for physiotherapy. There are
advantage. The nervous system itself becomes the source
 n  s  s  
of the pathology and contributes to patient morbidity.
patient experiencing both adaptive and maladaptive pain. It
Effective treatment for maladaptive pain can be an enigma.
is appropriate, when putting together the pain management
A number of studies have shown that the longer a pain
strategy for a specific patient, to address whatever targets
Chapter 14
Rehabilitating the Painful Patient: Pain Management in Physical Rehabilitation
245
Central
Brief trauma
Nervous
System
Pain
Phase 1
Brief
Phase 2
Inflammation
 Phase 3
Persisting
KNerve or
CNS·
damage
Abnormal
Figure 14-2   Proposed pain states as pain transitions from adaptive to maladaptive.
of therapy may be relevant. The rehabilitation practitioner
after surgery——-either at the surgical practice or in the home
must work in tandem with the primary care practitioner, the
during the initial postoperative healing period. It also
surgeon (when appropriate), and the dog's human compan-
allows the rehabilitation practitioner the potential to play
 jons to facilitate open and reciprocal communication about
a role in preventing the patient from evolving into a
the patient's pain status at every stage of treatment. Some
maladaptive pain state.
patients require a very complex and aggressive pain man-
agement protocol to accomplish the goals of physical reha-
Preemptive Analgesia
bilitation. As physiotherapy progresses, and the patient 
Pain memories imprinted within the CNS, mediated by
improves, the pain management strategy must be adjusted
NMDA receptors, produce hyperalgesia and contribute to
to meet those changing needs. Likewise, if the patient
allodynia—pain that is produced by a stimulus that does
worsens during rehabilitation, reassessment of the patient
not normally provoke pain. A preoperative blockade of
and revision of its pain protocol are essential. Without
und io ued punom perginsisod quaaaid Aeur uondanioou
some understanding of the complexities of long-standing
hypersensitivity following surgery. This is the concept of
pain, and of treating pain as a disease in and of itself, the
preemptive analgesia articulated by the eminent pain phys-
rehabilitation patient may suffer needlessly.
jologist Patrick Wall.'6 In 1988, Professor Patrick Wall
 introduced the concept of preemptive amalgesia to clini-
Putting Together a Pain Management
cians with his editorial in the jourmal Pain.' Successful
Plan for Surgery Patients
 preemptive analgesia must meet three criteria. It must be
(1) intense enough to block all nociception, (2) wide
enough to cover the entire surgical area, and (3) prolonged
Postsurgical Pain and Rehabilitation
enough to last throughout surgery and even into the post-
Whenever possible, the rehabilitation practitioner should
operative period.
be in contact with the primary care practitioner and surgeon
General anesthesia with an inhalant agent (e.g., isoflu-
before a surgical patient is referred for physiotherapy.
rane, sevofurane) does not prevent central sensitization.
This allows for dialog about the patient's diagnosis, the
The potential for central sensitization exists even in uncon-
surgical plan, and the pre-, intra-, and postoperative pain
scious patients who are unresponsive to surgical stimuli. 8.19
management strategy. It also allows the rehabilitation prac-
 Noxious stimuli still enter the spinal cord during appar-
titioner to design the postoperative physiotherapy program
ently adequate anesthesia.20 The purpose of preemptive
and implement any appropriate techniques immediately
analgesia is to prevent sensitization of the nervous system
246
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
throughout the perioperative period. Pain is to be expected
from an initial surgery and the hypersensitivity that
subsequently develops.  Analgesia administered  after
sensitization may decrease pain somewhat, but has little
Moderate to
long-term benefit in addressing the pain resulting from
 severe pain
 postsurgical inflammation. Analgesia administered before
Strong opioid
 and non-opioid
surgery limits inflammatory pain and decreases subsequent
hypersensitivity. The most effective preemptive analgesic
regimen occurs when it is initiated before surgery and
 Mild to moderate pain 
 Non-opioid and weak opioid
continued throughout the postoperative period. Equally
 important is to use a complement of medications that work
synergistically; for example, an opioid, alpha-2 agonist,
Mild pain 
NMDA antagonist, local anesthesia, and an NSAID 21-23 It
Non-opioid (NSAID)
bears reminding that good nursing care in the immediate
 postoperative period can contribute to the comfort of the
Figure 14-3  The World Health Organization Cancer Pain Ladder.
surgical patient.24
(Adapted from WHO 31.)
 Postoperative Analgesia
pain—often as a result of the degenerative changes that
For the majority of rehabilitation patients that have expe-
characterize osteoarthritis. Regardless of the underlying
rienced surgery, NSAIDs form the foundation of pain man-
etiology, maladaptive pain patients present unique chal-
agement in the postoperative period. Antinflammatory
lenges to the rehabilitation practitioner, the primary care
drugs play such a substantial role in perioperative pain
provider, and the pet owner who has witnessed the erosion
management?s because surgery cannot be performed
of the dog's activities of daily living. The goal is to break
without subsequent inflammation. Reducing the inflamma-
the cycle of maladaptive pain to allow the patient to engage
tory response in the periphery, and thereby decreasing sen-
in physical rehabilitation activities designed to restore
sitization of the peripheral nociceptors, should attenuate
function, build strength, and ultimately minimize the use
central sensitization.?6 In human medicine, the use of peri-
 of pharmacologic agents to sustain comfort.
 operative NSAIDs has reduced the use of patient-controlled
When building a comprehensive pharmacologic pain
analgesic morphine by 40% to 60% 27.28
management plan for these patients, it is instrumental to
Depending upon the patient's needs, an NSAID may be
consider the World Health Organization (WHO) Cancer
adequate as a stand-alone pain management agent.
Pain Ladder as a model (Figure 14-3). The principle articu-
However, the rehabilitation practitioner must be especially
lated in this model is to begin pain management using
vigilant about pain issues in the immediate postoperative
medications that are effective against mild to moderate
 period. Inadequately managed postoperative (adaptive)
 pain—generally NSAIDs—and building upon that founda-
pain can transition to maladaptive pain, creating additional
tion by adding adjunctive medications that attack maladap-
problems for the physiotherapy patient. A postoperative
tive pain via synergistic pathways/modes of action as well
rehabilitation patient should be assessed for pain regularly,
as nonpharmacologic strategies. The result is a pyramid in
both at the time of therapy and through conversation and
which each addition builds upon the last layer of pain
questioning with the pet owner to evaluate activities of
 management, providing a foundation for the next layers to
daily living. One source of methods for scoring and evalu-
be added. The WHO ladder for treating cancer pain in
ating pain may be found in the AAHA/AAFP Pain Man-
 humans30 has been adopted for a variety of different types
agement Guidelines for Dogs and Cats.? It may be that a
of pain in both humans and veterinary patients.
postsurgical patient may need one or more of the adjunc-
 As veterinary pain management becomes more sophis-
tive pain management strategies outlined in the following
ticated, pharmacologic combination therapies from human
chronic pain section.
medicine are being considered and implemented. It is
much easier to identify maladaptive pain states in humans
The Elements of a Comprehensive
than in nonhuman species. Figure 14-4 suggests a logical
Pain Management Plan for Chronic
approach to managing the progressive pain state, wherein
Pain Patients
pain management uses a multimodal scheme in which drug
classes are added rather than substituted. The doses are
empiric, and one could debate the order of implementation
Pharmaceutical Pain Management for the
from bottom to top. The merit of this approach is the addi-
Maladaptive Pain Patient
tion of agents from different drug classes, attempting to
A majority of nonsurgical patients presented for physical
block as many of the pain pathways (transduction, trans-
rehabilitation are dogs suffering from chronic, maladaptive
mission, modulation, and perception) as possible. The
Chapter 14
Rehabilitating the Painful Patient: Pain Management in Physical Rehabilitation
247
Opioids
(μ and k)
Amantadine
(NMDA)
(3-5 mg/kg SID)
Figure 14-4 Proposed analgesic ladder for pro-
gressing pain states using drugs with different
 Gabapentin 
(Ca++ channel)
(complementary) modes of action. (Doses are empiric,
(2-20 mg/kg B1D)
and combination eficacy and safety data are
 Tramadol 
(Opioid/
unexplored.)
(2-10 mg/kg TID)
serotonergic)
NSAID
(Cyclooxygenase)
Weight control/exercise: Chondroprotectant: EPA-diet: Physical rehab
illustration also acknowledges the important role of non-
pain. Nonsteroidal antinfammatory drugs have effects at
pharmacologic contributions to pain management. Care
numerous locations along nociceptive pathways, both
must be taken as clinicians await clinical trials that clearly
peripherally and centrally. This class of drugs manifests
and specifically provide information about (1) each drug's
 antiprostaglandin effects peripherally, but they are also
mode of action, (2) the pharmacokinetics in the target
considered central-acting because of their inhibition of
species, and (3) the physiology as well as pathophysiology
cyclooxygenase within the dorsal horm of the spinal cord.
in the veterinary target species. At the moment, only a
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)-mediated PGE2 production
handful of studies may be cited in support of the use of
contributes to a late-onset, prolonged, and diffuse phase of
several of the adjunctive agents that are enjoying increas-
dampen central sensitization, and therefore play an impor-
 Before beginning any multimodal pharmmacologic pain
tant role in a multimodal pain management strategy.
 management strategy for the rehabilitation patient with
Cyclooxygenase-1 -sparing NSAIDs (Deracoxib,37 meloxi-
maladaptive pain, it is important to ensure due diligence to
cam, and firocoxib3) have their optimal theoretical advan-
uncover any existing disease or co-morbidity that could
tage where there is concerm for platelet aggregation, or
 influence decisions about medications. It is also imperative
homeostasis
to understand the potential interactions among medications
The integration of an NSAID in a pain management
that may be chosen to manage maladaptive pain, as these
protocol is particularly appealing when considering the
theory by some?9 that the origin of all pain is inflammation
 potentially months to years.
 and the inflammatory response. However, it must be appre-
Pretreatment screening should include a thorough
ciated that the ceiling effect of NSAIDs can limit their
physical examination, including a review of the patient's
analgesic potential, thereby suggesting they are best, when
medical history and medical record for any previous
used alone, for mild and moderate pain. Among a popula-
 Or concurrently administered medications. A metabolic 
 tion of canine pain patients, all NSAIDs are effective, but
profile to evaluate renal and hepatic function and a hemo-
 a practitioner may witness variable responses to NSAIDs
gram are fundamental. A more sensitive way to assess
among individuals.
for potential renal compromise is to include a test for
Tramadol
microalbuminuria3s_
a marker for increased penmeability
of the basement membrane of the glomerulus. Although
Tramadol has become a popular analgesic adjunct over
not pathognomonic for chronic renal failure, microalbu-
the past decade, having gained a worldwide reputation
minuria alerts the practitioner to the need for additional
as an effective, safe, and well-tolerated drug for inhibition
vigilance of renal function. There is no consensus regard-
 Of moderate pain in humans. It has come to fill the gap
ing the frequency of monitoring metabolic and organ func-
on the WHO analgesic ladder between the weak analge-
tion in the face of chronic-use medications for pain;
sics (NSAIDs) and strong opioids (e.g., morphine). It is
however, a 2- to 4-month interval for monitoring is reason-
not classified as a true opioid, but does have a weak affin-
able in most older dogs.
ity for μ-receptors. In addition, tramadol inhibits both
serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake.
Nonsteroidal Antinfammatory Drugs
Adverse effects include sedation, dysphoria, vomiting.
Nonsteroidal antinfammatory drugs remain the cormer-
diarrhea, and inappetence. Tramadol tablets are extremely
stone for treating pain associated with degenerative joint
bitter, so care must be taken to hide the tablet to prevent
disease (osteoarthritis; OA) and other sources of chronic
the dog from tasting it and becoming food averse. Because
248
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
of its effects on serotonin reuptake, concomitant use of
maladaptive pain.33 Reported starting doses are 5 to 10 mg/
a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRIs such as
kg po bid-tid. The most common adverse effect of gaba-
tricyclic antidepressants) or monoamine oxidase inhibitor
pentin in humans is dose-dependent sedation, and in clini-
(MAOI) can lead to serotonin syndrome. The signs of
cal practice this appears to be the case for dogs. For most
serotonin syndrome include: agitation, confusion, rapid
patients a downward dose adjustment resolves the issue. In
heart rate, dilated pupils, shivering, high fever, seizures,
dogs with maladaptive pain, positive results to the addition
and unconsciousness. Serotonin syndrome is potentially
of gabapentin may manifest in as little as 48 to 72 hours.
life-threatening.
As stated the analgesic effect of gabapentin may be pro-
Doses range from 2 to 10 mg/kg po tid. This is empiric
portional to the level of maladaptive pain the patient is
 dosing, as tramadol is not approved for dogs or cats. Only
experiencing. Thus the dose of gabapentin may be increased
 Oral preparations are available in the United States. The
to meet the need of the patient, with sedation as the primary
pharmacokinetics of tramadol have been studied in dogs,
dose-limiting effect. Gabapentin should not be discontin-
and it appears that the half-life is quite short, approxi-
ued abruptly because withdrawal may precipitate rebound
mately 1.7 hours, necessitating frequent dosing.4 Evalua-
pain. Once the dog's pain is well managed the dosage can
tion of an oral sustained-release formulation of tramadol
be slowly reduced over a period of weeks to months.
nary profession, there are not yet dose titration studies in 
N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Antagonists
 Our target species. To date there are no published dose titra-
The NMDA receptor plays a major role in central sensitiza-
o no sop un Aoogea no aes go saips no sais uo
tion°; therefore inhibition of this receptor validates the
Anticonvulsants
protocol. Amantadine is an NMDA receptor antagonist and
The anticonvulsant gabapentin is structurally analogous to
acts through stabilization of NMDA channels in the closed
Y-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and was initially used as an
state.*6 Amantadine has been used to treat neuropathic pain
antiepileptic, particularly in children. Gabapentin is widely
 in humans. A clinical trial was reported in which dogs with
used in human medicine for its activity in certain maladap.
refractory osteoarthritis received amantadine as an adjunc-
tive pain syndromes including postherpetic neuralgia,
shm uoisngouos auL ze TIvSn ue on uonippn ui Adeaun aan
painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy, and fibromyalgia.
Gabapentin is theorized to work by binding to the C,-8,
activity in the treated dogs. Toxicity studies have been
performed,31 and a dose of 8 mg/kg once daily was not
are upregulated during central sensitization. Its analgesic
implicated in ad verse signs.
effect may well be proportional to the magnitude of sensi-
As an adjunct to an NSAID in the dog with chronic OA
tization within the dorsal horm.41.42
pain, a dose of 3 to 5 mg/kg per day po may be given. In
Gabapentin may be most useful as an adjunct to other
the author's (Downing) experience, this drug and dose
analgesics, particularly in those patients suspected of expe-
is extremely well tolerated. Amantadine is available com-
mercially as 100 mg capsules and as a 10 mg/mL oral
gabapentin may be analgesic in the pain associated with
syrup.
 Osteoarthritis.43 Gabapentin use in human pain medicine
Tricyclic Antidepressants
has recently extended into the management of more acute
conditions, including an adjunctive role in the periopera-
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) are characterized by their
tive period for the prevention of persistent postoperative
multiple modes of action, with a particular ability to inhibit
pain.44 The liquid form of gabapentin, labeled for human
reuptake of monoamines (serotonin and norepinephrine)
use, should not be used in pets, as it contains xylitol, which
from presynaptic terminals. Additionally TCAs block
is hepatotoxic in dogs. Gabapentin can be compounded
several receptors (cholinergic, adrenergic, histaminergic)
into liquid form for veterinary use, however.
and ion channels, including Nat channels. The mechanism
Simultaneous administration of oral antacids may
of TCA action might best be identified as five drugs in
 decrease the bioavailability of gabapentin. They should be
 One: serotonin reuptake inhibitors, norepinephrine reup-
given at least 2 hours apart. Also, coadministration of mor-
take inhibitors, anticholinergic-antimuscarinic drugs, C-1
phine may increase gabapentin's effects and increase the
 adrenergic antagonists, and antihistamines. These drugs
likelihood of side effects such as sedation. The use of
have been used in humans to treat maladaptive pain at
 gabapentin in three dogs suspected of experiencing neuro-
much lower doses than those used to treat depression.
pathic pain, a maladaptive pain state, has been docu-
Longer-term administration alters the receptor binding
mented.33 Additional studies need to be conducted in
of NMDA. Tricyclic NMDA activity is likely analgesic
veterinary species.
via its inhibition of neuronal hyperexcitability.4? Alpha-
In dogs clinicians are using gabapentin as an adjunct to
adrenergic-receptor  blockade  in  peripheral  neuropathy
 Other therapies for those patients suspected of experiencing
Chapter 14
Rehabilitating the Painful Patient: Pain Management in Physical Rehabilitation
249
noradrenergic stimulation of highly sensitive receptors
soft tissue pain and intermal disorders, but in the case of
such as those identifed on sprouts from diseased periph-
peripheral soft tissue pain the result appears more predict-
eral nerves.4 Tricyclic antidepressants may stabilize both
 able because of the local needle reaction.
diseased peripheral nerves and hyperexcitable neurons of
the central nervous system (CNS) by blocking sodium
Hypothesis of Acupuncture Analgesia Mechanisms
channels.49
The leading hypotheses of acupuncture analgesia mecha-
Although TCAs may be effective as an adjunctive
nisms include local effects of needling, neuronal gating.
therapy for maladaptive pain in animals, they have not yet
the release of endogenous opiates, and the placebo effect.
been evaluated. The TCAs should not be used concomi-
It is further proposed that the CNS is essential for the
tantly with drugs that affect serotonin levels such as
processing of these effects via its modulation of the
tramadol.
autonomic nervous system, the neuroimmune system, and
hormonal regulation. Clinical observation suggests that
Orally Administered Opioids
acupuncture needling may achieve at least four therapeutic
Although controversial, studies suggest that maladaptive
goals:
pain secondary to peripheral nerve damage, more often
1. Release of physical and emotional stress
than not, shows reduced sensitivity to opioids.50 This is
 2. Activation and control of immune and antinflammatory
attributable to a reduction in spinal opioid receptors, non-
mechanisms
opioid receptor-expressing Aβ fiber-mediated allodynia,
 3. Acceleration of tissue healing
increased cholecystokinin antagonism of opioid actions,
 4. Pain relief secondary to endorphin and serotonin
 and NMDA-mediated dorsal horm neuronal hyperexcitabil-
release.
o  do  e   
Acupuncture therapy is considered to activate built-in sur-
fect. Another problem with oral opioids in dogs is the very
vival mechanisms (e.g., self-healing potential). Therefore
low (methadone <30%; morphine 5%) bioavailability$1.52
it is effective for those symptoms that can be completely
because opioids are metabolized in the liver. Codeine
Or partially healed by the body. Additionally each indi-
has the highest bioavailability, approaching 60%,$3 and is
vidual has a different self-healing capacity influenced by
often administered in combination with acetaminophen
genetic makeup, medical history, lifestyle, and age, all of
(acetaminophen is lethal in cats). Although morphine
which may be dynamically changing. Acupuncture can
 and hydromorphone are available as suppositories, there 
be used to release trigger or tender points in addition to its
 appears to be little difference in effcacy or bioavailability
application for musculoskeletal pain.
(=20%) from oral administration.54 However, this delivery
 Acupuncture can be initiated immediately for the benefit
form is an option if oral administration is unavailable.
 Of the rehabilitation patient experiencing maladaptive pain.
Although injectable opioids remain the gold standard for
In this context, acupuncture may be used to augment the
managing severe acute pain, oral opioids seem lacking
effects of the pharmacologic intervention that is chosen. It
is the author's experience (Downing) that acupuncture
 maladaptive pain.
often results in reduced doses of medications needed to
break the cycle of a rehabilitation patient's maladaptive
Nonpharmacologic Approaches to the
pain.
Chronic Pain Patient
Other Therapies
Acupuncture
Acupuncture falls under the category of complementary
Other techniques exist for augmenting the pharmacologic
and altermative medicine (CAM) as part of traditional
 intervention on behalf of a painful dog presented for reha-
Chinese medicine (TCM) and is used in humans in at least
bilitation. These include the application of low-level laser
78 countries worldwide.ss There are sound physiologic
therapy (LLLT), also referred to as cold laser, therapeutic
mechanisms for the analgesic effects of this treatment.$6 A
laser, extracorporeal shock wave therapy, therapeutic ultra-
common feature shared by all styles of acupuncture is the
sound, cryotherapy, heat therapy, and electrical stimula-
use of needles to initiate changes in the soft tissue. Needles
tion. These modalities are described in detail elsewhere in
and needle-induced changes are believed to activate the
this book and by others.59-61
built-in survival mechanisms that normalize homeostasis
 and promote self-healing. In this context acupuncture can
Environmental Modification
be defined as a physiologic therapy coordinated by the
It is difficult to overstate the positive difference that simple
brain that responds to the stimulation of manual or electri-
envirommental changes can make for the maladaptive pain
cal needling of peripheral sensory nerves, in which acu-
patient. Yet, this is one area that is easy to overlook because
puncture does not treat any particular pathologic system,
it does not involve as much hard science as choosing
but normalizes physiologic homeostasis and promotes self-
a pharmacologic regimen or calculating an appropriate
healing."′ Acupuncture can be effective for both peripheral
nutritional profile. With a few simple questions it is fairly
250
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
straightforward to determine if the rehabilitation patient
first step is recognizing that rehabilitation will be counter-
will benefit from environmental modification. It does mean
productive if the patient's pain is not identified and managed
taking the initiative to gather infonmation about the home,
 appropriately. Pain is a subjective, individual phenomenon,
such as foor surfaces, stairs, placement of food and water
and there is tremendous variability among individual
dishes, type of bedding, location of bedding, and so on.
patients. For these reasons, when in doubt, it is best to treat.
One of the simplest environmental modifications that
 Often after pain management is initiated the client will
can have a positive effect on the chronically painful reha-
report a normalization of the dog's behaviors and activities
bilitation patient is to protect the dog from slippery foor
of daily living. It is common to hear a client say, "I didn't
surfaces. Aging patients, particularly those with OA, expe-
know he was painful."
rience a loss of proprioceptive function in joint receptors
Considering that each patient is unique, an individual
pain management protocol should be designed to accom-
used in children's play areas, and rubber-backed mats are
pany each patient's rehabilitation plan. The pharmacologic
some examples of ways a dog owner can make the home
component of that protocol is based on assessment of
more comfortable for the pain patient.
the individual animal  and the particular rehabilitation
Raising food and water dishes to between elbow and
treatment/session. For immediate postoperative rehabilita-
shoulder height makes for more comfortable meal times.
tion the importance of a comprehensive multimodal, peri-
Be sure the dog is able to stand on a nonskid surface while
operative analgesic protocol cannot be overstated because
eating and drinking. Have the client explore the home for
of its impact on the postoperative recovery period. For the
potential problem spots. Steps in and out of the house,
dog with chronic maladaptive pain, monotherapy with a
patio stones, and garage foors can create unintentional
single-agent like an NSAID is likely to fail.
challenges for the painful dog. Ramps for getting into and
How does a rehabilitation practitioner begin putting
out of vehicles should be recommended. Likewise, have
together a multimodal pain management strategy? Earlier
the client consider ramps or steps if the dog is used to
in this chapter the analogy was drawn between building a
getting onto and off fumiture. It may be best to use child
-Oid suL piueiAd e Supnq pue ue[d quauaseueu ujed
restraint gates at the top and bottom of staircases to prevent
vides us with a visual expression of our task on behalf of
unsupervised access. Memory foam or eggshell foam may
the painful rehabilitation patient. Because each patient is
be a more comfortable sleeping surface for the painful dog.
an individual, each pain management protocol must be
Assistive devices like slings and wheelchairs can sustain
created with that patient's individual needs in mind.
mobility during the initiation of appropriate multimodal
However, there are some general principles to consider
pain management strategies. Finally it is best for the dog
based on the author's (Downing) experience in a pain man-
to receive moderate exercise every day than to do excessive
agement referral practice:
exercise on the weekend, requiring the rest of the week to
1. Start with a complete and thorough physical examina-
recover.
tion, including a neurologic evaluation, orthopedic
evaluation, and careful palpation for pain.
 Putting It All Together for the
 2. Spend time talking with the client to understand the
Painfui Patient
dog's activities of daily living. the daily household
routine, and the home environment (stairs, foor sur-
 In human pain medicine, pain practitioners understand that
faces, placement of food and water dishes, etc.).
pain is what the patient says it is, and that their obligation
 3. Conduct a complete metabolic profle to assist in the
is to believe the patient. In veterinary medicine, the prac-
 choice of medications as well as to identify any
titioner, whether the primary care provider, the surgeon on
co-morbidities. Treat any co-morbidities (e.g., hypo-
an orthopedic case, or the rehabilitation practitioner, has
thyroidism) concurrently.
an obligation to advocate on behalf of a patient that cannot
4. Focus on BCS (body condition score). If the dog is
advocate for itself, and that means actively looking for pain
overweight this will interfere with pain management
in the patients we see. Assessing nonhuman patients pre-
and subsequent rehabilitation.64.6 Create a nutritional
sents its own challenges; however, these challenges must
plan to assist the dog in achieving a normal BCS.
 not prevent caretakers from taking an aggressive approach
 5. For those dogs with OA provide an EPA-supplemented
to pain, particularly to the long-standing suffering of the
nutritional product.668
maladaptive pain patient. For assistance in choosing a pain
6. Create a pharmacologic intervention plan. If NSAIDs
scoring system, the reader is referred to the AAHA/AAFP
are appropriate for the patient, based on the metabolic
Pain Management Guidelines for Dogs and Cats,"? and the
profile, prescribe one. For a maladaptive pain patient,
 Intermational Veterinary Academy of Pain Management
gabapentin is a reasonable addition in the first round
(www.ivapm.org).
of therapy.
There are many things to consider when confronted
 7. If possible consider acupuncture, laser therapy, cryo-
with a painful rehabilitation patient. The most important
Chapter 14 
Rehabilitating the Painful Patient: Pain Management in Physical Rehabilitation
251
8. Create expectations for the client so he or she can
medicine. Animals must have their pain relieved for their
 appropriately gauge the success or failure of each step
physiotherapy to be max imally effective.
in the treatment progression.
9. Create a written plan for the client, the medical
REFERENCES
record, and the primary care provider to minimize
misunderstanding as well as the risk for medical error.
1. Rollin BE: The ethics of pain management. Handbook of
veterinary pain management, ed 2, St. Louis, 2009, Mosby
Painful rehabilitation patients require complex care
Elsevier.
and monitoring, so make it as easy for the client as
2. Mathews KA: Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 30:4, 2000.
possible.
3. Mathews KA: Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 38:6, 2008.
10. Schedule each pain reassessment for chronic pain
4. Gaynor JS, Muir ww, editors: Handbook of veterinary pain.
patients before the client leaves the facility. The first
management, ed 2, St. Louis, 2009, Mosby Elsevier.
pain reassessment should be performed 7 to 10 days
5. Woolf CJ: Pain: moving from symptom control toward
after initiating treatment. Subsequent reassessments 
mechanism-specific phaimacologic treatment, Ann Int Med
should be scheduled at 10- to 14-day intervals until the
140:441-451, 2004.
dog's pain is well managed. Although we should not
6. Mathews KA: Neuropathic pain in dogs and cats: if only they
could tell us if they hurt, Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract
increase the dose of an NSAID above the recom-
38(6):1365-1414, 2008.
mended dosing. it is common to increase the dose of
7. Vertosick FT: Why we hurt. The naturat history of pain, New
gabapentin to meet the patient's need. For patients
York, 2000, Harcourt.
with long-standing maladaptive pain, it is not uncom-
8. Russo CM, Brose WG: Chronic pain, Annu Rev Med 49:123-
mon to need gabapentin doses approaching 30 to
133, 1998.
40 mg/kg bid-tid. Patients being treated for acute post-
 9. Schaible HG, Richter F: Pathophysiology of pain, Langer-
 operative pain should be assessed several times per
becks Arch Surg 89:237-243, 2004.
day for adequate comfort.
10. Jacobsen L, Mariano A: General considerations of chronic
11. If the patient remains painful at the third visit follow-
pain. In Loeser JD, Butler SH, Chapman SR, editors: Boni-
ing an increase in gabapentin dosing, consider adding
ca's management of pain, ed 2, Baltimore, 2001, Lippincott
amantadine, and schedule the next recheck in 7 to 14
Williams & Wilkins.
days, depending on the patient's level of discomfort.
11. Cervero F, Laird JM: From acute to chronic pain: peripheral and
central mechanisms. In Bountra C, Munglani R, Schmidt WK,
The greater the discomfort, the shorter should be the
editors: Pain: current understanding, emerging therapies, and
recheck interval. If needed, tramadol may be used for 
novet approaches to drug discovery, New York, 2003, Dekkel.
episodes of breakthrough pain. Likewise, a TCA may
12. Mendell LM: Modifiability of spinal synapses, Physiol Rev
be used for refractory pain. Do not use tramadol and
64:260-324, 1984.
a TCA together.
13. Woolf CJ, Salter MW: Neuronal plasticity: increasing the
12. After the dog's pain is reasonably controlled rehabili-
gain in pain, Science 288:1765-1769, 2000.
tation can begin in eamest.
14. Mathews KA: Neuropathic pain in dogs and cats: if only they
 13. Schedule appropriate metabolic monitoring based on
could tell us if they hurt, Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract
the patient and the medications chosen.
38(6):1368, 2008.
14. After pain is well managed and the dog is actively
15. Lei Z, Ruan Y, Yang AN et al: NMDA receptor mediated
dendritic plasticity in cortical cultures after oxygen-glucose
engaged in rehabilitation activities, coordinate the
deprivation, Neurosci Letts 407:224-229, 2006.
titration of medication doses to achieve minimum
16. Aida S: The Challenge of Preemptive Analgesia. Pain. Clini-
effective doses, recognizing that some individuals may
cal updates, /ASP 13(2):1, 2005.
 need multiple medications long tenm.
17. Wall PD: The prevention of post-operative pain, Pain 32:289-
The goal as practitioners is to achieve and maintain a
290, 1988.
delicate balance with painful patients to keep them as 
18. Fox SM, Mellor DJ, Firth EC et al: Changes in plasma cor-
comfortable, active, mobile, and functional as possible to
tisol concentrations before, during and after analgesia, anaes-
sustain the precious family-pet relationship. After a pain
thesia and anaesthesia plus ovariohysterectomy in bitches,
management strategy is under way remember the "three
Res Vet Sci 57:110-118, 1994.
Rs"Recheck, Reassess, and Revise. Painful rehabilita-
19. Hansen BD, Hardie EM, Cattoll GS: Physiological measure-
tion patients provide a moving target for our care. Remain
ments after ovariohy sterectomy in dogs: what's normal? App!
 in dialog with the clients to notice patterms of behavior that
Anim Behav Sci 51:101-109, 1997.
20. Sun WZ, Shyu BC, Shieh JY: Nitrous oxide or halothane, Of
might precipitate modification of the treatment plan. Daily
 both, fail to suppress c-fos expression in rat spinal cord dorsal
joumals of the dog's activities and interactions with the
horn neurons after subcutaneous formalin, Br J Anaesth
family can provide important insights.
76:99-105, 1996.
Our obligation to our painful rehabilitation patients is
21. Shafford HL, Lascelles BDX, Hellyer PW: Preemptive anal-
to advocate on behalf of creatures who cannot advocate
gesia: managing pain before it begins, Vet Med 6:478-491,
for themselves. We need to practice compassionate care
2001.
252
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
22. Tverskoy M, Oz Y, Isakson A et al: Preemptive effect of
the inflammatory response. Part 1 of 3—a unifying law of
fentanyl and ketamine on postoperative pain and wound
pain, Med Hypoth 69:70-82, 2007.
hyperalgesia, Anesth Analg 78:205-209, 1994.
 40. Kukanich B, Papich MG: Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and
23. Rockemann MG, Selling W, Bischof C et al: Prophylactic
the metabolite O-desmethy ltramadol in dogs, J Vet Pharma-
use of epidural mepivacaine/morphine, systemic diclofenac,
col Ther 27:239-246, 2004.
and methimazole reduces postoperative morphine consump-
41. Gottrup H, Juhl G, Kristensen AD et al: Chronic oral gaba-
tion after major abdominal surgery, Anesthesiotogy 84:1027-
pentin reduces elements of central sensitization in human
1034, 1996
 experimental hyperalgesia, Anesthesiotogy 101:1400-1408,
24. Shaffran N: Pain management: the veterinary technician's
2004.
perspective, Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 38(6):1423-
 42. Curros-Criado MM, Hetrero JF: The antinociceptive effect
1424, 2008.
of systemic gabapentin is related to the type of sensitization-
25. Lee VC, Rowlingson JC: Pre-emptive analgesia: update
induced hyperalgesia, J Neuroinfam 4:15, 2007.
on nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs in anesthesia, Adv
 43. Fernihough J, Gentry C et al: Pain related behaviour in two
Anesthes V12:69-110, 1995.
models of osteoarthritis in the rat knee, Pain 112:83-93,
26. Souter AJ, Fredman B, White PF: Controversies in the peri-
2004.
operative use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
 44. Kong VKF, Irwin MG: Gabapentin: a multimodal periopera-
Anesth Anatg 79:1178-1190, 1994.
tive drug? Br J Anaesth 99:775-786, 2007.
27. Gillies GWA, Kenny GNC, Bullingham RES et al: The mor-
45. Woolf CJ, Thompson Sw: The induction and maintenance
phine sparing effects of ketorolac tromethamine: a study of
 of central sensitization is dependent on N-methyl-D-aspartic
a new parenteral non-steroidal anti-infammatory agent after
acid receptor activation: implications for the treatment of
abdominal surgery, Anaesthesia 42:727-731, 1987.
post-injury pain hypersensitivity states, Pain 44:293-299,
28. Sevarino FB, Sinatra RS, Paige D et al: The efficacy of
1991.
intramuscular ketorolac in combination with intravenous
46. Blanpied TA, Clarke RJ, Johnson JW: Amantadine inhibits
PCA morphine for post-operative pain relief, J Clin Anaesth.
 NMDA receptors by accelerating channel closure during
4:285-288, 1992
channel block, J Neurosci 25:3312-3322, 2005.
29. Hellyer P, Rodan I, Brunt J et al: AAHA/AAFP Pain Man-
47. Nelson KA, Park KM, Robinovitz E et al: High-dose oral
agement Guidelines for Dogs & Cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
dextromethorphan versus placebo in painful diabetic neurop-
43:235-248, 2007.
athy and postherpetic neuralgia, Neurology 48:1212-1218,
30. World Health Organization: Cancer pain relief, Geneva,
1997.
1986, world Health Organization.
48. Sato J, Perl ER: Adrenergic excitation of cutaneous pain
 31. Vernier VG et al: The toxicologic and pharmacologic proper-
receptors induced by peripheral nerve injury, Science 
ties of amantadine hydrochloride, Toxicot Appt Pharmacot
251:1608-1611, 1991.
15:642-665, 1969.
49. Pancrazio JJ, Kamatchi GL, Roscoe AK et al: Inhibition of
32. Lascelles BDX, Gaynor JS et al: Amantadine in a
neuronal Na+ channels by antidepressant drugs, J Pharmacot
 multimodal analgesic regimen for alleviation of refractory
Exp Ther 284:208-214, 1998.
osteoarthritis pain in dogs, J Vet Interrn Med 22:53-59,
 50. Jadad AR, Carroll D, Glynn CJ et al: Morphine responsive-
2008.
ness of chronic pain: double-blind randomized crossover
33. Cashmore RG, Harcourt-Brown TR et al: Clinical diagnosis
study with patient controlled analgesia, Lancet 339:1367-
'shop snun ul ued oynedoineu paoedsns go jueuean pue
1371, 1992.
Aust Vet J 87:45-50, 2009.
51. Kukanich B, Lascelles BD, Aman AM et al: The effects of
34. Giori M, Saccomanni G et al: Pharmacokinetic evaluation of
inhibiting cytochrome P450 3A, P-glycoprotein, and gastric
tramadol and its major metabolites after single oral
acid secretion on the oral bioavailability of methadone in
sustained tablet administration in the dog: a pilot study,
dogs, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 28:461-466, 2005.
Vet J 180:253-255, 2009.
 52. Kukanich B, Lascelles BD, Papich MG: Pharmacokinetics of
35. ERD@, Heska Corp.
-oinonla -g-aulydiou jo suogenueouoo euseld pue sulydiou
 36. Samad TA, Moore KA, Sapirstein A et al: Interleukin-1 beta-
nide following morphine administration to dogs, J Vet Phar-
mediated induction of COX-2 in the CNS contributes
macol Ther 28:371-376, 2005.
to inflammatory pain hypersensitivity, Nature 401:471-475,
 53. Hansen B: How to prevent and relieve patient pain, Vet
2001.
Forum 8:34-39, 1996.
37. Wooten JG, Blikslager AT, Ryan KA et al: Cyclooxygen-
 54. Barnhart MD, Hubbell JAE, Muir WW et al : Pharmacokinet-
ase expression and prostanoid production in pyloric and
ics, pharmacodynamics, and analgesic effects of morphine
duodenal mucosae in dogs after administration of nonste-
after rectal, intramuscular, and intravenous administration in
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Am J Vet Res 69:457-464,
dogs, Am J Vet Res 61:24-28, 2000.
2008.
 55. World Health Organization: WHO traditionat medicine strat-
38. Punke JP, Speas AL, Reynolds LR et al: Effects of firocoxib,
egy 2002-2005. Geneva, 2002, World Health Organization.
tepoxalin and meloxicam on prostanoid and leukotriene pro-
56. Gaynor JS: Acupuncture for management of pain, Vet Clin.
duction by duodenal mucosa and other tissues of osteoar-
North Am Small Anim Pract 30:875-884, 2000.
thritic dogs, Am J Vet Res 69:1203-1209, 2008.
57. Ma Y et al, editors: Biomedicat acupuncture for pain
39. Omoigui S: The biochemical origin of pain—proposing a
management: an integrative approach, St. Louis, 2005,
new law of pain: the origin of all pain is infammation and
Elsevier.
Chapter 14
Rehabilitating the Painful Patient: Pain Management in Physical Rehabilitation
253
58. Lin J-G, Chen W-L: Acupuncture analgesia: a review of its 
 practice-based study of a therapeutic food and a nonsteroidal
mechanisms of actions, Am J Chin Med 36(4):635-645, 2008.
anti-infammatory drug in dogs with osteoarthritis.) Hill's
 59. Millis DL, Francis D, Adamson C: Emerging modalities in
Clinical Evidence Report TD-828.
veterinary rehabilitation, Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract
68. Budsberg S, Bartges J, Schoenherr W et al: Effects of difer-
35(6): 1335-1355, 2005.
ent n-6:n-3 fatty acid diets on canine stife osteoarthritis
60. Steiss JE, Levine D: Physical agent modalities, Vet Clin
(abstract). Veterinary Orthopedic Society Annual Conference
North Am Sm Anim Pract 35(6):1317-1333, 2005.
Proceedings, Lake Louise, Canada, 2001.
61.0
Canapp DA: Select modalities, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
22:160-165, 2007.
62. Pa YC, Rymer WZ, Chang RW et al: Effect of age and
BIBLIOGRAPHY
osteoarthritis on knee proprioception, Arthritis Rheum
1. Fox SM: Chronic pain in small animat medicine, London,
40:2260-2265, 1997.
2009, Manson.
 63. van der Esch M, Steultjens M, Harlaar J et al: Joint proprio-
 2. Fox SM, Millis DL: Muttimodal management of canine osteo-
ception, muscle strength, and functional ability in patients 
arthritis, London, 2009, Manson.
with osteoarthritis of the knee, Arthritis Rheum 57(5):787-
3. Mathews KA, ed: Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 38(6),
793, 2007.
2008.
64. Burkholder WJ, Taylor L, Hulse DA: Weight loss to optimal
4. Gaynor JS, Muir WW, eds: Handbook of veterinary pain man-
body condition increases ground reactive forces in dogs with.
agement, ed 2, St. Louis, 2009, Mosby Elsevief.
osteoarthritis (abstract ). Purina Nutrition Forum Proceed-
 5. Muir WW, Woolf CJ: Mechanisms of pain and their therapeu-
ings, St. Louis, 2000.
tic implications, JAVMA 219(10):1346-1356, 2001.
65. Impellizeri JA, Tetrick MA, Muir P: Effect of weight reduc-
 6. Kehlet H, Woolf CI: Persistent postsurgical pain: risk factors
tion on clinical signs of lameness in dogs with hip osteoar-
and prevention, Lancet 367:1618-1625, 2006.
thritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1089-1091, 2000.
7. Mogil JS: Animal models of pain: progress and challenges,
66. Canine osteoarthritis and omega-3 fatty acids. (Omega-3
Neuroscience 283-294, 2009.
fatty acids in canine osteoarthritis: A randomized, double-
 8. Jensen TS: Pathophysiology of pain: from theory to clinical
masked, practice based study. Effects of feeding omega-3
 evidence, Eur J Pain Suppt 2: 13-17, 2008.
fatty acids on force plate gait analysis in dogs with osteoar-
9. Lascelles BDX, Marcellin-Little DJ: Practical approach to
thritis.) Hill's Clinical Evidence Report TD-827K.
pain management and rehabilitation in canine osteoarthritis.
 67. Canine j/d clinical studies. (Dose titration effects of omega-3
Proceedings of the Chronic Diseases Symposium, North
fatty acids fed to dogs with osteoarthritis; A multi-center
American Veterinary Conference, Orlando, 2006.
The Role of Chondroprotectants.
Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition
in Rehabilitation
D.M. Raditic and J.W. Bartges
eterinary rehabilitation is a rapidly developing
information is analyzed and interpreted and an action plan
field and is an integral therapy for many medically
is implemented. After implementation of the action plan
and surgically managed musculoskeletal, neuro-
the patient undergoes repeated assessment and adjustment
logic, and other conditions in dogs and cats. Nutrition
of the plan.
plays an integral role in prevention and management of
many conditions commonly seen in this field. This chapter
Role of Nutrition in the Prevention of
discusses how nutrition can be used to help facilitate and
Musculoskeletal Disease
 promote healing and infuence the rehabilitation process.
Nutritional concepts such as overall caloric, protein, car-
Nutrition interacts with musculoskeletal disease. The
bohydrate, vitamin, and mineral requirements are dis-
prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders for all dogs at
cussed, and a variety of supplements and their evidence are
multicenter referral practices has been reported to be
reviewed.
3 jo iea I ueui ssa sop ul z'noy u auo Aiauixoidde
the prevalence is 22%, with 20% of these possibly having
Nutritional Plan
a nutrition-related cause.13 We focus on two specific
common conditions.
 To integrate appropriate nutritional recommendations for
patient management, a two-step process is undertaken: a
Developmental Orthopedic Disease
nutritional assessment phase (based on the Circle of Nutri-
The role of nutrition in the development of musculoskeletal
tion by the American College of Veterinary Nutrition;
disease in growing dogs has been recognized for decades.
http://www.acvn.org) and an analysis, interpretation, and
 Developmental orthopedic disease refers to a group of
action phase.' In the assessment phase three sets of factors
skeletal abnormalities (e.g., osteochondritis dissecans, hip
are assessed: animal-specific factors, diet-specifc factors,
dysplasia, wobblers’ syndrome, ligamentous laxity, and
and feeding management and environmental factors.?
hypertrophic osteodystrophy) that affect primarily rapidly
Animal-specific factors include age, physiologic status,
growing, large- and giant-breed dogs. Nutrient excess
disease processes, and activity of the patient. Diet-specific
(calcium and energy) and rapid growth (overfeeding and
factors include safety and appropriateness of diet fed and
      ( s
nutrients of interest. Feeding factors include frequency.
timing, location, and method of feeding, and environmen-
Restricting food intake during growth slows growth rate
tal factors include living space and quality of the patient's
without significantly reducing adult body size and is asso-
surroundings.' An important part of the assessment phase
ciated with decreased incidence of developmental orthope.
is obtaining body weight, body condition score, and muscle
dic disease.8.19 Dietary calcium greater than 3% on a dry
condition score.' Body condition score evaluates body
matter basis is associated with increased risk despite an
fat (Figure 15-1).3- The goal for most patients is a
 appropriate calcium-to-phosphorus ratio.' Even if the diet
body condition of 2.5 to 3.0 out of 5 or a 4 to 5 out of 9,
contains less calcium than this, excess calcium intake
which is associated with decreased health problems,
can occur if owners provide supplemental calcium. For
including musculoskeletal conditions.6-10 Muscle condition
example, two level teaspoons of calcium carbonate added
score evaluates muscle mass, which can be independent
to a growth diet fed to a 15-week-old Rottweiler puppy
from body fat content assessed by body condition score
 doubles the calcium intake. For large- and giant-breed dogs
(Figure 15-2)." Evaluation of muscle mass includes visual
 during growth, recommended dietary composition includes 
examination and palpation over temporal bones, scapulae,
the following20:
lumbar vertebrae, and pelvic bones. Muscle loss adversely
Energy: 3.2 to 4.1 kcal/kg of diet (lower end of range
affects strength, immune function, and wound healing.
if at risk for developmental orthopedic disease or if
After collecting information from the assessment phase
clients use free-choice feeding)
254
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation
255
BODYCONDITIONSCORINGSYSTEM
Body condition assessment willassist theveterinary technician in determining if the puppy or kitten is growing appropriately and if the
1. VERY THIN
The ribs are easily palpable with no fat cover.The tailbase*has a prominent raised
bony structure withno tissue between the skin andbone.The boneprominences
areeasilyfeltwithnooverlying fat.Inanimalsoversixmonths,thereisasevere
abdominal tuck when viewed from the side and an accentuated hourglass shape
whenviewed from above.
2.UNDERWEIGHT
The ribsare easilypalpable withminimal fatcover.The tailbase*hasaraisedbony
structure with litte tissue between the skin and bone.The bony prominences are
easilyfelt withminimal overlying fat.nanimalsoversixmonths,thereisan
abdominal tuckwhenviewed from theside and a marked hourglassshapewhen
viewed from above.
3.IDEAL
The ribs are palpable witha slight fat cover.The tailbase*has a smooth contouror
when viewed from the side and a well proportioned lumbar waist when viewed from
above.
4.OVERWEIGHT
Theribs aredifficult tofeel with moderatefat cover.The tailbase*hassome
thickening with moderate amounts of tissue between the skin and bone. The bony
of fat.Inanimals over sixmonths, there slitle orno abdominal tuck orwaist when
viewed from above. Abdominal fat apron present in cats.
5.OBESE
Theribs arevery difficult tofeel undera thickfat cover.The tailbase*appears
thickened and is dificult to feel under a prominent layer of fat. The bony
prominences are covered by a moderate to thick layer of fat.In animals over six
months,thereisapendulousventral bulge andnowaist whenviewed fromthe
side.The back ismarkedly broadened when viewed from above.Marked abdominal
fat apron present in cats.
*Tailbase evaluation is done only in dogs.
Figure 15-1 Body condition scoring (BCS) systems for the dog and the cat. (From Bassert JM, McCurnin DM: McCurnin's clinical textbook for
veterinary technicians, ed 7. St. Louis, Saunders, 2010.)
256
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
Description
Figure
·Crude fat: 8.5% to 11% on a dry matter basis
 Docosahexaenoic acid: ≥0.02% on a dry matter basis
No muscle wasting.
 Protein: ≥27% on a dry matter basis
normal muscle mass
Calcium: 0.8% to 1.2% (<3% on a dry matter basis)
with a calcium-to-phosphorus ratio of 1.1 to 2.0: 1.0
The risk of developmental orthopedic disease is reduced if
Skin
clients use limited meal-feeding rather than free-choice
feeding and if growth rate is limited during the postwean-
Fat
 ing period.21
Muscle
Obesity
Bone
Obesity can be defined as accumulation of body fat in
excess of what is necessary to maintain optimum condition
and health. This may be obvious in a grossly obese indi-
 Mild muscle wasting
vidual particularly when obesity-related disease is present;
however, it is less obvious in a patient who is overweight
and otherwise clinically healthy, but who is at risk for
obesity-related disease such as osteoarthritis. Quantita-
tively, obesity is generally defined as exceeding ideal body
weight by 15% to 20% or more. One technique that is
useful in the management of clinical patients is a body
condition score and muscle condition score as previously
discussed. More sophisticated methods of body composi-
tion assessment include body composition determination
computed tomography (quantitative CT) scans, or bioelec-
 Moderate muscle wasting
 trical impendence.
 Obesity may contribute to the development and progres-
sion of osteoarthritis because of excess forces placed
on joints and articular cartilage, which may lead to inactiv-
ity and further development of obesity. Thus a vicious
cycle ensues. Additionally adipose tissue is recognized
as being metabolically active and proinfammatory; there-
fore obesity may contribute to inflammation.22-26
Several studies have demonstrated a relationship
between obesity and osteoarthritis?; however, a cause and
 Marked muscle wasting
effect has not been determined2728 A long-term study was
 s  a    p
divided into two dietary groups. One group was fed an
 adult maintenance dog food at 0.27 kJ of metabolizable
energy per kilogram of body weight per day, and the
second group was fed the same diet at 75% of the amount
(0.20 kJ of metabolizable energy per kilogram of body
aaae u pa sop pay psl ezs (ep rad yam
1.8 years longer, weighed less, had better body condition
Figure 15-2 A muscle condition scoring (MCS) system. Evaluation
scores, and had longer delay to treatment of chronic
of muscle mass includes visual examination and palpation over the
 disease including osteoarthritis.? In addition the restricted
temporal bones, scapulae, ribs, lumbar vertebrae, and pelvic bones.
fed group had a lower incidence of osteoarthritis in most
(Adapted from Baldwin K, Bartges I, Buffington T et al.: AAHA Nutri-
major joints, and if it occurred, it was less severe. Main-
ossdsows ws r 'sie pue shop lot saapinh suassasse ge
taining optimal or slightly lean body condition may be
46:285, 2010. IN Little S: The Cat: Clinical Medicine and Management,
associated with lower risk of developing osteoarthritis,
ed. 1, St. Louis, 2012, Saunders.)
development of less severe osteoarthritis if osteoarthritis
occurs, and delay of onset of clinical signs of osteoarthri-
tis in dogs.
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation
257
Role of Nutrition in the Treatment of
the trauma is less severe, then energy requirements are
Musculoskeletal Disease
similar to nontraumatized surgical patients, and energy
 Energy requirements are determined by estimating RER as
Nutrition and Surgery
stated.30.31
The role of nutrition in surgery in the context of physical
Severely injured patients or those with closed head inju-
rehabilitation and rehabilitation falls under two major cat-
ries typically have energy requirements exceeding resting
egories: healthy surgical patients undergoing procedures
for developmental (e.g., osteochondritis dissecans) or
 Or activation of the sympathetic nervous system, in part.34
 acquired (e.g., repair of cranial cruciate ligament damage)
 In these patients energy requirements may exceed two
 conditions, and posttrauma surgical patients undergoing
 procedures (e.g., fracture repair from motor vehicle
Likewise protein requirements may ex ceed that required
injury).
for maintenance to facilitate recovery, immune function,
and wound healing.35.36 Recommended protein intake
Nontraumatized Surgical Patients
for adult dogs at maintenance is 2.62 to 3.28 g/Bwk075
 Patients undergoing surgery that are healthy and in optimal
and for adult cats is 3.97 to 5.90 g/BWkg0.7s 37 with trauma
body and muscle condition (see Figures 15-1 and 15-2)
 Or strenuous exercise, protein requirements may exceed
require no further intervention nutritionally other than to
these by 50% to 100%. Some patients may require facili-
continue feeding the current diet at the same amount and
frequency. Patients are not fed 8 to 12 hours before anes-
Nutritional support in these patients should be individual-
thesia and surgery, but can resume normal feeding patterms
ized and intensive monitoring is required to maximize
once recovered from the procedure. It may be necessary to
recovery and response to supportive care. Convalescent
add favoring agents or feed a different diet to stimulate
diets are available that are formulated to contain higher
appetite in the postoperative period. Patients should be
levels of protein and fat are more calorically dense, highly
assessed daily following surgery to insure they are eating
palatable, and have a homogeneous texture suitable for
feeding tubes.
the procedure or from postoperative medications such as
 analgesics and sedatives. Energy requirements during hos-
Nutrition and Rehabilitation
pitalization and in the immediate postoperative period
Research into nutritional needs of patients undergoing
when activity is restricted is estimated in most patients to
various rehabilitation programs is nonexistent. Individuals
developing rehabilitation programs should have knowledge
Of nutrition. Rehabilitation can include simple strengthen-
RER (kcal/day) = 30BWkg + 70
 ing to extensive long-term physical rehabilitation; there-
10
fore, the nutritional plan for a patient must adjunctively
meet the goals set during therapy and after goals are
RER (kcal/day) = 70BWkg .75
met. Nutritional plans should be included as part of
Although both equations are used to estimate RER, the
the rehabilitation therapy. As described previously, a
authors prefer the second equation because body weight
nutritional plan involves two phases: an assessment phase
and RER are not linearly related as estimated with the first
and an analysis, interpretation, and action phase. Reassess-
equation. As the patient becomes more active or as a reha-
 ment is required until nutritional and rehabilitative goals
bilitation program is initiated, energy requirements increase
 are met.
(see Nutrition and Rehabilitation).
 In many instances surgery in these patients is elective;
Essential Nutritional Factors
therefore, depending on the urgency of the surgical proce-
Water
dure, consideration should be given to weight reduction
Water is the most essential nutrient. It is the transport
before surgery in patients that are obese (see Obesity).
medium for nutrients, heat, and waste products. Total body
Reducing body weight to the optimal weight decreases
water is divided into four compartments with 64% being
anesthetic risk, improves immune function, and allows
intracellular, 22% in interstitial spaces, 7% in plasma, and
patients to more easily undergo postsurgical physical
the remaining 7% transcellular.* Total body water is deter-
rehabilitation.32
 mined by total water intake and metabolic water produc-
tion minus evaporation, urine, and fecal losses. An increase
Traumatized Surgical Patients
 in muscle activity results in an increased demand for nutri-
Patients with surgical musculoskeletal disease associated
ents and removal of waste products. Only 20% to 30%
     
of energy consumed by muscle tissue produces actual
requirements depending on the degree of trauma. If
work, with the remaining 70% to 80% resulting in heat.45
258
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
Increased blood fow during exercise dissipates this heat.
 4 to 6/9 (see Figure 15-1), which usually has low energy
Increases in body heat during exercise must be removed
requirements, that begins a rigorous short duration, increas-
because increases not only limit work, but also damage
ing intensity, daily program, may need energy intake
tissues.
adjustment during rehabilitation.
During rehabilitation, excitement, fear, pain, and other
 The dog's daily energy requirement (DER) is based on
stress factors affect the simplest of nutritional needs,
the resting energy requirement (RER) multiplied by a
water and electrolytes. These stress factors can increase
factor for life stage or disease. Resting energy require-
body temperature and respiration alone or during exer-
ments are estimated as described in the preceding equa-
cise. It is important to monitor hydration and electrolyte
tions and defined as the energy requirement (kcal/day;
balance during the program. A study of sprinting and
1 kcal = 4.184 kJ) for a healthy but fed animal at rest in a
endurance racing dogs showed water intake can directly
thermoneutral environment.3 Maintenance, exercise, and
 affect biochemical and red blood cell profiles.46 The same
 life stage (growth, gestation, and lactation) are combined
study showed increased blood cortisol and decreased
to develop factors of RER to estimate a patient's DER. Life
blood glucose in sprint-racing sled dogs. These changes
stage factors commonly used in clinical nutrition are as
were attributed to metabolic stress and the physiologic
follows49:
 Intact adult: 1.6
cise is not commonly used in a rehabilitation setting, but
 Neutered adult: 1.4
the summation of patient stress, new exercise level, and
Obese prone: 1.2
 perhaps changes in water and food intake should be
Weight loss: 1.0
noted.
Gestation: 1.8 to 3.0
Patients boarded for continuous rehabilitation may have
Lactation: 4.0 to 8.0
 poor diet and water intake in an unfamiliar environment.45
Growth: 1.6 to 2.5
Water and food intake should be recorded for hospitalized
Adult, light work: 2.0
patients. Owners of outpatient dogs should be questioned
Adult, moderate work: 3.0
about food intake, water intake, and other nutritional
Adult, heavy work: 4.0 to 8.0
changes they may have noted during the program. Water
 Critical care: 1.0
rad sy/ pg on os saddn sp ueaq ig a
These life stage factors are guidelines. Variables such as
day, but may be more with rehabilitation.
breed, disease, environment, and age can greatly affect
energy requirements.
Energy
 In rehabilitation, energy required to participate in a
Energy is a primary nutrient for maintenance, stage of life,
 therapy program affects DER. If the therapist defines the
and the therapy program. Diet supplies energy from carbo-
treatment plan as work, then intensity, duration, and fre-
hydrate, fat, and protein. Fats and carbohydrates are pre-
quency of exercises are factored into the DER. Studies
ferred substrates for exercise, whereas protein provides
show sprinting greyhounds can have a DER of 1.6 to 2 X
structural and functional tissue. Energy requirements cor-
RER, whereas endurance sled dogs may require greater
relate to work intensity, duration, and frequency, with
 than 5 × RER.47 This comparison is useful because there
intensity being the primary determinant. Studies show that
are nutritional studies of racing greyhounds that may
sprinters depend on carbohydrates, whereas endurance
 apply to a rehabilitation program. Assigning an exercise
activities use fat stores. Sprinters such as greyhounds that
factor to common physical rehabilitation programs would
are rumming with maximum intensity have low energy
be useful in calculating the dog's DER. Until such data
requirements because of the short race duration and low
are provided it is important to recall that most house dogs
-oq asn Aquru saop asau et sunun jo ounba
have less than light exercise and may be obese or obese
drates to meet energy requirements. Studies of endurance
prone; therefore it is prudent to use low end exercise
sled dogs with long durations of work are at the other
factors initially.
extreme, requiring high energy intake. High-fat diets are
 Reassessment of the patient during rehabilitation will
determine if changes in energy intake are needed. If a
Exercise intensity has not been quantified in rehabilita-
patient loses weight during therapy, energy intake should
tion, unlike perfonmance and working dogs. Therapy is
increase. If weight gain is noted, energy intake should
likely an intermediate level of exercise, which has not been
 decrease. When starting a rehabilitation program with a
well defined. Intensity, duration, and frequency of exercise
patient with a BCS of 6 or 7, it may be best to make no
are highly variable; therefore it is difficult to predict
energy changes despite the need for weight loss. The exer-
the energy needs of these patients. Consideration of his-
cise program itself may induce weight loss and an ideal
torical exercise level combined with current patient and
 body condition score. Once the program is complete, client
diet assessment may provide some insight into energy
education about the patient's energy needs are discussed to
needs. A house pet with a body condition score (BCS) of
maintain optimal body condition.
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation
259
Fat
is because anaerobic metabolism of glucose and glycogen
Fat provides the most calories in dog foods at 8.5 kcal/g
is the dominant energy pathway that produces energy for
Of dry matter diet. Carbohydrates and protein supply
sprinting. Because of the intensity of work and immediate
3.5 kcal/g of dry matter in a diet. To increase the energy
 energy needs for the racing greyhound, this extrapolation
density of a commercial diet, the fat content of the diet is
is logical, and these dogs are generally fed carbohydrates
 increased. Fat also increases palatability of diets. Studies
at a level that meets 50% or greater of the energy require-
of endurance sled dogs show a positive effect for higher
ments. In physical rehabilitation, exercises are unlikely to
fat diets regarding performance. Sled dogs have been
have the intensity of work that is necessary to have an
known to consume 80% of their caloric needs from fat.45
absolute carbohydrate requirement to employ anaerobic
In a study of well-conditioned beagles running on a tread-
metabolism pathways. Carbohydrate intake using commer-
mill, time to exhaustion correlated with fat intake, diet
cial dog foods appears reasonable.
digestibility, and energy concentration of the diet.° Increas
Protein
ing fat intake improves performance of dogs with extreme
energy requirements. In rehabilitation therapy, the level of
Protein is required for structure and function, and to a
lesser extent, energy. Current recommendations with exer-
ments of sled dogs. Fat intake still should be considered
cise are to increase protein 5% to 15% regardless of the
when a patient is in therapy, however. If we use the example
level of exercise, with dietary protein providing approxi-
 of a sprinting greyhound, dogs in therapy may have similar
mately 25% of the energy needs. Dietary protein is the
fat requirements with fat providing 20% to 30% of the total
most important nutrient with regard to muscle protein, and
energy requirement. This equates to a diet with a fat content
of 8% to 10% on a dry matter basis.4 Stress factors of a
of canine physical rehabilitation require increased muscle
new environment, exercise, fatigue, surgery, and illness
tissue. Studies of protein intake during exercise are needed
may decrease diet intake. If there is appetite suppression,
to identify ideal protein intake for dogs during physical
a higher-fat diet, which has a higher energy concentration
rehabilitation.
and increased palatability, can be used to increase volun-
In a postabsorptive state, protein that has been broken
tary intake. Some dogs losing weight during a program are
down to amino acids provides the substrate for protein
on diets too low in fat and energy concentration to meet
synthesis elsewhere in the body. Exercise increases protein
the energy requirements of the rehabilitation program. The
synthesis and breakdown with the net result of decreased
diet can be changed to a higher-fat diet with increased
muscle protein. Ingestion of amino acids stimulates muscle
energy concentration to meet energy requirements. The
protein synthesis, exceeding the rate of breakdown, and
type of fat in the diet should be evaluated. Diets must
muscle mass increases. In one study of elderly humans,
contain essential fatty acids in the fonm of unsaturated fatty
patients maintained on bed rest for 10 days were given a
acids. Linoleic acid, a 20-carbon n-6 fatty acid, is required
dietary supplement of amino acids or placebo in a double-
in a dog's diet. N-3 fatty acid utilization is an area of
blind randomized fashion.54  Supplementing essential
extensive research in both humans and dogs and is dis-
amino acids in these individuals with absolute bed rest
cussed in a later section.
 prevented decreases in muscle strength and function. Fur-
thermore  amino  acid supplementation  prevented  the
Carbohydrates
decreased rate of muscle synthesis that is normally seen
Carbohydrates are required only during gestation because
with bed rest.4 Amino acid stimulation of muscle protein
synthesis and exercise is synergistic. Exercise combined
glycogen on a no-carbohydrate diet.4 However, dogs can
with amino acid intake produces a greater response regard-
readily use carbohydrates for energy and most pet foods
ing muscle synthesis than response to individual treat-
contain 40% to 60% carbohydrates 0n a dry matter basis.
ments. This suggests exercise can prime the muscle
Racing greyhounds depend on carbohydrates that are
response to the anabolic effects of amino acids or exercise
 metabolized into muscle glycogen. Muscle glycogen is a
activates muscle synthesis, but adequate amino acid pre-
readily available source of energy for these sprinters with
cursors are needed to increase muscle mass. Postexercise
utilization of 70% of muscle stores in a single race. In
supplementation with carbohydrate and protein or protein
humans, rats, and horses, increasing muscle glycogen
hydrolysate increases muscle glycogen stores and may
aum un si a s t aad asaxa sa
facilitate recovery.ss57 The effect of amino acid supple-
increased carbohydrate intake in dogs enhances exercise
 mentation via infusion on muscle proteolysis in beagles
performance or increases muscle glycogen stores. Studies
was found to require concomitant glucose infusion; there-
have mixed results evaluating carbohydrate loading in
 fore an energy substrate for protein anabolism is required
for the desired beneficial effect.° Branched chain amino
suggests that 50% to 70% of total energy intake should be
acids (leucine, isoleucine, and valine) supplementation
fed to maintain muscle glycogen stores for sprinting.* This
decreases branched chain amino acid catabolism and
260
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
exercise-induced  muscle damage promoting  muscle
 and that noticeable improvement may be seen after modest
weight loss of 6.10% to 8.85% body weight. Although
tradictory and branched chain amino acids may only facili-
these are uncontrolled clinical trials of a small number of
tate recovery of muscle following exercise.62 Alanine
dogs, results suggest that weight reduction may be benefi-
supplementation improves high-intensity aerobic perfor-
cial in dogs with osteoarthritis.
mance of muscle.63 Carmitine is a quatermary ammonium
Weight loss is beneficial when used in combination with
compound biosynthesized from lysine and methionine and
physical rehabilitation in dogs. In a non-blinded prospec-
is a cofactor for transport of long-chain fatty acids across
tive randomized clinical trial, 29 adult dogs that were over-
the mitochondrial membrane to liberate energy via β oxi-
weight or obese (body condition score of 4/5 or 5/5) having
dation. In dogs, it has been shown to improve function
 clinical and radiographic signs of osteoarthritis were evalu-
and energy metabolism in muscle and may be useful in
 ated.73 All dogs underwent weight loss. One group received
rehabilitation.64.6s However glutamine supplementation
caloric restriction and a home-based physical rehabilitation
does not appear to be beneficial in preventing muscle
 program and the other group received an identical dietetic
 protein catabolism with exercise.66
protocol and an intensive physical rehabilitation program,
Studies of protein nutrition often evaluate total dietary
including transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation. Sig-
protein content instead of amino acid composition. Inves-
nificant weight loss and improved mobility were achieved
tigation to optimize amino acid profiles for specific
in both groups; however, greater weight reduction and
better mobility was obtained in the group receiving inten-
classification is determined by the rate a protein exits the
sive physical rehabilitation.73
 stomach, is hydrolyzed into peptides and amino acids, and
is then absorbed. Plasma amino acid profiles of fast and
Nutritional Compounds Evaluated in Dogs or
In Vitro Using Canine Cells
slow proteins have shown that "blends" are more likely to
produce maximal amino acid concentration for optimal
There are other dietary supplements recommended for
protein synthesis. The blends maintain amino acid concen-
trations for an optimal time for longer duration of anabo-
ated in a controlled manner and even fewer have been
lism. Identifying and using protein blends for maximal
evaluated in dogs with osteoarthritis.
muscle synthesis and strength during physical rehabilita-
tion may be a reasonable goal with these current studies.
Antioxidants
 Formation of free radicals as a consequence of cellular 
Obesity
metabolism occurs constantly, but potential deleterious
Weight reduction from an obese state is beneficial in the
effects are minimized by antioxidants. Balance between
management of osteoarthritis in humans.67-69 In addition to
free radicals and antioxidant defenses is an essential
improvement in mobility, weight reduction was associated
factor in preventing development of noxious processes at
with better quality of life scores in humans with knee
cellular and tissue levels. Recent evidence supports the
Osteoarthritis.7° Three uncontrolled clinical studies of
theory that excessive production of free radicals or the
obese dogs with osteoarthritis demonstrated improvement
imbalance between concentrations of free radicals and
-ipuos Apoq ym saop auu jo Apms auo ul zzte Aqou u
antioxidant defenses may be related to processes such as
tion score of 5 out of 5 and coxofemoral osteoarthritis,
aging, cancer, diabetes mellitus, lupus, and arthritis.° Pro-
obesity management resulted in loss of 11% to 18% of
 gressive hypoxia resulting in production of reactive oxygen
body weight, a decrease in body condition to optimal, and
species may play a role in rheumatoid arthritis.9 Thus
improvement in severity of subjective hind limb lameness
antioxidant therapy may be of benefit in the treatment of
scores.71 In the second study of 16 dogs with coxofemoral
Osteoarthritis.90
osteoarthritis, weight loss of 13% to 29% of body weight
S-Adenosylmethionine. S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe)
 is a co-substrate involved in transmethylation, transsulfura-
improvement of ground reactive forces as well as improve-
tion, and aminopropylation reactions, which occur primar-
ment in subjective mobility and clinical signs of osteoar-
ily in the liver. In controlled trials of humans with
thritis.77 In the third study, 14 client-owned dogs with
osteoarthritis, SAMe was as effective as nonsteroidal anti-
clinical and radiographic signs of osteoarthritis partici-
infammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and better than placebo in
 pated in an open prospective clinical trial. Results indi-
reducing pain and improving function with a lower likeli-
cated that body weight reduction caused a significant
hood of side effects9i-s; however, no difference with an
decrease in lameness with a weight loss of 6.10% or more.
NSAID drug was found in one study. A systematic review
Kinetic gait analysis supported the results with a body
was inconclusive and evidence of efficacy was hampered
weight reduction of 8.85% or more. These results confirm
 by inclusion of small trials of questionable quality.1oo A
that weight loss should be presented as an important treat-
double-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial of 33 dogs
ment modality to owners of obese dogs with osteoarthritis,
with presumed osteoarthritis did not show a benefit of
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation
261
SAMe as a sole treatment.0l An in vitro study showed
SAMe adversely affected chondrocyte viability.1o2 SAMe
induced by anterior cruciate ligament transection that then
may reduce inflammatory mediators, increase levels of the
received placebo or ASUs (10 mg/kg per 24 hours).133 The
antioxidant glutathione, increase cartilage synthesis, be
size of macroscopic lesions of the tibial plateau, severity
chondroprotective, and maintain DNA methylation.103
of cartilage lesions, synovial cellular infltration, and
 Other Antioxidants. Most studies of antioxidant therapy
inducible nitric oxide synthase were decreased signifi-
for arthritis in humans involve rheumatoid arthritis, although
cantly and there was reduced loss of subchondral bone
several studies of knee osteoarthritis have been published.
volume and calcified cartilage thickness in the group
An early pilot study of vitamin E (tocopherols) demon-
receiving ASUs.133
strated improvement in clinical signs and pain scores in
52% of 29 patients with knee osteoarthritis compared with
Blueberries
4% receiving placebo.04 In another placebo-controlled
Blueberries are fowering plants of the genus Vaccinium,
study of humans with osteoarthritis of coxofemoral or knee
which includes cranberries and bilberries. They may
joints, high-dose tocopherols was as efficacious as diclofe-
have antioxidative and antinflammatory actions because
nac in reducing pain and improving mobility.1os This was
they contain pterostilbene, anthocyanins, proanthocyani-
also found in studies of humans with rheumatoid arthri-
dins, resveratrol, favonols, and tannins.134 In a study of
tis.106.17 Other studies have not demonstrated a benefit of
sled dogs, those receiving a blueberry supplement had
vitamin Eforeitherrheumatoid arthritisorosteoarthritis.108-10
higher antioxidant status than those not receiving the
Vitamin E has not been evaluated in dogs with osteoarthritis;
supplement; however, there was no difference in creatinine
kinase activity and isoprostane levels (a measure of
higher in protein, calcium, n-3 fatty acids, and antioxidants
oxidative stress) in dogs receiving blueberries and those
had increased lean body mass and improved cartilage turm-
that did not. 135
over as maturity was attained.1 In greyhounds and sled
Boswellia serrata
dogs, supplementation is associated with increased plasma
levels; however, no difference in muscle damage with exer-
Boswellia, also known as Boswellin or Indian frankin-
      to a s 
cense, comes from the Indian Boswellia serrata tree.
with osteoarthritis has been difficult to determine due to
Resin from the bark of this tree is purported to have
antinflammatory properties derived primarily from 3-
was found to increase vitamin C plasma levels, but was
O-acetyl-11-keto-β-boswellic acid (AKBA), which inhib-
associated with decreased racing performance in grey-
its 5-lipoxygenase and matrix metalloproteinases, and
hounds.!19 Selenium was not shown to be beneficial in
decreases tumor necrosis factor α and interleukin
humans with rheumatoid arthritis. 120 An antioxidant cocktail
1β.136.137 Following oral administration, AKBA has poor
was administered for 6 weeks to 48 dogs. Dogs were
bioavailability. However, two AKBA-containing com-
assigned to four groups: untrained/not supplemented,
 pounds, Alfapin and 5-Loxin, have good bioavailability.133
umtrained/supplemented, trained/not  supplemented, and 
Boswellia resin has been shown to improve clinical signs
trained/supplemented. Metabolomic profiling showed that
 dogs receiving the antioxidant cocktail recovered to baseline
a uado ue ui shop t u panaa uaaq s uisa
values 24 hours after exercise, whereas dogs receiving no
study.142 Improvement in clinical signs, lameness, and
supplementation did not. Therefore administration of an
 pain was found in 17 of 24 dogs. Diarrhea and fatulence
antioxidant cocktail apparently facilitates recovery from
occurred in five dogs.
exercise.121
Chondroprotectants
Avocado/Soybean Unsaponifiables
 Chondromodulating agents are purported to slow or alter
Avocado/soybean unsaponifiables (ASUs) are composed
the progression of osteoarthritis. These agents are consid-
of the unsaponifiable fractions of avocado and soybean oils
ered to be slow-acting drugs in osteoarthritis (SADOA)
in a one-third to two-thirds proportion.122123 Avocado/
and can be subdivided into symptomatic slow-acting drugs
soybean unsaponifiables have anti-osteoarthritic properties
(SYSADOA) and disease-modifying Osteoarthritis drugs
by inhibiting interlukin-1 and stimulating collagen synthe-
(DMOAD). Beneficial effects may include a positive effect
on cartilage matrix synthesis and hyaluronan synthesis by
an ovine meniscectomy model of osteoarthritis that sup-
synovial membrane, as well as an inhibitory effect on cata-
ports disease-modifying capabilities.125.126 Human clinical
bolic enzymes in osteoarthritis joints.143 Compounds fall
trials have shown some beneficial effects of ASUs on clini-
under two different categories. One group includes agents
cal symptoms of osteoarthritis and they may have some
that are approved by the US Food and Drug Administra-
structure modification capabilities 127-129 However there
tion, such as polysulfated glycosaminoglycan, which can
are conflicting data as other studies found no long-tenm
have label claims of clinical effects. The second group
262
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
includes products that are considered to be nutritional
chondroitin sulfate, but the amounts are not readily avail-
supplements, which are not required to undergo efficacy
able from the manufacturer or from electronic or print
testing, and legally cannot claim any medical benefits.
information. These compounds are not recognized by the
Examples of this group include glucosamine and chondroi-
American Association of Feed Control Officials, and so are
tin sulfate. Although many of these products are adminis-
not included in dog nutrient profiles. Furthermore, they are
tered as a supplement or altermative treatment, some, such
not considered as generally regarded as safe (GRAS)
as glucosamine and green-lipped mussels, are incorporated
 ingredients. However, there is no evidence to suggest that 
into pet foods.
they are not safe at the levels used in food.
Glucosamine and Chondroitin. Glucosamine is an
The New Zealand Green-Lipped Mussel
s n   n s n  o
of glycosylated proteins and lipids. D-glucosamine is made
The New Zealand green-lipped mussel (Perna canaliculus)
naturally in the form of glucosamine-6-phosphate and is
is a rich source of glycosaminoglycans, although its pro-
the biochemical precursor of nitrogen-containing sugars.144
posed benefit is thought to be from its antinflammatory
Specifically glucosamine-6-phosphate is synthesized from
effects.164 In 1986 dried mussel extracts became available
fructose-6-phosphate and glutamine14 as the first step of 
that were stabilized with a preservative. The earlier studies
the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway. The end product of
that found no beneficial effect of the green-lipped mussel
this pathway is UDP-N-acetylglucosamine, which is used
 On arthritis used preparations that had not been stabilized,
for making glycosaminoglycans, proteoglycans, and gly-
colipids. Because glucosamine is a precursor for glycos.
the research. A stabilized lipid extract is more effective
aminoglycans, and glycosaminoglycans are a major
than a nonstabilized extract at inhibiting inflammation.165 
component of joint cartilage, supplemental glucosamine
In an uncontrolled clinical trial stabilized lipid extract
may help enhance cartilage synthesis and there are in vitro
administration resulted in an 80% improvement in humans 
and clinical data to support this claim, although in vitro
with rheumatoid arthritis.166 In a randomized controlled
studies often use concentrations not achieved in serum
clinical study of 31 dogs with arthritis, green-lipped mussel
Or plasma after oral administration.146-152 There are conflict-
powder (0.3%) was added to the diet during processing for
ing data on evidence of clinical effect of glucosamine-
one group of dogs.167 Compared with the control group,.
chondroitin in Osteoarthritis.7475.1s3-161 In a randomized,
which was fed the same diet without added green-lipped
 double-blind, positive-controlled clinical trial comparing
mussel powder, there were significant improvements in
glucosamine hydrochloride and chondroitin sulfate to car-
subjective arthritis scores, joint swelling, and joint pain in
profen in 35 dogs with osteoarthritis, carprofen-treated
the treated group. However, these data must not be
dogs had improvement in five subjective measures, whereas
overinterpreted. In a randomized, double-controlled and
dogs treated with glucosamine-chondroitin sulfate had
double-blinded clinical trial, 45 dogs with osteoarthritis
improvement in three of five measures, but only at the final
 assessment point of 70 days.162 A 60-day prospective, ran-
improved mobility when compared with placebo; however,
domized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial of 71
it was not as effective as carprofen.168 In a study of 81 dogs
with presumptive osteoarthritis, clinical signs improved in
measures comparing carprofen, meloxicam, glucosamine-
both the green-lipped mussel and placebo-treated groups
chondroitin, and placebo. Results indicated that objectively
when compared with baseline. On day 56 of the study.
measured variables improved significantly with carprofen
 dogs receiving green-lipped muscle had improved clinical
and meloxicam, but not with glucosamine-chondroitin
signs but not musculoskeletal scores.169 An uncontrolled
Or placebo. Subjective findings of veterinarians agreed
study of 85 dogs that were fed a green-lipped mussel sup-
with results of objective evaluation, but subjective assess-
plemented diet for 50 days showed reduction of a compos-
ment by owners identified improvement only with meloxi-
ite arthritic score when compared with baseline scores
cam.63 Based on these results there is weak clinical
on various diets dogs were consuming.170 In systematic
evidence of benefit of glucosamine-chondroitin in dogs
reviews of agents used to treat canine osteoarthritis, the
with osteoarthritis.153-5s
data regarding the benefits of green-lipped mussel extract
When evaluating glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate
 in dogs were promising but uncertainties existed relating
inclusion in a manufactured dog food, two questions should
to the scientific quality of the data and no definitive rela-
be asked. Is the glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate in the
tionship has been proved between clinical improvements
food stable and bioavailable? And, is the amount of glu-
cosamine and chondroitin sulfate in the food enough to
 provide a beneficial effect? It is difficult to find the amount
Omega-3 Fatty Acids
of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate in pet foods. Many
 Degenerative osteoarthritis involves an inflammatory com-
 dog foods formulated and marketed for adult dogs, geriat-
ponent. Thus, it may be possible to modify the infamma-
ric dogs, and large breed growth contain glucosamine and
tion by nutritional components, specifically omega-3
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation
263
(n-3) fatty acids. Arachidonic acid (an n-6 fatty acid) is
owner observations who perceived improvement in their
incorporated into cell membranes, and when metabolized,
pet's arthritic signs when treated with fatty acids for
it yields prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and thromboxanes
various dermatologic problems.194 In a study of 127 dogs
of the two and four series. Many drugs used to treat degen-
with osteoarthritis, dogs fed a diet with a 31-fold increase
erative osteoarthritis inhibit conversion of arachidonic
in total n-3 fatty acid content and a 34-fold decrease in
acid to these eicosanoids. These n-6-derived eicosanoids
n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratio for 6 months had improved
have, for the most part, vasoactive and proinfammatory
 ability to rise from a resting position and play when com-
effects. Substituting an n-3 fatty acid in the membrane
pared with dogs fed a control diet.1ss In a randomized,
may decrease these responses. Metabolism of n-3 fatty
double-blinded, controlled clinical trial of 38 dogs with
acids results in eicosanoids of the three and five series,
osteoarthritis, dogs fed a diet containing 3.5% n-3 fatty
which are less vasoactive and less proinfammatory. In
acids for 90 days had improved peak vertical force values
addition to modulating cytokines, n-3 fatty acids have
and  subjective improvement in lameness and  weight
been shown to reduce expression of cyclooxygenase-2,
bearing when compared with a control diet.196 Another
lipoxygenase-5, aggrecanase, matrix metalloproteinase 3
randomized, controlled clinical trial was performed with
and 13, interleukin-1α and β, and tumor necrosis factor
131 dogs with stable chronic osteoarthritis treated with
α.171-17s In addition to these effects, novel oxygenated
carprofen. Over a 12-week study
carprofen dosage
products generated from n-3 fatty acids, eicosapentaenoic 
 decreased significantly faster in dogs fed a diet supple-
acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) have been
mented with n-3 fatty acids when compared with a control
identified in resolving inflammatory exudates and tissues
diet.i97 Based on results of these studies there is a ratio-
and are called Resolvins (resolution phase interaction
nale for n-3 fatty acid supplementation or feeding diets
products) and docosatrienes.176-178 They may have a role in
containing increased n-3 fatty acid levels to dogs with
 inflammatory diseases such as osteoarthritis.179-184
osteoarthritis.
Several studies have demonstrated a beneficial response
to n-3 fatty acid incorporation into diets of humans with
P54FP (Turmeric)
rheumatoid arthritis,s-1s although other studies have not
P54FP is an extract of Indian and Javanese turmeric,
 demonstrated a beneft.s9o There is a growing body of data
Curcuma domestica and Curcuma xanthorrhiza, which
showing positive effects of n-3 fatty acids on cartilage and
contains a mixture of active ingredients including cur-
its metabolism in the face of degradative enzymes; n-3
cuminoids and essential oils.19 There is evidence that
fatty acid supplementation can reduce infammatory and
these active ingredients possess antiinflammatory activity.
matrix degradative responses elicited by chondrocytes
Specifcally curcumin has been shown to inhibit pros-
taglandin E2, cyclooxygenase-2, nuclear factor kB, matrix
acid appears to be more effective than DHA and α-linolenic
metalloproteinase-3 upregulation, and IL-1β-induced pro-
acid.17]
teoglycan degradation1s-2 One randomized, blinded study
An unpublished study was performed in dogs evaluat-
 in dogs with osteoarthritis found no difference in objective
ing omega-3 fatty acids and experimentally induced stife
ground reaction forces but did see some improvements in
certain subjective outcome measures. 198
 one of three isocaloric diet groups containing 21.4% fat
Special Milk Protein Concentrate
(dry matter basis) differing only in their fatty acid com-
position: a diet with an n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratio of
Milk contains a number of biologically active compounds
28.0:1.0 (high n-6 diet), a diet with an n-6 to n-3 fatty
including immunoglobulins, cytokines, enzymes, hor-
acid ratio of 8.7: 1.0 (control diet), and a diet with an n-6
mones, and growth factors. These compounds impart anti-
to n-3 fatty acid ratio of 0.7:1.0 (high n-3 diet). Diets
inflammatory properties that have been recognized in
were fed for a total of 21 months. Dogs were begun on
human breast milkz22 and milk from hyperimmunized
their assigned diet 3 months before surgical transection of
the left cranial cruciate ligament, then continued until sur-
from milk of hyperimmunized cows exerts antinfamma-
gical repair 6 months later, and were maintained for an
tory properties.° The antinfammatory property does not
additional 12 months following repair. When compared
appear to be caused by inhibition of arachidonic acid
with the high n-6 and control diets, consumption of the
metabolism, but by suppression of neutrophil migration
high n-3 diet was associated with lower serum concentra-
from the vascular space.?06 A randomized, controlled clini-
tions of cholesterol, triglycerides, and phospholipids,
cal trial has been performed evaluating special milk protein
lower synovial concentration of prostaglandin E2, better
concentrate (Microlactin, Stolle Milk Biologics, Cincin-
ground reaction forces, and less radiographic changes of
nati, OH) in dogs with naturally occurring osteoarthritis.207
osteoarthritis. Synovial membrane fatty acid composition
 d  s a n s s sn 
mirrored the fatty acid composition of the diets consumed
centrate had improvement in subjective clinical signs of
by the dogs. Another study in dogs reported results of
osteoarthritis and owner global assessment compared with
264
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
dogs receiving placebo. Further studies need to be com-
Boron
pleted to validate these findings.
Boron deficiency in food may be part of the cause of
some arthritides.212 Epidemiologic studies suggest that
Zeel
humans in countries with low boron intake (less than
 Zee] is an over-the-counter homeopathic preparation
1.0 mg/day) have a higher risk of arthritis development
based on highly diluted extracts from plants, animals, and
when compared with humans in countries in which boron
minerals (sulfur) as well as defined biochemical substances
intake is higher (3-10 mg/day).213 In a double-blind,
including coenzyme A, DL-alpha lipoic acid, sodium
placebo versus boron supplementation trial with 20 sub-
diethyl oxalate, and nicotinamide adenine dinucleo-
jects with osteoarthritis, a significant favorable response
tide.20s.29 It has been evaluated in two controlled studies
to a 6-mg boron/day supplement was found; 50% of sub-
in dogs. Active ingredients (common name) include
jects receiving supplement improved compared with 10%
Amica montana (mountain amica), Sanguinaria canaden-
sis (blood root), Solanum dulcamara (bittersweet),
 in pet dogs is unknown. Furthermore whether boron sup-
Symphytum offcinale (comfrey), Toxicodendron quercifo-
plementation and what dosage of boron would be best is
lium (poison oak), Cartilago suis (porcine cartilage),
unknown.
Embryo totalis suis (porcine embryo),Funiculus umbilica-
Cat's Claw
lis suis (porcine umbilical cord), Placenta totalis suis
(porcine placenta), coenzyme A, dl-c-lipoic acid, nicotin-
Cat's claw, an Amazonian medicinal plant (Uncaria tomen-
amide adenine dinucleotide, sulfur, and sodium diethyl
tosa and U. guyanensis), has antinfammatory and antioxi-
1 uun ia (gg = u) ssop u Apms auo u 6osoaeexo
dant effects and has been shown to decrease clinical signs
year of age diagnosed with osteoarthritis, it was compared 
 Of knee arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis in humans.214.215
with carprofen in a multicenter, prospective, observational
Cat's claw has been found to inhibit lipopolysaccharide-
 open-label cohort study in 12 German veterinary clinics.208
 induced inducible nitric oxide gene expression, nitrate for-
In another study in dogs (n = 44) greater than 1 year of age
mation, cell death, PGEz production, activation of NF-kB,
diagnosed with osteoarthritis, it was compared with car-
and TNFo.216219 It also acts as a free radical scavenger,
- [iaaas pue susis peu soz'oqaoed e pue uajoid
 suppresses TNFc and apoptosis, and is cytoprotective
sures of osteoarthritis improved significantly with treatment
against oxidative damage.217.220 It has been used to treat
in both studies; however in one study,20° it was not as effec-
osteoarthritis in humans. In a metaanalysis of available
tive as carprofen. The composition of the products and the
data,β three studies demonstrated effectiveness of cat's
dosage of Zeel differed between the two studies, which
claw alone or in combination with other treatment for
confounds interpretation of results.
osteoarthritis.
Other Nutritional Compounds Evaluated in Other
Cetyl Myristoleate
Species or In Vitro
Cetyl myristoleate is the cetyl ester of myristoleic acid and
Articulin F
 has antinflammatory and immune-modulating activity.221
Articulin F is an herbo-mineral formulation containing
roots of Withania somnifera, the stem of Boswellia serra-
shown to improve function and range of motion when
tia, rhizomes of Curcuma longa, and a zinc complex. In
compared  with
placebo in 64 humans with knee
a double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 42 humans
Osteoarthritis.224
with osteoarthritis, Articulin F was associated with
Chinese (Baikal) Skullcap
sogoipn un jou gnq 'uoouny pue ued un quauaoidl
findings.
139
Chinese or Baikal skullcap (Scutellaria baicalensis) is a
fowering plant used in traditional Chinese medicine.81
Barberry
Sometimes Scutellaria lateriffora (North American Skull-
Extracts obtained from the roots and barks of various
cap) is mistaken for Scutellaria baicalensis (Baikal Skull-
Berberis species are used as folk remedies worldwide for
cap). This can result in intake of the incorrect species
the treatment of various inflammatory ailments. Effects of
that is often contaminated with other plants at high
the extracts and fractions from the roots of Berberis cra-
o ds asu sd aq o saal yno
taegina have been studied using various in vivo models
its B-ring favones and favonoids have been shown to
of inflammation in mice and rats and have resulted
ex hibit antispasmogenic, antivasoconstrictor, antihyperten-
in potent inhibitory activity against carrageenan- and
sive, antiplatelet aggregation, and antinflammatory prop-
serotonin-induced hind paw edema, acetic acid-induced
increased vascular permeability, castor oil-induced diar-
Flavocoxid (Limbrel, Primus Pharmaceuticals Inc., Scotts-
rhea, and Freund's complete adjuvant-induced (FCA)
dale, AZ) contains a proprietary blend of free-B ring
arthritis models.2 10.21
favonoids and flavins from the root of Scutellaria
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation
265
baicalensis and the bark of Acacia catechu.The primary
containing 50 to 60 mg harpagoside daily gave more reli-
components of Flavocoxid are baicalin and catechin, con-
able results and were more effective at alleviating pain and
centrated and standardized to greater than 90% purity.230
 It has been shown to inhibit activities of cyclooxygenase
An in vitro study using two rat cell lines found that
the glycosides inhibited lipopolysacc haride-induced induc-
ible nitric oxide and cyclooxygenase-2 expression via
when administered with other cyclooxygenase inhibitors
nuclear factor kB suppression, thereby inhibiting inflam-
such as NSAIDs or glucocorticoids. Caution should be
mation.247 Devil's claw is chondroprotective, possibly
exercised when used with concurrent cyclooxygenase
because of inhibition of inflammatory mediators, including
inhibitors. It appears to be beneficial in humans with
cyclooxygenase-2, leukotrienes, nitric oxide, tumor necro-
Osteoarthritis.231.234
sis factor-C, and interleukin-1β, and by inhibiting matrix
Collagen Hydrolysates
claw may increase gastric acidity; therefore caution is rec-
Collagen hydrolysate is obtained by enzymatic hydrolysis
ommended when using this compound with NSAIDs or
of collagenous tissues from mammals, which is similar in
corticosteroids.)
amino acid composition to type II collagen, and provides
high levels of glycine and proline that are involved in
Du Huo Ji sheng Wan
regeneration and stability of cartilage .235 Animal models
 Du Huo Ji sheng Wan is a Chinese herbal product con-
showed benefits with treatment of induced osteoarthritis 236
taining Angelica Pubescentis, Mulberry mistletoe, Cam-
pun ued quiof aaond on umous uaaq su n suny u
panulaceae,Hoelen, Eucommiae,Angelica, Rehmannia,
mobility and reduce analgesic medications in healthy
cinnamon, licorice (Glycyrrhiza), and ginger. In a double-
active individuals with joint pain but without osteoarthritis,
 blind, controlled study comparing it with diclofenac, pain
 and in humans with mild to severe osteoarthritis.237-240
and function scores improved in both groups to the same
extent but occurred more slowly in the Du Huo Ji sheng
Creatine
Wan treatment arm.249
 Creatine is used in muscle for production of adenosine
Ginger
triphosphate (ATP), which provides energy for muscle con-
traction. Creatine is sometimes used by body builders and
Ginger (Zingiber offcinale), rich in gingerols and shogaols,
people who exercise with the intent to increase muscle
 has been advocated for treatment of a variety of diseases,
mass and muscular energy. However, some recommend its
 including osteoarthritis because it suppresses prostaglan-
use with arthritis, especially rheumatoid arthritis in humans.
In rheumatoid arthritis skeletal muscle weakness often
study in humans significant improvement in symptoms for
accompanies the arthropathy. In one study creatine supple-
 both ginger and ibuprofen groups was found before cross-
mentation to humans with rheumatoid arthritis increased
over; however, at the study's end there was no difference
serum and skeletal muscle creatine content, but failed to
between ginger and placebo.25? In another study it was
increase skeletal muscle creatine phosphate concentration 
found to be less effective than turmeric.253
 Or strength.241 In another study of humans undergoing total
Green Tea
knee replacement, creatine supplementation did not
improve body composition or skeletal muscle strength.242
Green tea (Camellia sinensis) is a rich source of polyphe-
Creatine supplementation has been shown to improve
nols known as catechins, including epigallocatechin
physical function, lower limb lean mass, and quality of life
 3-gallate (EGCG), which has shown promise in treatment
in postmenopausal women with knee osteoarthritis under-
 Of arthritic diseases.254 Epigallocatechin 3-gallate has been
 going strengthening exercises.243
shown in vitro and in vivo in rodent models of arthritis to
have chondroprotective activity through modulation of
Devil's Claw
interleukin-1 and -6 and decreased matrix metalloprotein-
Harpagophytun procumbens (devil's claw) has been used
 ase and nitric oxide activities.25s-259
as an analgesic, a remedy for fever and allergies.244 The 
Homeopathy
major chemical constituents of Harpagophytum are iridoid
glycosides, phytosterols, aromatic acids, and favonoids.
Homeopathy is a forn of altemative and complementary
Glycosides found in the tubers of the plant appear to be
medicine based on vitalist philosophy, which interprets
the most therapeutically important constituents. Whole-
diseases and sickness as caused by disturbances in vital
plant extracts appear to have a better therapeutic effect
force or life force. Homeopathic practitioners treat patients 
than those prepared from isolated parts.244 A review of
using highly diluted preparations that follow the “law of
 clinical trials using H. procumbens preparations for treat-
similars" in which "let like be cured by like." Homeopathic
ment of joint and lower back pain found that using extracts
remedies are prepared by serial dilution with shaking by
266
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
forceful striking on an elastic body (called succussion).
proliferation, and by suppressing interleukin-1, reactive
Each dilution followed by succussion is assumed to
oxygen species, p53-induced apoptosis, leukotriene B4,
increase effectiveness (called potentization). In humans
prostaglandin E2, tumor necrosis factor Q, and matrix
with osteoarthritis, homeopathy has not been shown effec-
metalloproteinases, which may be beneficial for osteoar-
tive, has been found to be less effective than analgesic
thritis.4zs8 It acts,in part, by activating Sirtuin 1, a histone
administration, or beneficial effects were attributed to the
deacetylase, and Bcl2.289.290 Only in vitro studies have been
 consultation and not to the homeopathic remedy.132.260-265
perfonmed.
One homeopathic remedy, Zeel, has been evaluated in 
dogs (see Nutritional Compounds Evaluated in Dogs).
Rose Hip and Seed Powder
The rose hip is the fruit of the rose plant that typically is
Methylsulfonylmethane
red-to-orange, but ranges from dark purple to black in
Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) is a sulfur-containing
some species. It has antinfammatory and antioxidative
compound found in plant and animal tissues. Three clinical
effects and has shown benefit in humans with rheumatoid
trials in humans have shown positive results when com-
arthritis or chronic pain.291-294
pared with placebo either alone or in combination with
 glucosamine26-263; however, metanalyses have failed to
Rosemary
demonstrate a clinically effective reduction in pain or
Rosemarinus offcinalis is a common spice and household
improvement in function.269.270
plant that is also used for medicinal purposes. Experimen-
tally in rodents, it reduces nocioceptive pain in various
Phytodolor N
kinds of induced pain.29s It has been studied as rho iso-
Phytodolor N is a fixed combination of extracts from aspen
alpha acids from hops, rosemary, and oleanolic acid and
leaves and bark (Populus tremula), common ash bark
decreases prostaglandin production through inhibition of
(Fraxinus excelsior), and golden rod herb (Solidago
vigaurea). It appears to have antiinfammatory, antiedema-
tous, antioxidative, and analgesic properties 27122 Three
SKI 306X
studies in humans reported results in favor of Phytodolor
SKI 306X is a purifed extract from a mixture of three
N when compared with placebo, although results are skep-
oriental herbal medicines (Clematis mandshurica, Tricho-
tical as the manufacturer undertook the studies or used a
santhes kirilowii, and Prunella vulgaris) that has been
higher dose 273.274
widely used for the treatment of inflammatory diseases
including knee osteoarthritis in humans. In vitro studies
Pine Bark Extract (Pycnogenol°)
show SKI 306X or Clematis inhibits cartilage degradation,
 Pycnogenol is a special standardized extract containing
chondrocyte apoptosis, and production of tumor necrosis
polyphenols and procyanidins from the bark of the French
factor Q and interleukin-1 β.29s-303 Extracts from Clematis
maritime pine (Pinus pinaster).2 It ex hibits antiinfamma-
vitalba ex hibit antinflammatory, antinociceptive, and anti-
tory and antioxidative activity as well as inhibits matrix
pyretic effects in induced osteoarthritis in mice.304 In a
 metalloproteinase and inducible nitric oxide production.275
double-blind, controlled study of 96 patients with knee
Studies in humans with osteoarthritis show a positive effect
 Osteoarthritis, patients receiving SKI 306X showed lower
 On decreasing pain and increasing function.276279
levels of pain and better function when compared with
placebo.30s In another study of 249 patients with knee
Quercetin
osteoarthritis, SKI 306X was equally as effective as
Quercetin is a plant-derived favonoid that may exhibit
diclofenac.306
antinflammatory and antioxidant properties via inhibition
Willow Bark Extract (Salix spp.)
of tumor necrosis factor-α-mediated interleukin-8 and
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 expression.?0 In two
Extracts from the bark of Salix species have been used for
studies, it was not effective or only minimally effective in
treatment of pain. The analgesic effect is attributed to
salicin and/or its metabolite, salicylic acid.307 It should be
osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis, it improved synovial
administered cautiously or not at all with NSAIDs and
fuid quality and pain scores when administered in combi-
glucocorticoids because of these compounds. The mecha-
nation with glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate.283
nisms of action of willow bark extract include inhibition
Resveratrol
 and hyaluronidase,310 and it may have antioxidant activ-
 Resveratrol is a type of natural phenol found in high con-
ity.309.311,312
Evaluation in humans with osteoarthritis or
 centration in grape skin and red wine. It has antinflamma-
 rheumatoid arthritis has yielded differing results regarding
tory, antioxidant, and chondroprotective properties such
effectiveness. A moderate analgesic effect was shown in
as increasing proteoglycan synthesis and chondrocyte
one study,313 whereas in two other studies no effect was
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation 
267
found.314 (Note that because willow bark extract contains
10. Scarlett JM, Donoghue S: Associations between body con-
the parent compound of aspirin, concurrent use with other
dition and disease in cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1725-
NSAIDs or corticosteroids is not recommended. Also, the
1731, 1998.
half-life of this compound is relatively long.)
11. Michel KE, Anderson W, Cupp C et al: Validation of a
subjective muscle mass scoring system for cats, J Anim
Nutrition and Osteoarthritis in Cats
Physiol Anim Nutr ( Berl) 93:806, 2009.
Osteoarthritis occurs commonly in cats31s-319, however,
12. LaFond E, Breur GJ, Austin CC: Breed susceptibility for
developmental orthopedic diseases in dogs, J Am Anim
there is a paucity of information regarding nutrition or
Hosp Assoc 38:467-477, 2002.
nutritional compounds in management. In a prospective,
13. Breuer GJ: Unpublished data, West Lafayette, IN, 1997,
blinded, parallel group study evaluating a diet high in n-3
Purdue University.
fatty acids and supplemented with green-lipped mussel
14. Hazewinkel HAW: Skeletal disease. In Wills JM, Simpson
extract and glucosamine/chondroitin fed to cats with osteo-
KW, eds: The Wattham book of clinical nutrition, Talry-
 arthritis over 9 weeks, there was an improvement in mobil-
town, NY, 1994, Pergamon.
ity of cats fed the supplemented diet and a decline in cats 
15. Hazewinkel HAW, Goedegebriure S, Poubs P et al: Infu-
fed the control diet.320 Although other nutritional com-
ences of chronic calcium excess on the skeletal develop-
ment of growing great danes, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
pounds are used in cats with osteoarthritis, none has been
21:377-391, 1985.
16. Lauten SD: Nutritional risks to large-breed dogs: from
weaning to the geriatric years, Vet Clin North Am Small
Summary
Anim Pract 36:1345-1359, vii, 2006.
17. Smith GK, Paster ER, Powers MY et al: Lifelong diet
 In summary, this chapter provides guidelines on nutritional
restriction and radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis of the
requirements for dogs undergoing rehabilitation and how
hip joint in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 229:690-693, 2006.
nutrition can infuence the healing process. Numerous
18. Nap RC, Hazewinkel HA, Voorhout G et al: Growth and
supplements are available and used in small animal
skeletal development in Great Dane pups fed different
rehabilitation, and their efficacy should be evaluated
levels of protein intake, J Nutr 121:S107-S113, 1991.
using an evidence-based approach to define their use in
19. Alexander JE, Wood LLH: Growth studies of Labrador
Retrievers fed a caloric dense diet: time-restricted versus
rehabilitaiton.
free choice feeding, Canine Practice 14:41-47, 1987.
20. Richardson DC, Zertek J, Hazelwinkel HAW et al: Devel-
REFERENCES
opmental orthopedic disease of dogs. In Hand MS, Thatcher
1. Baldwin K, Bartges J, Buffngton T et al: AAHA nutritional
CD, Remillard RL, et al, eds: Small animal clinical nutri-
assessment guidelines for dogs and cats, J Am Anim Hosp
tion, ed 5, Topeka, KS, 2010, Mark Morris Institute.
Assoc 46:285-296, 2010.
 21. Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM et al: Evaluation of the
2. Thatcher CD, Hand MS, Remillard RL: Small animal clini-
effect of limited food consumption on radiographic evi-
cal nutrition: an iterative process. In Hand MS, Thatcher
dence of osteoarthritis in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
CD, Remillard RL, et al, eds: Small animal clinical nutri-
217:1678-1680, 2000.
tion, ed 5, Topeka, KS, 2010, Mark Momis Institute.
22. Greenberg AS, Obin MS: Obesity and the role of adipose
3. German AJ, Holden SL, Moxham GL et al: A simple, reli-
tissue in infammation and metabolism, Am J Clin Nutr
able tool for owners to assess the body condition of their
83:461S-465S, 2006.
dog or cat, J Nutr 136:203 1S-2033s, 2006.
23. Pang SS, Le YY: Role of resistin in infammation and
4. Laflamme D: Devlopment and validation of a body condi-
inflammation-related diseases, Celf Mot Immunol 3:29-34,
tion score system for dogs, Canine Practice 22:10-15,
2006.
1997.
24. Otero M, Lago R, Gomez R et al: Leptin: a metabolic
5. Laflamme D: Development and validation of a body condi-
hormone that functions like a proinflammatory adipokine,
tion score system for cats: a clinical tool, Feline Practice
Drug News Perspect 19:21-26, 2006.
25:13-18, 1997.
 25. Zoran DL: Obesity in dogs and cats: a metabolic and endo-
6. Lund EM, Armstrong PJ, Kirk CA et al: Prevalence and risk
crine disorder, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 40:221-
factors for obesity in adult dogs from private veterinary
239, 2010.
practices, Int J Appt Res Vet Med 4:177-186, 2006.
26. Marshall W, Bockstahler B, Hulse D et al: A review of
7. Lund EM, Armstrong PJ, Kirk CA et al: Prevalence and risk
osteoarthritis and obesity: current understanding of the rela-
factors for obesity in adult cats from private veterinary
tionship and benefit of obesity treatment and prevention in
practices, Int J Appt Res Vet Med 3:88-96, 2005.
the dog, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 22:339-345, 2009.
8. Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM et al: Effects of diet
27. Edney ATB, Smith PM: Study of obesity in dogs visiting
restriction on life span and age-related changes in dogs,
veterinary practices in the United Kingdom, Vet Rec
J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1315-1320, 2002.
118:391-396, 1986.
9. Kealy RD, Olsson SE, Monti KL et al: Effects of limited
28. Janssen I, Mark AE: Separate and combined infuence of
food consumption on the incidence of hip dysplasia in
body mass index and waist circumference on arthritis and
growing dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:857-863, 1992.
knee osteoarthritis, Int J Obes ( Lond) 1223-1228, 2006.
268
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
29. Larson BT, Lawler DF, Spitznagel EL, Jr. et al: Improved
diets containing medium, low, or zero carbohydrate,
glucose tolerance with lifetime diet restriction favorably
Am J Clin Nutr 30:409-418, 1977.
affects disease and survival in dogs, J Nutr 133:2887-2892,
49. Gross KL, Yamka RM, Khoo CG et al: Macronutrients. In
2003.
Hand MS, Thatcher CD, Remillard RL et al, eds: Small
 30. Saker KE, Remillard RL: Critical care nutrition and enteral-
animal clinical nutrition, ed 5, Topeka, KS, 2010, Mark
assisted feeding. In Hand MS, Thatcher CD, Remillard RL,
Mortis Institute.
et al, eds: Smaltl animal clinical nutrition, Topeka, KS,
50. Downey RL, Kronfeld DS, Banta CA: Diet of beagles
 2010, Mark Morris Institute.
affects stamina, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 6:273-277, 1980.
31. Bartges JW, Kirk CA, Lauten S: Calculating a patient's
51. Wagenmakers AJ, Beckers EJ, Brouns F et al: Carbohydrate
nutritional requirements, Vet Med 99:632, 2004.
supplementation, glycogen depletion, and amino acid
32. Toll PW, Yamka RM, Schoenherr WD et al: Obesity. In
metabolism during exercise, Am J Physiol 260:E883-890,
Hand MS, Thatcher CD, Remillard RL et al, eds: Small
1991.
animal clinical nutrition, ed 5, Topeka, KS, 2010, Mark
 52. Van Hall G, Saltin B, Wagenmakers AJ: Muscle protein
Mortis Institute.
degradation and amino acid metabolism during prolonged
33. Chan DL: Nutritional requirements of the critically ill
knee-extensor exercise in humans, Clin Sci ( Lond) 97:557-
patient, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 19:1-5, 2004.
567, 1999.
34. Cook AM, Peppard A, Magnuson B: Nutrition consider-
53. Griffths BC: Nutrition of the greyhound, Vet Rec 84:654-
ations in traumatic brain injury, Mutr Clin Pract 23:608-
656, 1969.
620, 2008
54. Ferrando AA, Paddon-Jones D, Hays NP et al: EAA supple-
35. Jivnani S, Iyer S, Umakumar K et al: Impact of enteral
mentation to increase nitrogen intake improves muscle
nutrition on nitrogen balance in patients of trauma, J Emerg
function during bed rest in the elderly, Clin Nutr 29:18-23,
Trauma Shock 3:109-114, 2010.
2010.
 36. Turner P: Providing optimal nutitional support on the
 55. Morifuji M, Kanda A, Koga J et al: Post-exercise carbohy-
intensive care unit: key challenges and practical solutions,
drate plus whey protein hydrolysates supplementation
Proc Nutr Soc 69:574-581, 2010.
increases skeletal muscle glycogen level in rats, Amino
37. Nutrient requirements and dietary nutrient concentrations.
Acids 38:1109-1115, 2010.
In Nutrient requirements of dogs and cats, Washington, DC,
 56. Howarth KR, Moreau NA, Phillips SM et al: Coingestion
 2006, National Academic Press.
of protein with carbohydrate during recovery from endur-
38. Vannatta M, Bartges JW, Snow P: Esophagostomy feeding
ance exercise stimulates skeletal muscle protein synthesis
tubes, Vet Med 99:596-600, 2004.
in humans, J Appt Physiot 106:1394-1402, 2009.
39. Thompson K, Bartges JW, Snow P: Gastrostomy feeding
57. Stellingwerff T, Boit MK, Res PT: Nutritional strategies to
tubes: percutaneous, nonsurgical, nonendoscopic place-
optimize training and racing in middle-distance athletes,
 ment, Vet Med 99:619-626, 2004
J Sports Sci 25(1):S17-S28, 2007.
40. Mesich ML, Bartges JW, Tobias K et al: Gastrostomy
58. Hamada K, Matsumoto K, Okamura K et al: Effect of amino
feeding tubes: surgical placement, Vet Med 99:604-610,
acids and glucose on exercise-induced gut and skeletal
2004.
muscle proteolysis in dogs, Metabolism 48:161-166, 1999.
41. Luhn A, Bartges JW, Snow P: Gastrostomy feeding tubes:
59. Shimomura Y, Murakami T, Nakai N et al: Exercise
percutaneous endoscopic placement, Vet Med 99:612-617,
promotes BCAA catabolism: effects of BCAA supplemen-
2004.
tation on skeletal muscle during exercise, J Nutr 134:
42. Francis H, Bartges JW, Tobias K et al: Enterostomy feeding
1583S-1587S, 2004.
tubes, Vet Med 99:627-630, 2004.
60. Blomstrand E, Eliasson J, Karlsson HK et al: Branched-
43. Bosworth C, Bartges JW, Snow P: Nasoesophageal and
chain amino acids activate key enzymes in protein synthesis 
nasogastric feeding tubes, Vet Med 99:590-594, 2004.
after physical exercise, J Nutr 136:269s-273S, 2006.
 44. Remillard RL, Saker KE: Parenteral-assisted feeding. In
61. Matsumoto K, Koba T, Hamada K et al: Branched-chain
Hand MS, Thatcher CD, Remillard RL et al, eds: Small
amino acid supplementation attenuates muscle soreness,
animal clinical nutrition, ed 5, Topeka, KS, 2010, Mark
muscle damage and inflammation during an intensive train-
Morris Institute.
ing program, J Sports Med Phys Fitness 49:424-431, 2009.
45. Toll Pw, Gillette RL, Hand MS: Feeding working and
 62. Gleeson M: Interrelationship between physical activity and
sporting dogs. In Hand MS, Thatcher CD, Remillard RL,
branched-chain amino acids, J Nutr 135:1591S-1595S,
et al, eds: Small animat clinicat nutrition, ed 5, Topeka, KS,
2005.
 2010, Mark Morris Institute.
 63. Artioli GG, Gualano B, Smith A et al: Role of beta-alanine
46. Wakshlag J, Snedden K, Reynolds AJ: Biochemical and
 supplementation on muscle carnosine and exercise perfor-
metabolic changes due to exercise in sprint-racing sled
mance, Med Sci Sports Exerc 42:1162-1173, 2010.
dogs: implications for postexercise carbohydrate supple-
64. Katircioglu SF, Grandjean PA, Kucuker S et al: Effects
ments and hydration management, Vet Ther 5:52-59,
of carnitine on preconditioned latissimus dorsi muscle at
2004.
different burst frequencies, J Cardiol Surg 12:120-125,
47. Hill RC: The nutritional requirements of exercising dogs,
1997.
J Nutr 128:2686S-2690S, 1998.
65. Dubelaar ML, Lucas CM, Hulsmann WC: Acute effect of
48. Hammel EP, Kronfeld DS, Ganjam VK et al: Metabolic
L-carnitine on skeletal muscle force tests in dogs, Am J
responses to exhaustive exercise in racing sled dogs fed
Physiot 260:E189-193, 1991.
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation
269
66. Gleeson M: Dosing and efficacy of glutamine supplementa-
 85. Li RW, Myers SP, Leach DN et al: A cross-cultural study:
tion in human exercise and sport training, J Nutr 138:2045S-
anti-infammatory activity of Australian and Chinese plants,
2049S, 2008.
J Ethnopharmacol 85:25-32, 2003.
67. Messier SP, Gutekunst DJ, Davis C et al: Weight loss
 86. Mathie RT, Baitson ES, Hansen L et al: Homeopathic pre.
reduces knee-joint loads in overweight and obese older
scribing for chronic conditions in feline and canine veteri-
adults with knee osteoarthritis, Arthritis Rheum 52:2026-
nary practice, Homeopathy 99:243-248, 2010.
2032, 2005
87. Clayton JJ: Nutraceuticals in the management of osteoar-
68. Messier SP, Loeser RF, Miller GD et al: Exercise and
thritis, Orthopedics 30:624-629; quiz 630-634, 2007.
dietary weight loss in overweight and obese older adults 
88. Bermejo- Vicedo T, Hidalgo-Cofreas FJ: Antioxidants: the
with knee osteoarthritis: the Arthritis, Diet, and Activity
therapy of the future? Nutr Hosp 12:108-120, 1997.
Promotion Trial, Arthritis Rheum 50: 1501-1510, 2004.
89. Mapp PL, Grootveld MC, Blake DR: Hypoxia, oxidative
69. Huang MH, Chen CH, Chen TW et al: The effects of weight
stress and rheumatoid arthritis, Br Med Buff 51:419-436,
reduction on the rehabilitation of patients with knee osteo-
1995.
arthritis and obesity, Arthritis Care Res 13:398-405, 2000.
90. McAlindon TE, Biggee BA: Nutritional factors and osteo-
70. Rejeski WJ, Focht BC, Messier SP et al: Obese, older adults 
arthritis: recent developments, Curr Opin Rheumatof 17:
with knee osteoarthritis: weight loss, exercise, and quality
647-652, 2005.
of life, Heaith Psychol 21:419-426, 2002.
91. Caruso I, Pietrogrande V: Italian double-blind multicenter
71. Impellizeri JA, Tetrick MA, Muir P: Effect of weight reduc-
study comparing S-adenosylmethionine, naproxen, and
tion on clinical signs of lameness in dogs with hip osteoar-
placebo in the treatment of degenerative joint disease, Am
thritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1089-1091, 2000.
J Med 83:66-71, 1987.
72. Burkholder WJ, Taylor L, Hulse DA: Weight loss to optimal
92. Maccagno A, Di Giorgio EE, Caston OL et al: Double-
body condition increases ground reactive force in dogs with
 blind controlled clinical trial of oral S-adenosylmethionine
osteoarthritis, Compen Cotin Educ Pract Vet 23:74, 2000.
versus piroxicam in knee osteoarthritis, Am J Med 83:72-77,
73. Mlacnik E, Bockstahler BA, Muller M et al: Effects of
1987.
caloric restriction and a moderate or intense physiotherapy
 93. Glorioso S, Todesco S, Mazzi A et al: Double-blind multi-
 program for treatment of lameness in overweight dogs with
 centre study of the activity of S-adenosylmethionine in hip
0steoarthritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 229:1756-1760, 2006.
and knee osteoarthritis, Int J Clin Pharmacol Res 5:39-49,
74. De Silva V, El-Metwally A, Ernst E et al: Evidence for the
1985.
efficacy of complementary and alternative medicines in the
94. Muller-Fassbender H: Double-blind clinical trial of S-
management of osteoarthritis: a systematic review, Rheu-
adenosylmethionine versus ibuprofen in the treatment of
matology (0xford) 50:911-920, 2011.
osteoarthritis, Am J Med 83:81-83, 1987.
75. Pirotta M: Arthritis disease
-the use of complementary
 95. Vetter G: Double-blind comparative clinical trial with
therapies, Aust Fam Physician 39:638-640, 2010.
S-adenosy lmethionine and indomethacin in the treatment of
76. Efthimiou P, Kukar M: Complementary and alternative
osteoarthritis, Am J Med 83:78-80, 1987.
medicine use in rheumatoid arthritis: proposed mechanism
96. Najm WI, Reinsch S, Hoehler F et al: S-adenosyl
of action and efficacy of commonly used modalities, Rheu-
methionine (SAMe) versus celecoxib for the treatment of
matot Int 30:571-586, 2010.
osteoarthritis symptoms: a double-blind cross-over trial.
77. Marcus DM: Therapy: Herbals and supplements for rheu-
[ISRCTN36233495], BMC Musculoskelet Disord 5:6, 2004.
matic diseases, Nat Rev Rheumatol 5:299-300, 2009.
 97. Soeken KL, Lee WL, Bausell RB et al: Safety and effcacy
78. Vitetta L, Cicuttini F, Sali A: Alternative therapies for mus-
of S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) for osteoarthritis, J Fam 
culoskeletal conditions, Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatot 22:
Pract 51:425-430, 2002.
499-522, 2008.
98. De Silva V, El-Metwally A, Ernst E et al: Evidence for the
79. Ernst E: Complementary treatments in rheumatic diseases,
efficacy of complementary and alternative medicines in the
Rheum Dis Clin North Am 34:455-467, 2008.
management of fibromyalgia: a systematic review, Rheuma-
80. Ernst E: Complementary or alternative therapies for osteo-
tology (0xford) 49:1063-1068, 2010.
arthritis, Nat Clin Pract Rheumatot 2:74-80, 2006.
 99. Kim J, Lee EY, Koh EM et al: Comparative clinical trial of
81. Rosenbaum CC, O'Mathuna DP, Chavez M et al: Antioxi-
S-adenosy lmethionine versus nabumetone for the treatment
dants and antinfammatory dietary supplements for osteo-
of knee osteoarthritis: an 8-week, multicenter, randomized,
arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, Aitern Ther Heaith Med
double-blind, double-dummy, Phase IV study in Korean
16:32-40, 2010.
patients, Clin Ther 31:2860-2872, 2009.
82. Henrotin Y, Lambert C, Couchourel D et al: Nutraceuticals:
100. Rutjes AW, Nuesch E, Reichenbach S et al: S-
 do they represent a new era in the management of osteoar-
adenosylmethionine for osteoarthritis of the knee or hip,
thritis? A narrative review from the lessons taken with five
Cochrane Database Syst Rev CD007321, 2009.
products, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 19:1-21, 2011.
101. Imhoff DJ, Gordon-Evans WJ, Evans RB et al: Evaluation
83. Ameye LG, Chee WS: Osteoarthritis and nutrition. From
of S-adenosyl 1-methionine in a double-blinded, random-
nutraceuticals to functional foods: a systematic review of
ized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial for treatment of pre-
the scientific evidence, Arthritis Res Ther 8:R127, 2006.
sumptive osteoarthritis in the dog, Vet Surg 40:228-232,
84. Morelli V, Naquin C, Weaver V: Alternative therapies for
2011.
traditional disease states: osteoarthritis, Am Fam Physician
102. Steinmeyer J, Burton-Wurster N, Lust G: Effects of three
67:339-344, 2003.
antiarthritic drugs on  fibronectin and keratan sulfate
270
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
synthesis by cultured canine articular cartilage chondro-
micronutrients in rheumatoid arthritis: clinical and bio-
cytes, Am J Vet Res 53:2077-2083, 1992.
chemical effects, Eur J Clin Nutr 58:839-845, 2004.
103. Hosea Blewett HJ: Exploring the mechanisms behind
119. Marshall RJ, Scott KC, Hill RC et al: Supplemental vitamin
S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) in the treatment of osteoar-
C appears to slow racing greyhounds, J Nutr 132:1616S-
thritis, Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 48:458-463, 2008.
1621S, 2002.
104. Machtey I, Ouaknine L: Tocopherol in osteoarthritis: a con-
120. Peretz A, Siderova V, Neve J: Selenium supplementation in
trolled pilot study, J Am Geriatr Soc 26:328-330, 1978.
rheumatoid arthritis investigated in a double blind, placebo-
105. Scherak O, Kolarz G, Schodl C et al: [High dosage vitamin
controlled trial, Scand J Rheumatol 30:208-212, 2001.
E therapy in patients with activated arthrosis], Z Rheumatof
121. Waldron MK, Reynolds AJ, Kochhar S et al: Metabolomic
49:369-373, 1990.
approach to assessing the effcacy of an antioxidant cocktail
106. Wittenborg A, Petersen G, Lorkowski G et al: [Effective-
in trained and untrained dogs following an exercise bout,
ness of vitamin E in comparison with diclofenac sodium in
Compend Contin Educ Vet 29:25, 2007 (abstract).
treatment of patients with chronic poly arthritis], Z Rheuma-
122. Verbruggen G: Chondroprotective drugs in degenerative
tol 57:215-221, 1998.
joint diseases, Rheumatology (0xford) 45:129-138, 2006.
107. Edmonds SE, Winyard PG, Guo R et al: Putative analgesic
123. Henrotin Y: Avocado/soybean unsaponifiable (ASU) to
activity of repeated oral doses of vitamin E in the treatment
tteat osteoarthritis: a clarification, Osteoarthritis Cartilage
of rheumatoid arthritis. Results of a prospective placebo
16:1118-1119, 2008; author reply 1120.
controlled double blind trial, Ann Rheum Dis 56:649-655,
124. Boumediene K, Felisaz N, Bogdanowicz P et al: Avocado/
1997.
soya unsaponifiables enhance the expression of transform-
108. Brand C, Snaddon J, Bailey M et al: Vitamin E is ineffective
ing growth factor betal and beta2 in cultured articulat chon-
for symptomatic relief of knee osteoarthritis: a six month 
drocytes, Arthritis Rheum 42:148-156, 1999.
double blind, randomised, placebo controlled study, Ann
125. Dinubile NA: A potential role for avocado- and soybean-
Rheum Dis 60:946-949, 2001.
based nutritional supplements in the management of osteo-
109. Wluka AE, Stuckey S, Brand C et al: Supplementary
arthritis: a review, Phys Sportsmed 38:71-81, 2010.
vitamin E does not affect the loss of cartilage volume
126. Cake MA, Read RA, Guillou B et al: Modification of
in knee osteoarthritis: a 2 year double blind randomized
Ue ur <aojoyied suoq jeipuoyoqns pue saeigieo iejnoui
placebo controlled study, J Rheumatol 29:2585-2591,
ovine meni scectomy model of osteoarthritis by avocado and
2002.
soya unsaponifiables (ASU), Osteoarthritis Cartilage 8:
 110. Chrubasik S: Vitamin E for rheumatoid arthritis or osteoar-
404-411, 2000.
thritis: low evidence of effectiveness, Z Rheumatol 62:491,
127. Maheu E, Mazieres B, Valat JP et al: Symptomatic efficacy
2003.
of avocado/soybean unsaponifiables in the treatment of
111. Schoenhelr WD, Macleay JM, Yamka RM: Evaluation of
osteoarthritis of the knee and hip: a prospective, random-
body composition and cartilage biomarkers in large-breed
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter clinical
dogs fed two foods designed for growth, Am J Vet Res
trial with a six-month treatment period and a two-month
71:934-939, 2010.
followup demonstrating a persistent effect, Arthritis Rheum
112. Scott KC, Hill RC, Lewis DD et al: Effect of alpha-
41:81-91, 1998.
tocopheryl acetate supplementation on vitamin E concen-
128. Appelboom T, Schuermans J, Verbruggen G et al: Symp-
trations in Greyhounds before and after a race, Am J Vet Res
toms modifying effect of avocado/soybean unsaponifiables
62:1118-1120, 2001.
(ASU) in knee osteoarthritis. A double blind, prospective,
113. Piercy RJ, Hinchcliff KW, DiSilvestro RA et al: Effect of
placebo-controlled study, Scand J Rheumatol 30:242-247,
 dietary supplements containing antioxidants on attenuation
2001.
 of muscle damage in exercising sled dogs, Am J Vet Res
129. Little Cv, Parsons T: Herbal therapy for treating osteoar-
61:1438-1445, 2000.
thritis, Cochrane Database Syst Rev CD002947, 2001.
114. Baskin CR, Hinchcliff KW, DiSilvestro RA et al: Effects of
130. Lequesne M, Maheu E, Cadet C et al: Structural effect of
dietary antioxidant supplementation on oxidative damage
avocado/soybean unsaponifables on joint space loss in
and resistance to oxidative damage during prolonged exer-
osteoarthritis of the hip, Arthritis Rheum 47:50-58, 2002.
cise in sled dogs, Am J Vet Res 61:886-891, 2000.
131. Ernst E: Ayocado-soybean unsaponifables (ASU) for
115. Leffler CT, Philippi AF, Leffler SG et al: Glucosamine,
 osteoarthritis——a systematicreview, Clin Rheumatot 22:285-
chondroitin, and manganese ascorbate for degenerative joint
288, 2003
disease of the knee or low back: a randomized, double-blind,
 132. Soeken KL: Selected CAM therapies for arthritis-related
placebo-controlled pilot study, Mil Med 164:85-91, 1991.
paln the evidence from systematic reviews, Clin J Pain
116. Jensen NH: [Reduced pain from osteoarthritis in hip joint
20:13-18, 2004.
 Or knee joint during treatment with calcium ascorbate. A
133. Boileau C, Martel-Pelletier J, Caron J et al: Protective
randomized, placebo-controlled cross-over trial in general
effects of total fraction of avocado/soybean unsaponifi-
practice], Ugeskr Laeger 165:2563-2566, 2003.
ables on the structural changes in experimental dog osteo-
117. Jaswal S, Mehta HC, Sood AK et al: Antioxidant status in
arthritis: inhibition of nitric oxide synthase and matrix
rheumatoid arthritis and role of antioxidant therapy, Clin
metalloproteinase-13, Arthritis Res Ther 11:R41, 2009.
Chim Acta 338:123-129, 2003.
134. Burdulis D, Sarkinas A, Jasutiene I et al: Comparative study
118. Remans PH, Sont JK, Wagenaar LW et al: Nutrient
of anthocyanin composition, antimicrobial and antioxidant
supplementation with polyunsaturated fatty acids and
activity in bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus L.) and blueberry
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation
271
(Vaccinium corymbosum L.) fruits, Acta Pot Pharm 66:399-
mRNA in rat cartilage and kidney: implications for human
408, 2009.
efficacy and toxicity, Arch Biochem Biophys 510:1l-18,
135. Dunlap KL, Reynolds AJ, Duffy LK: Total antioxidant
2011.
su pue soiiegenig yim peusueiddns siop peis ui pemod
151. Phitak T, Pothacharoen P, Kongtawelert P: Comparison of
comparison of blood parameters associated with exercise,
glucose derivatives effects on cartilage degradation, BMC
Comp Biochem Physiol A Mot Integr Physiol 143:429-434,
Musculoskelet Disord 11:162, 2010.
2006.
152. Silbert JE: Dietary glucosamine under question, Glycobiol-
136. Sengupta K, Alluri KV, Satish AR et al: A double blind,
ogy 19:564-567, 2009.
randomized, placebo controlled study of the effcacy and
153. McKenzie BA: What is the evidence? There is only very
safety of 5-Loxin for treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee,
weak clinical tial evidence to support the use of glucos-
Arthritis Res Ther 10:R85, 2008.
amine and chondroitin supplements for osteoarthritis in
137. Ernst E: Frankincense: systematic review, BMJ 337:a2813,
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 237:1382-1383, 2010.
2008.
154. Aragon CL, Hofmeister EH, Budsberg SC: Systematic
138. Sengupta K, Kolla JN, Krishnaraju AV et al: Cellular and
review of clinical trials of treatments for osteoarthritis in
molecular  mechanisms of  anti-inflammatory effect of
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 230:514-521, 2007.
AflapIn a novel Boswellia setrata extract, Mol Cell Biochem
155. Sanderson RO, Beata C, Flipo RM et al: Systematic review
2011.
of the management of canine osteoarthritis, Vet Rec 164:418-
139. Kulkarni RR, Patki PS, Jog VP et al: Treatment of osteoar-
424, 2009.
thritis with a herbomineral formulation: a double-blind,
156. Sofat N, Beith I, Kumar PG et al: Recent clinical evidence
placebo-controlled, cross-over study, J Ethnopharmacof
for the treatment of osteoarthritis: what we have learned,
33:91-95, 1991.
Rev Recent Clin Trials 6(2):114-126, 2011.
140. Sander O, Herborn G, Rau R: [Is H15 (resin extract of
157. Wandel S, Juni P, Tendal B et al: Effects of glucosamine,
Boswellia serrata,"incense") a useful supplement to estab-
 chondroitin, or placebo in patients with osteoarthritis of
lished drug therapy of chronic polyarthritis? Results of a
hip or knee: network meta-analysis, BMJ 341:c4675,
double-blind pilot study], Z Rheumatot 57:11-16, 1998.
2010.
141. Kimmatkar N, Thawani V, Hingorani L et al: Effcacy and 
158. Sawitzke AD, Shi H, Finco MF et al: Clinical efficacy and
tolerability of Boswellia serrata extract in treatment of
safety of glucosamine, chondroitin sulphate, their combina-
osteoarthritis of knee—a randomized double blind placebo
tion, celecoxib or placebo taken to treat osteoarthritis of the
controlled trial, Phytomedicine 10:3-7, 2003.
knee: 2-year results from GAIT, Ann Rheum Dis 69:1459-
142. Reichling J, Schmokel H, Fitzi J et al: Dietary support with
1464, 2010.
Boswellia resin in canine infammatory joint and spinal
159. Petersen SG, Saxne T, Heinegard D et al: Glucosamine but
disease, Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 146:71-79, 2004.
not ibuprofen alters cartilage turnover in osteoarthritis
143. McNamara PS, Johnston SA, Todhunter RJ: Slow-acting,
patients in response to physical training, Osteoarthritis
disease-modifying osteoarthritis agents, Vet Clin North Am
Cartilage 18:34-40, 2010.
Small Anim Pract 27:863-881, 1997.
160. Lee YH, Woo JH, Choi SI et al: Effect of glucosamine of
144. Roseman S: Refections on glycobiology, J Biot Chem
chondroitin sulfate on the osteoarthritis progression: a
276:1527-1542, 2001.
meta-analysis, Rheumatot Int 30:357-363, 2010.
145. Ghosh S, Blumenthal HJ, Davidson E et al: Glucosamine
161. Giacovelli G, Rovati LC: Glucosamine and osteoarthritis.
metabolism. V. 1
 Enzymatic synthesis of glucosamine
Conclusions not supported by methods and results, BMJ
6-phosphate, J Biol Chem 235:1265-1273, 1960.
341:c6338, 2010
146. Chan PS, Caron JP, Orth Mw: Effects of glucosamine and
162. McCarthy G, O'Donovan J, Jones B et al: Randomised
chondroitin sulfate on bovine cartilage explants under long-
double-blind, positive-controlled trial to assess the effcacy
term culture conditions, Am J Vet Res 68:709-715, 2007.
of glucosamine/chondroitin sulfate for the treatment of dogs
147. Lippiello L, Han MS, Henderson T: Protective effect of the
with osteoarthritis, Vet J 174:54-61, 2007.
chondroprotective agent Cosequin DS on bovine articular
163. Moreau M, Dupuis J, Bonneau NH et al: Clinical evaluation
cartilage exposed in vitro to nonsteroidal antinflammatory
of a nutraceutical, carprofen and meloxicam for the treat-
agents, Vet Ther 3:128-135, 2002.
ment of dogs with osteoarthritis, Vet Rec 152:323-329,
148. Gouze JN, Bordji K, Gulberti S et al: Interleukin-1beta
2003
down-regulates the expression of glucuronosyltransferase I,
164. Gibson RG, Gibson SL, Conway V et al: Perna canaliculus
a key enzyme priming glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis:
in the treatment of arthritis, Practitioner 224:955-960,
infuence of glucosamine on interleukin-lbeta-mediated 
1980.
effects in rat chondrocytes, Arthritis Rheum 44:351-360,
165. Butters DE, Whitehouse Mw: Treating inflammation: some
2001.
(needless) difficulties for gaining acceptance of effective
149. Dodge GR, Jimenez SA: Glucosamine sulfate modulates
natural products and traditional medicines, Infiammophar-
the levels of aggrecan and matrix metalloproteinase-3 syn-
macology 11:97-110, 2003.
 thesized by cultured human osteoarthritis articular chondro-
166. Cho SH, Jung YB, Seong SC et al: Clinical efficacy and
cytes, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 11:424-432, 2003.
safety of Lyprinol, a patented extract from New Zealand
150. Ali AA, Lewis SM, Badgley HL et al: Oral glucosamine
m suened ui (snnarus mad) jessnu peddi-ue
increases expression of transforming growth factor betal
osteoarthritis of the hip and knee: a multicenter 2-month
(TGFbetal) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF)
clinical trial, Allerg Immunol (Paris) 35:212-216, 2003.
272
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
167. Bui LM, Bierer TL: Influence of green lipped mussels
and Rheumatoid Arthritis, Proc Nutr Soc 67:409-418,
(Perna canaliculus) in alleviating signs of arthritis in dogs,
2008.
Vet Ther 4:397-407, 2003.
184. Calder PC: n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, inflammation,
168. Hielm-Bjorkman A, Tulamo RM, Salonen H et al: Evaluat-
and infammatory diseases, Am J Clin Nutr 83:1505S-
ing complementary therapies for canine osteoarthritis. Part
1519S, 2006.
I: green-lipped mussel (Perna canaliculus), Evid Based
185. de Deckere EA, Korver O, Verschuren PM et al: Health
Complement Alternat Med 6:365-373, 2009.
aspects of fish and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids from
169. Pollard B, Guilford WG, Ankenbauer-Perkins KL et al:
plant and marine origin, Eur J Clin Nutr 52:749-753,
1998.
mussel (Perna canalicutus) in dogs presumptively diag-
186. Alexander JW: Immunonutrition: the role of omega-3 fatty
nosed with degenerative joint disease, N Z Vet J 54:1 14-118,
acids, Nutrition 147:627-633, 1998.
2006.
187. Skoldstam L, Borjesson O, Kjallman A et al: Effect of six
170. Servet E, Biourge V, Marniquet P: Dietary intervention can
months of fish oil supplementation in stable rheumatoid
improve clinical signs in osteoarthritic dogs, J Nutr 136:
arthritis. A double-blind, controlled study, Scand J Rheu-
1995S-1997S, 2006.
matot 21:178-185, 1992.
171. Hurst S, Zainal Z, Caterson B et al: Dietary fatty acids and 
188. Stamp LK, James MJ, Cleland LG: Diet and rheumatoid
arthritis, Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 82:315-
arthritis: a review of the literature, Semin Arthritis Rheum
318, 2010
35:77-94, 2005
172. Curtis CL, Hughes CE, Flannery CR et al: n-3 fatty acids
189. Galatraga B, Ho M, Youssef HM et al: Cod liver oil (n-3
 specifically modulate catabolic factors invol ved in articular
fatty acids) as an non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
cartilage degradation, J Biot Chem 275:721-724, 2000.
sparing agent in rheumatoid arthritis, Rheumatology
173. Curtis CL, Rees SG, Cramp J et al: Effects of n-3 fatty
(Oxford) 47:665-669, 2008.
acids on cartilage metabolism, Proc Nutr Soc 61:381-389,
190. Veale DJ, Torley HI, Richards IM et al: A double-blind
2002.
placebo controlled trial of Efamol Marine on skin and joint
174. Curtis CL, Rees SG, Little CB et al: Pathologic indicators
symptoms of psoriatic arthritis, Br J Rheumatot 33:954-
 of degradation and infammation in human osteoarthritic
958, 1994.
cartilage are abrogated by exposure to n-3 fatty acids,
191. Curtis CL, Harwood JL, Dent CM et al: Biological basis
Arthritis Rheum 46:1544-1553, 2002.
for the benefit of nutraceutical supplementation in arthritis,
175. Zainal Z, Longman AJ, Hurst S et al: Relative effcacies of
Drug Discov Today 9:165-172, 2004.
omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in reducing expression
192. Bartges JW, Budsberg SC, Pazak HE et al: Efects of differ-
 of key proteins in a model system for studying osteoarthri-
ent n6:n3 fatty acid ratio diets on canine stijfe osteoarthri-
tis, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 17:896-905, 2009.
tis. Orthopedic Research Society 47th Annual Meeting, San
176. Serhan CN, Arita M, Hong S et al: Resolvins, docosatri-
Francisco, 2001
enes, and neuroprotectins, novel omega-3-derived media-
193. Budsberg SC, Bartges JW, Pazak HE et al: Efects of differ-
tors, and their endogenous aspirin-triggered epimers, Lipids
ent n6:n3 fatty acid diets on canine stife osteoarthritis.
39:1125-1132, 2004.
Veterinary Orthopedic Society 28th Annual Meeting, Lake
177. Hong S, Gronert K, Devchand PR et al: Novel docosatrienes
Louise, Canada, 2001.
and 17S-resolvins generated from docosahexaenoic acid
194. Miller WH, Scott DW, Wellington JR: Treatment of dogs
in murine brain, human blood, and glial cells. Autacoids
with hip arthritis with a fatty acid supplement, Canine Pract
in anti-infammation, J Biot Chem 278:14677-14687,
17:6-8, 1992.
2003.
195. Roush JK, Dodd CE, Fritsch DA et al: Multicenter veteri-
178. Meduri GU, Carratu P, Freire AX: Evidence of biological
nary practice assessiment of the effects of omega-3 fatty
efficacy for prolonged glucocorticoid treatment in patients
acids on osteoarthritis in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 236:59-
with unresolving ARDS, Eur Respir J Suppt 42:57s-64s,
66, 2010.
2003.
196. Roush JK, Cross AR, Renberg WC et al: Evaluation of the
179. Xu ZZ, Ji RR: Resolvins are potent analgesics for arthritic
pain, Br J Pharmacol 164(2):274-277, 2011.
fatty acids on weight bearing in dogs with osteoarthritis,
180. Lima-Garcia J, Dutra R, da Silva K et al: The precursor of
J Am Vet Med Assoc 236:67-73, 2010.
resolvin D series and aspirin-triggered resolvin Dl display
197. Fritsch DA, Allen TA, Dodd CE et al: A multicenter
anti-hyperal gesic properties in adjuvant-induced arthritis in 
rats, Br J Pharmacot 164(2):278-293, 2011.
omega-3 fatty acids on carprofen dosage in dogs with osteo-
181. Xu ZZ, Zhang L, Liu T et al: Resolvins RvE1 and RvD1
arthritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 236:535-539, 2010.
attenuate infammatory pain via central and peripheral
198. Innes JF, Fuller CJ, Grover ER et al: Randomised, double-
actions, Nat Med 16:592-597, 2010.
blind, placebo-controlled parallel group study of P54FP for
182. James M, Proudman S, Cleland L: Fish oil and rheumatoid
the treatment of dogs with osteoarthritis, Vet Rec 152:457-
arthritis: past, present and future, Proc Nutr Soc 69:316-
460, 2003.
323, 2010.
199. Ley-Ari S, Strier L, Kazanov D et al: Curcumin synergisti-
183. Calder PC: Session 3: Joint Nutrition Society and Irish
cally potentiates the growth-inhibitory and pro-apoptotic
Nutrition and Dietetic Institute Symposium on "Nutrition
effects of celecoxib in osteoarthritis synovial adherent cells,
and Autoimmune Disease" PUFA, Inflammatory Processes 
Rheumatology (0xford) 45:171-177, 2006.
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation
273
200. Kwon Y, Magnuson BA: Effect of azoxymethane and cur-
(Uncaria tomentosa and Uncaria guianensis) are indepen-
cumin on transcriptional levels of cycloox ygenase-1 and -2
dent of their alkaloid content, Phytomedicine 9:325-337,
during initiation of colon carcinogenesis, Scand J Gastro-
2002
enterol 42:72-80, 2007.
218. Desmarchelier C, Mongelli E, Coussio J et al: Evaluation
201. Henrotin Y, Clutterbuck AL, Allaway D et al: Biological
of the in vitro antioxidant activity in extracts of Uncaria
actions of curcumin on articular chondrocytes, Osteoarthri-
tomentosa (Wild) DC, Phytotherapy Res 11:254-256,
tis Cartilage 18:141-149, 2010.
1998.
202. Goldman AS: The immunological system in human milk:
 219. Sandoval M, Charbonnet RM, Okuhama NN et al: Cat's
the past—a pathway to the future, Adv Nutr Res 10:15-37,
claw inhibits TNFalpha production and scavenges free radi-
2001.
cals: role in cytoprotection, Free Radic Biot Med 29:71-78,
203. Ormrod DJ, Miller TE: Milk from hyperimmunized dairy
2000.
cows as a source of a novel biological response modifer,
 220. Hardin SR: Cat's claw: an Amazonian vine decreases
Agents Actions 38 Spec No:C146-149, 1993.
inflammation in osteoarthritis, Comptement Ther Clin Pract
204. Ormrod DJ, Miller TE: The anti-infammatory activity of a
13:25-28, 2007.
low molecular weight component derived from the milk of
221. Diehl HW, May EL: Cetyl myristoleate isolated from Swiss
hyperimmunized cows, Agents Actions 32:160-166, 1991.
albino mice: an apparent protective agent against adjuvant
205. Gingerich DA, Fuhrer JP, Kiser KM et al: Milk protein
arthritis in rats, J Pharm Sei 83:296-299, 1994.
concentrate from hyperimmunized cows expresses anti-
222. Hunter KW, Jr., Gault RA, Stehouwer JS et al: Synthesis of
infammatory activity and clinical utility in osteoarthritis,
cetyl myristoleate and evaluation of its therapeutic efficacy
J Vet Intern Med 15:305, 2001.
in a murine model of collagen-induced arthritis, Pharmaco!
206. Stelwagen K, Ormrod DJ: An anti-infammatory component
Res 47:43-47, 2003.
derived from milk of hyperimmunised cows reduces tight
 223. Whitehouse MW, McGeary RP: Concerning the anti-
arthritic action of cetyl myristoleate in rats: an interim
1998.
report, Infammopharmacology 7:303-310, 1999.
207. Gingerich DA, Strobel JD: Use of client-specific outcome
 224. Hesslink R, Jr.,Armstrong D, 3rd, Nagendran MV et al:
 measures to assess treatment effects in geriatric, arthritic
Cetylated fatty acids improve knee function in patients with
dogs: controlled clinical evaluation of a nutraceutical, Vet
osteoarthritis, J Rheumatot 29:1708-1712, 2002.
Ther 4:376-386, 2003.
225. Linnebur SA, Rapacchietta OC, Vejar M: Hepatotoxicity
208. Neumann S, Stolt P, Braun G et al: Effectiveness of the
associated with chinese skullcap contained in Move Free
homeopathic preparation Zeel compared with carprofen in
 Advanced dietary supplement: two case reports and review
dogs with osteoarthritis, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 47:12-20,
of the literature, Pharmacotherapy 30(750):258e-262e,
2011.
2010.
209. Hielm-Bjorkman A, Tulamo RM, Salonen H et al: Evaluat-
 226. Kroliczewska B, Mista D, Zawadzki W et al: Effects of a
ing complementary therapies for canine osteoarthritis--Part
skullcap root supplement on haematology, serum parame-
 II: a homeopathic combination preparation (Zeel), Evid
ters and antioxidant enzymes in rabbits on a high-cholesterol 
Based Complement Alternat Med 6:465-471, 2009.
diet, J Anim Physiot Anim Nutr (Berl) 95:114-124, 2011.
210. Yesilada E, Kupeli E: Berberis crataegina DC. root exhibits
 227. Weeks BS: Formulations of dietary supplements and herbal
potent anti-infammatory, analgesic and febrifuge effects in 
extracts for relaxation and anxiolytic action: Relarian, Med
mice and rats, J Ethnopharmacol 79:237-248, 2002.
Sci Monit 15:RA256-262, 2009.
211. Ivyanovska N, Philipov S: Study on the anti-inflammatory
228. Wu Q, Li QY, Zhou XG et al: [Study of therapeutic effect
action of Berberis vuigaris root extract, alkaloid fractions
and mechanism of Sihuang powder treating acute synovitis
and pure alkaloids, Int J Immunopharmacol 18:553-561,
in experimental rabbit induced by papain injection], Zhong-
1996.
guo Gu Shang 21:42-45, 2008.
212. Newnham RE: Agricultural practices affect arthritis, Nutr
 229. Sagar SM, Yance D, Wong RK: Natural health products that
Health 7:89-100, 1991.
inhibit angiogenesis: a potential source for investigational
213. Newnham RE: Essentiality of boron for healthy bones and
new agents to treat cancer—Part 1, Curr Oncot 13:14-26,
joints, Environ Heatth Perspect 102(suppl 7):83-85, 1994.
2006.
 214. Piscoya J, Rodriguez Z, Bustamante SA et al: Effcacy and
 230. Morgan SL, Baggott JE, Moreland L et al: The safety of
safety of freeze-dried cat's claw in osteoarthritis of the
favocoxid, a medical food, in the dietary management of
knee: mechanisms of action of the species Uncaria guia-
knee osteoarthritis, J Med Food 12:1143-1148, 2009.
nensis, Inflamm Res 50:442-448, 2001.
231. Pillai L, Burnett BP, Levy RM: GOAL: multicenter, open-
215. Mur E, Hartig F, Eib1 G et al: Randomized double blind
label, post-marketing study of favocoxid, a novel dual
trial of an extract from the pentacyclic alkaloid-chemotype
pathway inhibitor anti-inflammatory agent of botanical
of Uncaria tomentosa for the treatment of rheumatoid
origin, Curr Med Res Opin 26:1055-1063, 2010.
arthritis, J Rheumatol 29:678-681, 2002.
232. Polito F, Bitto A, Inrera N et al: Flavocoxid, a dual inhibitor
216. Sandoval-Chacon M, Thompson JH, Zhang XJ et al: Anti-
of cyclooxy genase-2 and 5-lipox ygenase, reduces pancre-
infammatory actions of cat's claw: the role of NF-kappaB,
atic damage in an experimental model of acute pancreatitis,
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 12:1279-1289, 1998.
Br J Pharmacol 161:1002-1011, 2010.
217. Sandoval M, Okuhama NN, Zhang XJ et al: Anti-
233.
Altavilla D, Squadrito F, Bitto A et al: Flavocoxid, a dual
infammatory and antioxidant activities of cat's claw
inhibitor of cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase, blunts
274
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
 pro-inflammatory  phenotype activation in  endotoxin-
treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomized con-
stimulated macrophages, Br J Pharmacot 157:1410-1418,
trolled trial [ISRCTN70292892], BMC Comptement Attern.
2009.
Med 4:19, 2004.
234. Levy RM, Khokhlov A, Kopenkin S et al: Efficacy and
250. Zingiber officinale (ginger). Monograph, Attern Med Rev
 safety of favocoxid, a novel therapeutic, compared with
8:331-335, 2003.
naproxen: a randomized multicenter controlled trial in sub-
 251. Shimoda H, Shan SJ, Tanaka J et al: Anti-inflammatory
jects with osteoarthritis of the knee, Adv Ther 27:731-742,
properties of red ginger (Zingiber offcinale var. Rubra)
2010.
extract and suppression of nitric oxide production by its
235. Walrand S, Chiotelli E, Noirt F et al: Consumption of a
constituents, J Med Food 13:156-162, 2010.
functional fermented milk containing collagen hy drolysate
252. Bliddal H, Rosetzsky A, Schlichting P et al: A randomized,
improves the concentration of collagen-speci fic amino acids
placebo-controlled, cross-over study of ginger extracts and
in plasma, J Agric Food Chem 56:7790-7795, 2008.
ibuprofen in osteoarthritis, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 8:9-12,
 236. Ohara H, lida H, Ito K et al: Effects of Pro-Hyp, a collagen 
2000.
hydrolysate-derived peptide, on hyaluronic acid synthesis 
253. Ramadan G, Al-Kahtani MA, El-Sayed WM: Anti-
using in vitro cultured synovium cells and oral ingestion of
 inflammatory and anti-oxidant properties of Curcuma longa
(turmeric) versus Zingiber offcinale (ginger) rhizomes in
tis, Biosci Biotechnot Biochem 74:2096-2099, 2010.
rat adjuvant-induced arthritis, Infammation 127(2):515-
237. Clark KL, Sebastianelli W, Flechsenhar KR et al: 24-Week
520, 2010.
study on the use of collagen hydrolysate as a dietary supple-
 254. Ahmed S: Green tea polyphenol epigallocatechin 3-gallate
ment in athletes with activity-related joint pain, Curr Med
in arthritis: progress and promise, Arthritis Res Ther 12:208,
Res Opin 24:1485-1496, 2008.
2010.
238. Benito-Ruiz P,  Camacho-Zambrano :
 MM, Camillo-
 255. Ahmed S, Rahman A, Hasnain A et al: Green tea polyphe-
Arcentales JN et al: A randomized controlled trial on the
nol epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits the IL-1 beta-induced
efficacy and safety of a food ingredient, collagen hydroly-
activity and expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and nitric
sate, for improving joint comfort, Int J Food Sci Nutr
oxide synthase-2 in human chondrocytes, Free Radic Biot
60(Supp1 2):99-113, 2009.
Med 33:1097-1105, 2002.
 239. Moskowitz RW: Role of collagen hydrolysate in bone and
256. Singh R, Ahmed S, Islam N et al: Epigallocatechin-3-
joint disease, Semin Arthritis Rheum 30:87-99, 2000.
gallate  inhibits  interleukin-lbeta-induced expression of
 240. Bello AE, Oesser S: Collagen hy drolysate for the treatment
nitric oxide synthase and production of nitric oxide in
of osteoarthritis and other joint disorders: a review of the
human chondrocytes: suppression of nuclear factor kappaB
literature, Cur Med Res Opin 22:2221-2232, 2006.
activation by degradation of the inhibitor of nuclear factor
241. Willer B, Stucki G, Hoppeler H et al: Effects of creatine
kappaB, Arthritis Rheum 46:2079-2086, 2002.
supplementation on muscle weakness in patients with
257. Ahmed S, Wang N, Lalonde M et al: Green tea polyphenol
theumatoid arthritis, Rheumatology (Oxford) 39:293-298,
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) differentially inhibits
2000.
interleukin-1 beta-induced expression of matrix metallopro-
242. Roy BD, de Beer J, Harvey D et al: Creatine monohydrate
teinase-1 and -13 in human chondrocytes, J Pharmacol Exp
 supplementation does not improve functional recovery after
Ther 308:767-773, 2004.
total knee arthroplasty, Arch Phys Med Rehabit 86:1293-
258. Ahmed S, Marotte H, Kwan K et al: Epigallocatechin-3-
1298, 2005.
 gallate inhibits IL-6 synthesis and suppresses transsignaling
243. Neves M, Jr., Gualano B, Roschel H et al: Beneficial effect
by enhancing soluble gp130 production, Proc Natl Acad Sci
 of creatine supplementation in knee osteoarthritis, Med Sci
U S A 105:14692-14697, 2008.
Sports Exerc 43(8):1538-1543, 2011.
 259. Kim HR, Rajaiah R, Wu QL et al: Green tea protects rats 
244. Harpagophytum procumbens (devil's claw). Monograph,
against autoimmune arthritis by modulating disease-related
Altern Med Rev 13:248-252, 2008.
immune events, J Nutr 138:2111-2116, 2008.
245. Chrubasik S: [Devil's claw extract as an example of the
 260. Brien S, Lachance L, Prescott P et al: Homeopathy has 
effectiveness of herbal analgesics], Orthopade 33:804-808,
clinical benefts in rheumatoid arthritis patients that are
2004.
attributable to the consultation process but not the homeo-
246. Chrubasik S, Pollak S, Black A: Effectiveness of devil's
pathic remedy: a randomized controlled clinical trial,
claw for osteoarthritis, Rheumatology (Oxford) 41:1332-
Rheumatology (Oxford) 2010, doi: 10.1093/theumatology/
1333, 2002; author reply 1333.
keq234.
247. Huang TH, Tran VH, Duke RK et al: Harpagoside sup-
 261. Zaman T, Agarwal S, Handa R: Complementary and alter-
presses  lipopolysaccharide-induced  iNOS and  COX-2
native medicine use in rheumatoid arthritis: an audit of
expression through inhibition of NF-kappa B activation,
patients visiting a tertiary care centre, Natl Med J India
J Ethnopharmacof 104:149-155, 2006.
20:236-239, 2007.
248. Fiebich BL, Heinrich M, Hiller KO et al: Inhibition of TNF-
 262. Sevar R: Audit of outcome in 455 consecutive patients
alpha synthesis in LPS-stimulated primary human mono-
treated with homeopathic medicines, Homeopathy 94:215-
cytes by Harpagophy tum ex tract SteiHap 69, Phytomedicine
221, 2005.
8:28-30, 2001
 263. Chandrashekara S, Anilkumar T, Jamuna S: Complemen-
249. Teekachunhatean S, Kunanusorn P, Rojanasthien N et al:
tary and alternative drug therapy in arthritis, J Assoc Physi-
Chinese herbal recipe versus diclofenac in symptomatic
cians India 50:225-227, 2002.
Chapter 15
The Role of Chondroprotectants, Nutraceuticals, and Nutrition in Rehabilitation 
275
264. Long L, Ernst E: Homeopathic remedies for the treatment
physical performance and vascular aspects, Phytother Res
of osteoarthritis: a systematic review, Br Homeopath J
22:518-523, 2008.
90:37-43, 2001.
 280. Sato M, Miyazaki T, Kambe F et al: Quercetin, a biofavo-
265. Shipley M, Berry H, Broster G et al: Controlled trial of
noid, inhibits the induction of interleukin 8 and monocyte
homoeopathic treatment of osteoarthritis, Lancet 1:97-98,
chemoatractant protein-1 expression by tumor necrosis 
1983.
factor-alpha in cultured human synovial cells, J Rheumatol
266. Usha PR, Naidu MU: Randomised, double-blind, parallel,
24:1680-1684, 1997.
placebo-controlled study of oral glucosamine, methylsulfo-
 281. Choi EJ, Bae SC, Yu R et al: Dietary vitamin E and quer-
nylmethane and their combination in osteoarthritis, Clin
cetin modulate inflammatory responses of collagen-induced
Drug Investig 24:353-363, 2004.
arthritis in mice, J Med Food 12:770-775, 2009.
267. Kim LS, Axelrod LJ, Howard P et al: Efficacy of methyl-
282. Jackson JK, Higo T, Hunter WL et al: The antioxidants
sulfonylmethane (MSM) in osteoarthritis pain of the knee:
a pilot clinical trial, Osteoarthritis Cartiage 14:286-294,
associated with arthritis, Infamm Res 55: 168-175, 2006.
2006.
283. Matsuno H, Nakamura H, Katayama K et al: Effects of an
268. Debi R, Fichman G, Bar Ziv Y et al: The role of MSM
 oral  administration of glucosamine-chondroitin-quercetin
in knee osteoarthritis: a double blind, randomized, prospec-
yia suened ui soniednd pinh leiaouas sun uo spisoona
tive study, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 15(Suppl 3):C231,
osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, Biosci Biotechnot
2007.
Biochem 73:288-292, 2009.
269. Brien S, Prescott P, Bashir N et al: Systematic review of
 284. Kawaguchi K, Matsumoto T, Kumazawa Y: Effects of anti-
the nutritional supplements dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
oxidant polyphenols on TNF-alpha-related diseases, Curr
and methylsulfonylmethane (MSM)  in the treatment
Top Med Chem 11(14):1767-1779, 2011.
of osteoarthritis, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 16:1277-1288,
 285. Csaki C, Keshishzadeh N, Fischer K et al: Regulation of
2008.
inflammation signalling by resveratrol in human chondro-
270. Brien S, Prescott P, Lewith G: Meta-analysis of the related
cytes in vitro, Biochem Pharmacol 75:677-687, 2008.
nutritional supplements dimethyl sulfoxide and methylsul-
 286. Dave M, Attur M, Palmer G et al: The antioxidant resvera-
fonylmethane in the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee,
trol protects against chondrocyte apoptosis via effects on
Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 20ll;article ID
mitochondrial polarization and ATP production, Arthritis 
528403.
Rheum 58:2786-2797, 2008.
271. Gundermann KJ, Muller J: Phytodolor—effects and eff-
 287. Shakibaei M, John T, Seifarth C et al: Res veratrol inhibits
cacy of a herbal medicine, Wien Med Wochenschr 157:343-
 IL-1 beta-induced stimulation of caspase-3 and cleavage of
347, 2007.
PARP in human articular chondrocytes in vitro, Ann V Y
272. el-Ghazaly M, Khayyal MT, Okpanyi SN et al: Study of the
Acad Sci 1095:554-563, 2007.
anti-infammatory activity of Populus tremula, Solidago
 288. Lei M, Liu SQ, Liu YL: Res veratrol protects bone marrow
virgaurea and Fraxinus excelsior, Arzneimittelforschung
mesenchymal  stem  cell  derived  chondrocytes cultured
42:333-336, 1992.
on chitosan-gelatin scaffolds from the inhibitory effect
273. Cameron M, Gagnier J, Little CV et al: Evidence of effec-
of interleukin-1beta, Acta Pharmacol Sin 29:1350-1356,
tiveness of herbal medicinal products in the treatment of
2008.
arthritis. Part I: Osteoarthritis, Phytother Res 23: 1497-1515,
 289. Takayama K, Ishida K, Matsushita T et al: SIRT1 regulation
2009.
of apoptosis of human chondrocytes, Arthritis Rheum
274. Cameron M, Gagnier JJ, Chrubasik S: Herbal therapy for
60:2731-2740, 2009.
treating rheumatoid arthritis, Cochrane Database Syst Rev
290. Byun HS, Song JK, Kim YR et al: Caspase-8 has an essen-
2:CD002948, 2011.
tial role in resveratrol-induced apoptosis of rheumatoid
275. Maimoona A, Naeem I, Saddiqe Z et al: A review on bio-
fibroblast-like synoviocytes, Rheumatology (Oxford) 47:
logical, nutraceutical and clinical aspects of French mari-
301-308, 2008
time pine bark extract, J Ethnopharmacot 133:261-277,
291. Willich SN, Rossnagel K, Roll S et al: Rose hip herbal
2011.
remedy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis—a randomised
276. Farid R, Mirfeizi Z, Mirheidari M et al: Pycnogenol supple-
controlled trial, Phytomedicine 17:87-93, 2010.
mentation reduces pain and stiffness and improves physical
292. Chrubasik C, Duke RK, Chrubasik S: The evidence for
function in adults with knee osteoarthritis, Mutr Res 27:692-
clinical efficacy of rose hip and seed: a systematic review,
697, 2007.
Phytother Res 20:1-3, 2006.
277. Cisar P, Jany R, Waczulikova I et al: Effect of pine bark
293. Chrubasik C, Wiesner L, Black A et al: A one- year survey
extract (Pycnogenol) on symptoms of knee osteoarthritis,
on the use of a powder from Rosa canina lito in acute
Phytother Res 22:1087-1092, 2008.
exacerbations of chronic pain, Phytother Res 22:1141-1148,
278. Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, Errichi S et al: Variations in
2008.
C-reactive protein, plasma free radicals and fibrinogen
294. Christensen R, Bartels EM, Altman RD et al: Does the hip
yalues in patients with osteoarthritis treated with Pycno-
 powder of Rosa canina (rosehip) reduce pain in osteoarthri-
genol, Redox Rep 13:271-276, 2008.
tis patients? A meta-analysis of randomized controlled
279. Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, Errichi S et al: Treatment of
trials, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 16:965-972, 2008.
osteoarthritis with Pycnogenol. The SVOS (San Valentino
 295. Gonzalez-Trujano ME, Pena EI, Martinez AL et al: Evalu-
Osteo-arthrosis Study). Evaluation of signs, symptoms,
ation of the antinociceptive effect of Rosmarinus offcinalis
276
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
L. using three different experimental models in rodents,
308. Fiebich BL, Chrubasik S: Effects of an ethanolic salix
J Ethnopharmacol 111:476-482, 2007.
extract on the release of selected inflammatory mediators in
296. Minich DM, Bland JS, Katke J et al: Clinical safety and
vitro, Phytomedicine 11:135-138, 2004.
efficacy of NG440: a novel combination of rho iso-alpha
309. Khayyal MT, El-Ghazaly MA, Abdallah DM et al: Mecha-
acids from hops, rosemary, and oleanolic acid for infam-
nisms involved in the anti-infammatory effect of a stan-
matory conditions, Can J Physiol Pharmacol 85:872-883,
dardized willow bark extract, Arzneimittelforschung 55:
2007.
677-687, 2005.
297. Lukaczer D, Darland G, Tripp M et al: A pilot trial evaluat-
 310. Kuppusamy UR, Khoo HE, Das NP: Structure-activity
ing Meta050, a proprietary combination of reduced iso-
studies of favonoids as inhibitors of hyaluronidase, Biochem 
alpha acids, rosemary ex tract and oleanolic acid in patients
Pharmacol 40:397-401, 1990.
with arthritis and fbromyalgia, Phytother Res 19:864-869,
311. Rohnert U, Schneider W, Elstner EF: Superoxide-dependent
2005.
and -independent nitrite formation from hydroxylamine:
298. Choi JH, Kim DY, Yoon JH et al: Effects of SKI 306X, a
inhibition by plant extracts, Z Naturforsch C 53:241-249,
new herbal agent, on proteoglycan degradation in cartilage
1998.
explant culture and collagenase-induced rabbit osteoarthri-
312. Kahkonen MP, Hopia AI, Vuorela HJ et al: Antioxidant
tis model, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 10:471-478, 2002.
activity of plant extracts containing phenolic compounds,
299. Lee SW, Chung WT, Choi SM et al: Clematis mandshurica
J Agric Food Chem 47:3954-3962, 1999.
protected to apoptosis of rat chondrocytes, J Ethnopharma-
313. Schmid B, Ludtke R, Selbmann HK et al: Effcacy
cot 101:294-298, 2005.
and tolerability of a standardized willow bark extract in
300. Lee SW, Lee HJ, Moon JB et al: Purifed extract from
 patients with osteoarthritis: randomized placebo-controlled,
 Clematis mandshurica prevents adenoviral-TRAIL induced
double blind clinical trial, Phytother Res 15:344-350,
apoptosis on rat articular chondrocytes, Am J Chin Med
2001.
36:399-410, 2008.
314. Biegert C, Wagner I, Ludtke R et al: Effcacy and safety of
301. Hartog A, Hougee S, Faber J et al: The multicomponent
willow bark extract in the treatment of osteoarthritis and
phytopharmaceutical SKI306X inhibits in vitro cartilage
rheumatoid arthritis: results of 2 randomized double-blind
degradation and the production of inflammatory mediators,
controlled trials, J Rheumatot 31:2121-2130, 2004.
Phytomedicine 15:313-320, 2008.
315. Slingerland LI, Hazewinkel HA, Meij BP et al: Cross-
302. Kim JH, Ryu KH, Jung KW et al: Effects of SKI306X on
sectional study of the prevalence and clinical features of
arachidonate metabolism and other infammatory media-
osteoarthritis in 100 cats, Vet J 187:304-309, 2011.
tors, Biol Pharm Bull 28:1615-1620, 2005.
 316. Lascelles BD: Feline degenerative joint disease, Vet Surg
303. Kim JH, Ryu KH, Jung KW et al: SKI306X suppresses
39:2-13, 2010
cartilage destruction and inhibits the production of matrix
 317. Kerwin SC: Osteoarthritis in cats, Top Companion Anim
metalloproteinase in rabbit joint cartilage explant culture,
Med 25:218-223, 2010.
J Pharmacol Sci 98:298-306, 2005.
 318. Godfrey DR: Osteoarthitis in cats: a retrospective radio-
304. Yesilada E, Kupeli E: Clematis vitatba L. aerial part exhib-
logical study, J Small Anim Pract 46:425-429, 2005.
its potent anti-inflammatory, antinociceptive and antipyretic
319. Clarke SP, Mellor D, Clements DN et al: Prevalence of
effects, J Ethnopharmacol 110:504-515, 2007.
radiographic signs of degenerative joint disease in a hospital
305. Jung YB, Roh KJ, Jung JA et al: Effect of SKI 306X, a new
population of cats, Vet Rec 157 :793-799, 2005.
herbal anti-arthritic agent, in patients with osteoarthritis of
320. Lascelles BD, Depuy V, Thomson A et al: Evaluation of a
the knee: a double-blind placebo controlled study, Am J
 therapeutic diet for feline degenerative joint disease, J Vet
Chin Med 29:485-491, 2001.
Intermn Med 24(3):487-495, 2010.
306. Lung YB, Seong SC, Lee MC et al: A four-week, random-
321. Mathie RT, Hansen L, Elliott MF et al: Outcomes from
ized, double-blind trial of the efficacy and safety 
of
homeopathic prescribing in veterinary practice: a prospec-
SKI306X: a herbal anti-arthritic agent versus diclofenac in
tve, research-targeted, pilot study, Homeopathy 96:27-34,
osteoarthritis of the knee, Am J Chin Med 32:291-301, 2004.
2007.
307. Vlachojannis JE, Cameron M, Chrubasik S: A systematic
 322. Beale BS: Orthopedic problems in geriatic dogs and
review on the effectiveness of willow bark for musculo-
cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 35:655-674,
skeletal pain, Phytother Res 23:897-900, 2009.
2005.
Nursing Care of the
Rehabilitation Patient
Marti Drum, Bobbie Werbe, Karen McLucas, and Darryl Millis
ursing care is essential during treatment of the
some veterinary hospital environments housing is limited
physical rehabilitation patient. As discussed in
to cages elevated above the ground or runs enclosed
 depth in Chapter 7, muscles and tendons quickly
 by fencing, thus creating a "step" in and out of the cage
 atrophy with immobilization or reduced activity, and other
 or run. These circumstances provide challenges for the
tissues such as cartilage,ligaments, and bones also undergo
 preoperative/postoperative patient and those who care for
rapid changes during the postoperative period. Starting
them. It may seem elementary to consider but patients
 physical rehabilitation as soon as it is safe can minimize
should be cared for as if they were our own pets and we
these changes. There are several considerations one should 
should occasionally stop to consider, "If I were my patient,
consider when working with a postoperative patient, some
how would I feel? What would make me feel better?
of which may be severely injured and therefore recumbent
Bedding and Decubital Ulcers
or nonambulatory. Taking care of a patient that is nonam-
bulatory or weakly ambulatory can be emotionally and
Rubber mats may be used to provide appropriate footing
physically challenging. It may be best to start with basic
in cages and kennel runs (Figure 16-2). An essential
functions, such as learming to stand and walk again. Nursing
factor with any orthopedic or neurologic patient that is
care during the critical postoperative period in the hospital
unable to walk is preventing decubital ulcers. Decubital
can be achieved by veterinarians, technicians, assistants,
ulcers develop over bony prominences such as the olecra-
and ultimately the owner. It is important for every person
non process, acromion process, greater trochanter, tuber
involved to understand the recovery process to provide the
ischium, and medial and lateral malleoluses. Prevention
best supportive care possible. Rehabilitation should begin
is crucial and begins with proper bedding. A helpful rule
as soon as the animal is stable, and before the onset of
of thumb is that 1 inch of bedding should be used for
complications that are often associated with prolonged
every 40 pounds of body weight. Bedding should be
changed daily and the cage or run cleaned daily as well. It
less effort, and better outcomes may be obtained than one
has been well documented that frequent position changes 
that is in response to a developing problem.
and ample bedding decrease the incidence of pressure
sores, edematous limbs, and joint and muscle stiffness.2
Preoperative Considerations
 Recumbent patients should be turmed every 4 to 6 hours at
a minimum.
The importance of history taking, orthopedic examination,
Urine/Fecal Scald
neurologic examination, and lameness and gait analysis
has been discussed at length in other chapters. However, it
Providing absorbent pads undermeath the patient to facili-
is vital that the practitioner has a clear working knowledge
tate the absorption of urine and feces of recumbent patients
of these assessment tools. One must also have a working
is essential to keep the patient and cage from becoming
knowledge of common orthopedic and neurologic condi-
excessively soiled. Altermatively larger patients that are
tions and the medical management and surgical procedures
incontinent may be placed on fenestrated grates to allow
that apply. A review of the common conditions affecting
excess urine and feces to drain away from the patient.
dogs is warranted. With this information in mind one can
 Urine- or fecal-scalded skin typically appears red, irritated
apply it to nursing care.
with or without serous exudate, and is caused by prolonged
exposure to urine or feces (Figure 16-3). Proper nursing
Clean, Dry, Safe, and Comfortable Housing
care should be initiated immediately if scalding occurs and
Veterinary professionals have a responsibility to act as
 consists of cleansing the area, drying thoroughly, applying
advocates for animals when people bring their pets for
creams such as Desitin (Johnson & Johnson, New Bruns-
care and treatment. Providing a clean, dry bed in an
wick, NJ) or Skin Sake (Skin Sake, Hamburg, AR) (Figure
appropriate cage or enclosure is vital (Figure 16-1). In
 a o rpmod dqg p us a oaod day o (t-9
277
278
Section Ill
Patient Assessment and Management
Figure 16-2 Rubber mats are commercially available ( X" Eco-soft
tiles, Foamtiles.com, Chandler, AZ). They can be pieced together to fit
Figure 16-1 Patient in clean, dry, comfortable cage. Note place-
 a variety of cages and are also easily cleaned and sanitized between
ment of bedding, absorbent pad, and folded towel to support the
patients.
head and neck. Pieces of foam can be used to position the patient
 in sternal recumbency if necessary.
C
Figure 16-3 Patient with absence of deep pain with urine scald. A, View of abdomen. B, Lateral aspect of hindlimb. C, Close up view of lateral
 aspect of hindlimb.
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
279
SKIN
SAKE
Chaled tArear
for
Skin Protectan
PaBed
Figure 16-4 Skin Sake (Skin Sake, Hamburg. AR) or other skin
Figure 16-6 Patient with an atlantoaxial subluxation, properly
 barrier cream can be applied to areas of skin with urine scald.
positioned to maintain a sternal position.
3M
②
Cavilon""
No Sting Barrier Film
· Boiy Flhauds
 Adhesive Suripping
334325
Figure 16-5   Cavilon (3M) is another product that may be applied
 as a skin protectant.
to absorb additional fuid. The importance of preventing
the patient from licking its urine/perianal scald, wounds,
and/or incisions is paramount. A no sting barrier film
Figure 16-7 Properly placed e-collar, with clear sides and adjust-
(Cavilon, 3M, St. Paul, MN) (Figure 16-5) also can be used
able Velcro affixing strip (3M). Note the brim of the collar extends
beyond the patient's nose.
to protect the skin.
Positioning of the Neurologic Patient
If the patient is umable to sit stermally, foam rolls, pads,
wedges, or rolled-up towels can be placed beside the
collar, it is too tight. If three or more fingers can be passed
patient to help it maintain a stermal position and prevent it
under the collar, it is too loose. Most commonly, e-collars
from falling over (Figure 16-6).
are too loose and the patient has little trouble getting it off.
Patients must become accustomed to daily tasks such as
Elizabethan Collars
eating and drinking while wearing an e-collar. Food and
The Elizabethan collar, or e-collar, is very helpful to dis-
water must be placed close enough to the patients for them
courage patients from licking their incision. The art of
to reach the bowls. Attention must be paid to the patient's
a functioning e-collar lies in the sizing and fitting of the
appetite and willingness to eat. Many patients have diff-
collar. Elizabethan collars are typically made of plastic, but
culty learming to eat while wearing an e-collar. In this case
softer cloth e-collars are also commercially available.
the e-collar can be removed, feeding should be supervised,
 and the collar promptly reapplied after eating or drinking.
extend well past the patient's nose (Figure 16-7). This
In addition many patients refuse to eat or drink during their
ensures the patient cannot lick the incision. The collar
stay at the hospital. Hand feeding or assisted syringe
should be comfortably snug around the patient's neck. To
feeding using pureed canned food is recommended, but 
check the tightness of the collar, two fingers are passed
feeding should be slow enough to allow ample time for
under the collar. If two fingers cannot be passed under the
swallowing. Patients should wear the e-collar at all times
280
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
in the hospital and at home until the sutures or staples are
signs, the time elapsed since the patient became paretic/
removed and any open wounds are adequately healed.
paralyzed, and any use of steroids or other antinfamma-
tory medication. After a patient has lost deep pain there is
Medications
a 50% chance it will regain functional mobility if surgery
Although the decision regarding prescribed medications is
is performed within 24 hours. In general every hour past
ultimately the veterinarian's decision, the adept veterinary
 24 hours from the point when deep pain is lost decreases
technician must always be aware of the current medica-
poos si a tAleguauodxa Aiaaonai [ny e og sisougoid a
tions for each patient. Unflavored medications are best
to remember that the loss of deep pain does not definitively
administered disguised, if possible, in food or a treat before
preclude a dog from regaining motor function. However,
mealtimes. The technical staff often is responsible for
 dogs that do not recover deep pain, rarely regain conscious
medicating patients, and this can be facilitated with soft,
voluntary motor function and their ambulation is not
treat-like dog medication devices (Greenies Pill Pockets,
normal. It is also important to remember that any dog that
Nutro Products, Inc., Franklin, TN). The technical staff is
 has intact deep pain in its affected limbs has the potential
in a position to make the veterinarian aware of any discrep-
to recover function.
ancies regarding medication, such as a history of concur-
rent nonsteroidal antinfammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and
Postoperative Considerations
corticosteroids, or an abrupt switch from one NSAID to
another without a washout time in between. The veterinary
technician is also essential to identify side effects a patient
Postoperative Pain Management
may be experiencing, such as vomiting, diarrhea, or
Pain management is a priority in orthopedic or neurologic
melena. These classic NSAID side effects usually occur 2
surgery. Multimodal analgesia has become the standard of
to 3 days after beginning NSAID administration but may
care for postoperative pain control in veterinary medicine.
take up to 2 weeks to develop. If such signs develop the
 Many patients receive local or regional nerve blocks
veterinarian should be notified immediately and the NS AID
or epidurals before or immediately after surgery. It is
discontinued
extremely important to monitor the urinary status of
 It is important to realize that many owners may give
patients after receiving epidurals. A high percentage of
their pets aspirin, but do not consider this as a medication
 patients retain urine following epidural morphine (Dura-
because it is easily obtained over the counter. It is critical
 morph) administration. There are three suggested mecha-
nisms that may explain urinary retention following epidural
side effects from drug interactions. Aspirin is a nonselec-
morphine administration: (1) local detrusor inhibition
tive COX inhibitor and may increase gastrointestinal side
through opiate receptors; (2) inhibitory action on the
effects when given with other NSAIDs or COXTB class
primary micturition center in the caudal brainstem; and
medications.
(3) inhibition of parasympathetic nervous activity follow-
ing binding of morphine with opiate receptors in the sacral
Understanding When, What, and How
spinal cord, resulting in detrusor muscle relaxation and
Understanding when a patient is a candidate for surgery.
 increased bladder filling.56 A 50/50 mixture of bupivacaine
what procedure is recommended, and how it is performed
and Duramorph may be administered to provide more bal-
comes with years of experience of the veterinary surgeon.
anced analgesia.
For canine rehabilitation practitioners it is beneficial to be
Additional medications commonly used in multimodal
aware of certain factors regarding the patient's condition.
analgesic protocols include NSAIDs such as deracoxib or
For example if a patient has sustained a fracture several
carprofen; opioids such as hydromorphone, buprenorphine,
days before surgical repair, the injury will be more difficult
or morphine; and other analgesics such as gabapentin, pre-
to repair because of contracture of muscle, fibrosis, and
gabalin, or amantadine. Physical modalities such as cryo-
early callus formation. This may make the initial rehabili-
therapy or transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation also
tation period somewhat more challenging because of
 may be used in postoperative pain management protocols.
greater surgical trauma during fracture repair. It is also
The veterinary staff must also be adept at monitoring and
beneficial to know which fractures should be surgically
assessing pain and able to discerm painful responses or
repaired, and which may be managed successfully with
 behaviors in contrast to the dysphoria that can occur during
extermal coaptation devices. Additionally knowledge of
anesthetic recovery.
common orthopedic procedures is essential to the rehabili-
Managing the Recumbent Patient
tation practitioner to fully understand postoperative con-
siderations and the basic care of these cases.
Some conditions require a lengthy recovery and animals
For the neurologic patient with intervertebral disk
may initially be recumbent. During this critical time, it is
disease or trauma, triage begins with the history. It is vital
     n  
to collect information regarding the duration of clinical
avoid serious complications.
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
281
B
Figure 16-8 Incisions follwing surgery. A, One day postoperative bilateral TPLO incisions. Note that there is swelling and edema, resulting
in constriction of the soft tissues by the sutures. There is also bruising. Bilateral procedures may be at greater risk for incisional complications.
B, More normal one day postoperative TPLO incision.
Patients should be tumed every 4 hours if they cannot
Although hydrogen peroxide may recruit free radicals and
turm themselves. They should be placed on a padded bed.
cause oxidative injury to tissue, the use of hydrogen per-
An absorbent pad should be placed under the animal if 
oxide to clean blood and other fuids from the skin around
 incontinence is an issue. For patients that urinate frequently
the wound has minimal effects on healing if not directly
it may be necessary to have the animal on an elevated grate
 applied to the incision. For standard orthopedic procedures
that will not allow urine to pool under the animal.
a nonadherent pad is applied with triple antibiotic ointment
 Animals that are recumbent for a very long time may
and affixed over the incision with wide adhesive tape
be at risk for developing decubital ulcers. It may take as
(Figure 16-9). This temporary dressing serves to protect
little as 1 hour of sustained pressure to develop a deep
the incision and may be removed when the incision is
decubitus.7 In particular, animals with thin skin and promi-
sealed after 2 to 3 days if there is no drainage. Often the
 nent bony protuberances, such as greyhounds and whip-
 postoperative orthopedic patient's incision will have slight
 pets, are especially prone to developing decubital ulcers.
 bloody or serosanguinous discharge the day of surgery and
Prevention of ulcers is far superior to treatment of ulcers.
the day following surgery. This is considered to be normal
Therefore the skin should be assessed each day for redness
and becomes less prominent as a fibrin seal is created
of the skin or other evidence of skin breakdown. If redness
approximately 24 to 72 hoursa after surgery (Figure 16-10).
or irritation of skin is noted, a "doughnut'’ may be made 
When allowable a cold compress can be applied immedi-
to help distribute pressure away from the area.
ately after surgery for 15 to 20 minutes to the operative site
to provide analgesia, and to decrease infammation and
Care of the Incision
edema formation.9 10 The patient's incision should be moni-
The adept practitioner should be familiar with the charac-
tored daily for any drainage or discharge, apposition of
teristics and appearance of "normal'’ incisions, in order to
wound edges, excessive inflammation or swelling, and any
 properly identify questionable or compromised incisions 
missing staples or sutures (Figure 16-11). Before discharge
(Figure 16-8). It is important to note the location of the
the patient's incision should be evaluated and cleaned
incision(s), the number of incisions, number of individual
again if needed. The patient should not be discharged with
sutures, and the type of incision closure(s). Effort should
an actively draining or open incision (Figure 16-12).
be made to ensure the incision(s) is clean and dry. Follow-
 Patients with edema in a single limb should have this limb
ing surgical closure of the incision in the operating room
elevated to help prevent swelling by lying on the opposite
the skin around the incision is cleaned with either wanm
side and using a rolled towel or pillow to elevate the edem-
sterile saline or hydrogen peroxide and allowed to dry.
atous limb if tolerated.
282
Section IlI
Patient Assessment and Management
REF1238
KENDALI
TELF
KENDALL
TELFAM
Non-AdherentDressing
inx8in(7.5cm
KENDALI
Figure 16-9 Placement of a protective dressing following surgery. A, Materials needed to apply a temporary dressing. B, A nonadherent contact 
dressing is placed on an adhesive bandage. Triple antibiotic ointment is applied to the pad. C and D, Application to the incision. E, Final place-
ment of temporary protective dressing.
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
283
Figure 16-10 Bilateral incisions for luxating patella corrective surgery. A, 24 hours postoperatively. Note that the sutures are somewhat tight.
B, 48 hours postoperatively. C, 72 hours postoperatively.
Cold Compresses
extra-small to small cold compress should be used. Like-
Cold compresses may be applied to the operative site
wise for a mastiff with a femur fracture repair, a large to
immediately following surgery. Common practice is to
extra-large cold compress would be best. For more infor-
affix a nonadherent sterile pad with adherent tape over the
mation on types of cold compresses, the reader is referred
incision, and apply the compress directly on or around the
to the chapter on superficial thermal modalities.
temporary dressing. Studies of human patients have indi-
Warm Compresses
cated that it is not effective to apply a cold compress
through a thick padded bandage.1 Thus cryotherapy should
It is important to remember that if the tissues are inflamed
be performed at the time of bandage changes if a bandage
from disease, injury, or surgery, application of heat is con-
must remain on the patient. When applying a cold com-
traindicated. Wanm compresses may begin after the acute
press, a barrier such as a nonadherent sterile pad or very
postoperative inflammatory phase has ceased, usually
thin towel may be placed between the skin and the cold
around 72 hours postoperatively or postinjury. The applica-
compress to maintain patient comfort (Figure 16-13). It is
tion of heat results in increased blood fow to the area, and
important to use a compress appropriately sized for the
possibly decreased muscle spasms. When applying a warm
patient. For example in a small dog with a distal radius and
compress when drainage is present, always provide a
ulnar fracture that has been repaired with a bone plate, an
barrier, such as a nonadherent sterile pad or an absorbent
284
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
Figure 16-11 A, Postoperative stifle wound
repair with marked increase in erythema and
edema. B, Postoperative femur fracture repair with
a compromised incision. Note area of missing
sutures.
Figure 16-12  Postoperative TPL0 surgery with seriously compro-
mised incision, most likely secondary to self-trauma and infection.
Note drainage and TPLO plate can be visualied through the open
Figure 16-13 Crushed ice and water in plastic bag. Wrap in cold
towel to protect skin for cryotherapy application.
pad with a plastic backing, between the skin and the com-
the procedure performed and the severity of the injury.
press to reduce disease transmission. It is important to
Ideally massage is perfonmed following superficial thermal
always test the compress before application on the patient
modalities and before assisted ambulation or controlled
to be certain that it is not too hot. Several commercially
 therapeutic exercises. It is important to begin the massage
made compresses are available. For more information
distally and work proximally to increase lymphatic and
regarding types of warm compresses, see Chapter 18,
venous fow and thereby decrease edema (Figure 16-14).
Superficial Thermal Modalities.
The edges of the incision should be avoided. The degree
of pressure applied by the hand and fingers should be
Massage
 gentle but finm. Patients that have compromised incisions
 Soft tissue massage can be beneficial in reducing postop-
 Or skin grafts are not candidates for soft tissue massage.
erative edema. The degree of limb edema can vary follow-
The reader is referring to the chapter on massage for more
ing orthopedic surgery depending on the size of the patient,
information regarding massage techniques.
Chapter 16 
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
285
surgical repairs (Figure 16-17). Caution should be taken if
the patient is excessively painful or ill tempered. To best
 help these patients begin early ambulation, the patient must
trust the caregiver. Therefore some time must be invested
in allowing the patient to become accustomed to the
assistive device and the procedures involved in placement
and assisting ambulation. Numerous assisted ambulation
devices such as slings and harmesses are commercially
available. The practitioner should be familiar with the
devices, how they work, and how to graduate a patient from
one device to a more challenging device. For more on this
topic see Chapter 17, Assistive Devices.
Everyday Activities as
Rehabilitation Exercises
 Encourage owners to make everyday activities a rehabilita-
tion exercise in disguise. For example, while a postopera-
Figure 16-14 Massage, specifically effleurage, performed distally
tive patient is standing to eat from a food bowl, an
to proximally on the hind limbs of a dog with pelvic fractures repaired
surgically.
opportunity is presented to do some standing and weight-
shifting exercises. Not only will the dog probably be more
interested in the food than the standing or weight-shifting
Assisted Standing
exercise, but the behavior is tolerated and positively rein-
forced with the food (Figure 16-18).
Standing exercises focus on strengthening shoulder, elbow,
hip and stifle extensors and reeducating muscles needed
Nursing Care for the Orthopedic Patient
for balance and proprioception. Several approaches can be
used to facilitate standing. Particularly when a patient is
large, assistive devices such as slings, physio rolls, mobil-
Postoperative Orthopedic Infections
ity carts, wheelchairs, or lifts may be used to maintain a
 Infection control measures begin with hospital admission
 patient in a standing position (Figure 16-15). In smaller
and continue in the prep room and operating room. The
patients, the therapist can manually support the patient to
cages and runs that house the patients should be properly
maintain a standing position (Figure 16-16, A). Two
cleaned between patients. Chlorhexidine or povidone
common variations of this exercise are static standing and
iodine surgical scrub is used to cleanse the skin of patients.
sit-to-stand exercises. Static standing is typically per-
The presence of pyoderma, a skin infection, is a clinician-
formed three to five times daily for 2 to 5 minutes or until
dependent precaution for surgery. The client should be
the patient fatigues. It is useful to support the patient under
 informed if pyoderma is present before the surgical proce-
the ischiatic tuberosity and on the cranial aspect of the
dure and any risks should be thoroughly explained. The
stifes to facilitate a normal standing angle of the hind
surgery proceeds depending on the surgeon's and client's
limbs (Figure 16-16, B). Conversely one often will need
 decisions. There is some increased risk of postoperative
two people to maintain limb position in a tetraparetic
infection if pyoderma exists, especially if implants are
patient even with abdominal support from a physio roll or
used. If surgery is postponed the procedure is performed
sling system. It is important to maintain normal foot posi-
when the patient is clear of infection after completing
tion at all times during this exercise (prevent knuckling and
antibiotic therapy.
encourage weight bearing). It is recommended that one
Other factors can also increase infection risk, such as
should perform standing exercises at the time of eating or
prolonged operative and anesthesia times, number of per-
drinking, because standing often improves while the patient
is distracted by the act of eating and drinking.
and the experience level of personnel. The level of microbes
in the air of the operating room is directly proportional to
Assisted Ambulation
the number of people moving in the room; thus Staphylo-
Assisted ambulation is paramount with orthopedic and
coccus infections can be reduced if traffic is limited in the
neurologic patients. It is necessary to assist postoperative
 operating room during surgical procedures.1? Effort should
patients getting into and out of cages, and to help them up
be made to reduce operative times and limit foot traffic in
from a recumbent position, as well as while ambulating.
the operating room.
The caregiver provides assistance when needed and also
 Perioperative antibiotic therapy is indicated in contami-
 prevents the patient from falling or overloading tissues and
nated cases (open surgeries), patients with severe soft
286
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
C
and therapy balls. B, Assisted standing over therapy roll by a dog recovering from a cerebellar infarction. C, Note manual placement of the left
sasiplaxa bupueis paisisse bunp ioojanot yal aui jo juawaeid penuew aion 'a 'sasplaxa bupueis paisisse bunp poot pusy
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
287
Figure 16-17  Assisted standing performed using a harness and
black elastic therapy band.
B
Figure 16-16  A, Assisted manual standing by a dachshund follow-
ing hemilaminectomy. B, Another manually assisted standing tech-
nique is to support the patient under the ischiatic tuberosity and on
the cranial aspect of the stifles to facilitate a normal standing angle
of the hind limbs.
tissue swelling or bruising as a result of trauma, or in cases
with lengthy operative times (longer than 2 hours).3
Cefazolin is commonly used at a dose of 22 mg/kg given
20 minutes before surgery, and every 2 to 4 hours thereafter
Figure 16-18  Assisted standing exercise over a therapy roll, per-
throughout the surgical procedure. The most common
formed while eating to encourage standing behavior and provide
types of infectious agents seen in postoperative surgical
positive reinforcement.
wounds are Staphylococcus species and Escherichia coli.'3
A factor contributing to antibiotic resistance is the
 Overuse of antimicrobial therapy. Again, although is it the
tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO) that developed
responsibility of the veterinarian to prescribe antibiotics,
 a postoperative infection. Wound management was per-
the adept therapist should know when and why antibiot-
formed daily under sedation and consisted of fushing.
ics are administered and make the veterinarian aware of
wound debridement, and packing it with antimicrobial
which antibiotics were prescribed, for what purpose, and
gauze. A drain was placed and the wound was surgically
the time period of treatment.
closed after 2 weeks.
Infection can be a costly complication of orthopedic
 In human medicine the incidence of methicillin-resistant 
surgery and affect the ability of the patient to undergo
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections has increased.
physical rehabilitation. The patient in Figure 16-12 had a
The term methicillin-resistant was originally used in 1961
288
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
Recognizing Signs of Infection
after a Staphylococcus aureus infection in the United
Kingdom was found to be resistant to methicillin.14 MRSA
is a gram-positive bacterium that is resistant to methicillin
with most infections occurring within 7 days after surgery.
and many other β-lactam antimicrobials; β-lactam antimi-
The classic signs of inflammation are heat, redness, swell-
crobials include penicillins and cephalosporins. The major 
ing, pain, and loss of function; the cardinal signs of infec-
vector for transmission is unwashed hands, although
tion are often the same but they persist beyond the acute
MRSA can live on the patient's skin, in the environment,
infammatory period and may be accompanied by dis-
and on surfaces for extended periods of time. Approxi-
charge from the incision, fever, lethargy, and poor to no
mately 25% to 40% of humans are carriers of the organism,
 appetite. However, local abnormalities are more commonly
mostly in the nasal passages.'5 The organism lives harmo-
observed than signs of systemic illness with MRSI infec-
niously with the host, but an immunocompromised indi-
tions in orthopedic procedures. Often the patient is dis-
vidual or skin wounds can allow infection to occur. These
charged, and the client calls with concerms a few days to 2
infections can have dire consequences in humans, but so
weeks after surgery. The most common clinical history is
far do not appear to be life threatening in canine patients.
a sudden decrease in use of the surgical limb, or the limb
Morbidity generally consists of incisional dehiscence,
may develop significant edema. The surgical limb may also
septic arthritis, and chronically draining wounds necessitat-
have a seroma or active serosanguinous or purulent drain-
ing implant removal.
age from the surgical site. A seroma is a collection of
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus was con-
serum in the body, producing a fuctuant to finm swelling.
sidered solely a human pathogen for many years until it
 If clinical signs of a postoperative infection are noted by
was first isolated in a dairy cow in 1972.16 Since then the
the client, the patient should be seen by the veterinarian as 
veterinary medical community has seen an increase in the
soon as possible.
incidence of postoperative infections. Specifically infec-
 A sample is obtained from the affected area and sub-
tions caused by MRSA and more commonly, methicillin-
mitted for cytology, culture, and sensitivity. To aseptically
resistant Staphylococcus pseudintermedius (MRSI), have
drain a seroma, the site should be clipped and cleaned
been identified following both soft tissue and orthopedic
thoroughly with an aseptic scrub such as chlorhexidine.
surgeries, as well as cases of pyoderma. Although a stan-
Wearing exam gloves or sterile gloves, a butterfy catheter
dard method for typing and naming MRSA strains has
or needle attached to a syringe is inserted into the seroma.
yet to be developed, many methods of nomenclature are
The fuid is aspirated and collected into the proper tubes
currently in use.s MRSA infections in small animals are
or material is placed on a culturette. A seroma does not
predominated by the strain USA 100, whereas MRSA
necessarily indicate that an infection is present. The diag-
infections in large animals are predominately strain USA
 nosis of infection is based on cytology or culture results.
500.7 Although it was previously thought that MRSA
When patients have a postoperative infection, the area
 could only be transmitted from human to animal, emerging
is often infamed, edematous, wanm to the touch, and
evidence indicates that MRSA can be transmitted in
painful on palpation. Postoperative infections may involve
both directions, from human to animal and from animal
the joint, periarticular soft tissues, or the site of an implant
to human. After an animal becomes colonized it can act
such as a plate or pin. In any case, radiographs are indi-
as a reservoir, transmitting the infection to humans or
cated to help determine the extent of the infection. While
 Other animals.17 Although identification of carriers is para-
the patient is sedated an arthrocentesis may be performed
mount to prevention of MRSA and MRSI transmission,
to determine if intraarticular infection is present. Septic
routine screening of animals is not yet practiced; therefore
arthritis is associated with greater postoperative morbidity
the possibility remains that colonized animals will go
and less favorable long-term outcomes.
 To aseptically perform an arthrocentesis the site should
determine adequate treatment regimens for MRSA- and
be clipped and cleaned thoroughly with an aseptic scrub
MRSI-infected animals, control of MRSA and MRSI
such as chlorhexidine. Wearing sterile gloves, a 20- or
transmission, and environmental sanitation. In the interim
 22-gauge 1% -inch needle is inserted into the joint, usually
 practicing proper hand hygiene and sanitization is integral
just medial to the patellar tendon. In the event that the joint
to the prevention of MRSA and MRSI transmission. In
is not infected, caution should be used to avoid affected
addition, disposable gowns, gloves, and masks should
skin and subcutaneous tissues while obtaining joint fuid
 sssa pm p s  on m 
to avoid carrying infection into the joint. Fluid is allowed
afflicted patients. Signs of MRSA and MRSI in dogs
to drip from the needle into a sterile collection vial. If fuid
include acute edema around the incision or wound, exces-
does not drain a syringe may be attached and fuid gently
sive scratching or licking, pimple-like lesions on the skin
aspirated and collected into the proper tubes or culturettes.
with larger “bumps"’ in the area, and drainage from the
Normal joint fuid is clear and viscous. Abnonmal joint
wounds.
fuid may be cloudy and red-tinged, indicating the presence
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
289
Coaptation devices should be well padded and comfort-
able, well tolerated by the patient, provide support and
protection to the injured limb, provide compression of the
soft tissues to aid in edema reduction, provide stabilization
of the limb, should not cause morbidity, and be cost
effective.
Splints and Casts
Basic coaptation guidelines should be followed. Splints
or casts may be used to stabilize fractures after reduction.
It is important to immobilize the joint above and below
the fracture; otherwise the cast or splint may act as a
fulcrum at the fracture site. Thus only fractures distal to
the elbow and stife may effectively be treated with exter-
nal coaptation.
Figure 16-19 Postoperative infected TPLO after several days of
Splints and casts may be used with variable success in
daily aggressive wound management. The sutures are for securing a
stabilization of distal limb fractures, such as the radius and
tie-over dressing.
ulna. Case selection depends on the type of fracture, and
the signalment and demeanor of the patient. Malalignment
of blood; or cloudy white or yellow, indicating the pres-
of the fracture may result in limb deformities, gait abnor-
ence of purulent material.
malities, and osteoarthritis.
The fuid should be cultured for both aerobic and anaer-
When applying coaptation devices, the limb should
obic bacteria. It generally takes 72 hours to obtain culture
be maintained in a neutral standing position with joints
and antibiotic susceptibility profiles of organism(s). In this
placed at a functional standing angle. Immobilizing the
case, the client is instructed to continue on an empirical
antibiotic or perhaps no antibiotic, until the results are
bearing may produce cartilage changes similar to those of
available. During this time it is imperative that the patient
osteoarthritis,2° and joint stiffness as a result of immobili-
be prevented from licking the wound. After culture and
zation in extension may result in a poorly functional limb.
susceptibility results are available the patient is placed on 
Components of a Bandage
the appropriate antibiotic therapy for 3 to 6 weeks. In
 a  n a  d a sas s
 The primary contact layer is a nonadherent sterile dressing
 so aq  psu aq   o 
(e.g., a Telfa pad, Covidien; Mansfield, MA). This layer is
wound debridement (Figure 16-19).
in direct contact with the incision, and a sterile triple anti-
 In severe cases in which an implant may be harboring
biotic ointment can be applied between the incision and
an infection, the implant may need to be removed after
primary contact layer. The secondary layer of the bandage
bony healing is completed. In such cases continued antibi-
is the padding or absorptive layer, such as cotton cast
otic therapy is often required. Radiographs are taken to
padding. The tertiary layer of the bandage is the protective
confinm bony union and the implant is removed and
layer, such as Vet Wrap or Elastikon (Johnson & Johnson,
 infected tissue is resected and cultured. Following implant
Langhorme, PA) (Figure 16-20).
removal, postoperative care is the same as after the initial
Principles of Bandage Application
surgical repair.
There are several principles of bandage application that
External Coaptation Devices: Bandages,
should be followed. The limb and joints should be placed
Splints, and Casts
in a neutral standing position for bandage application.
The roles of coaptation devices are threefold; they can
 Non-stretch adhesive tape should never be placed circum-
 provide temporary support before surgical intervention,
ferentially around the limb. Doing so could lead to serious
complications including compromised limb circulation,
support instead of surgical intervention. The primary func-
ischemia, and limb necrosis. Tape stirrups should be
tions of a coaptation device include protection, absorption,
applied to either the medial and lateral or cranial and
compression, and stabilization.' The device should protect
caudal aspects of the distal limb. These tape stirrups aid in
the incision from bacterial contamination and from self-
preventing the bandage from sliding distally off the limb.
mutilation. It should be absorptive if a wound is present,
The contact layer, usually a nonadherent sterile dress-
to decrease accumulation of exudates. The contact layer
ing, is applied to the incision or wound. A doughnut can
should be appropriate for any wounds that may be present.
 be custom made for a patient and is beneficial when placed
290
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
KENDALL
HEE1238
TELFAM
Non-Adherent Dre
A
C
D
Figure 16-20 Materials for a soft padded bandage (modified Robert Jones bandage). A, Materials needed to start the bandage and materials 
for the contact layer. B and C, Materials for the secondary layer of bandage (padding and compression). D, Materials for the tertiary or outer
layer of bandage.
Over a pressure point, such as the tuber calcis, olecranon,
throughout all layers. Cast padding is often textured and
 Or accessory carpal bone, to prevent pressure sores. The
the textured markings fatten when the material is pulled
 doughnut can be made from cotton cast padding or roll
taut.  If too  much tension is applied  the  material  will
cotton. After folding several layers a hole may be cut in
tear. If the secondary layer of cast padding is too loose
the center so that the doughnut fits over the pressure point.
the bandage may slip distally and irritate the tissues under
The purpose of the doughnut is to distribute the forces of
the bandage. A compression layer is then applied over the
bandage compression over a greater surface area rather
cotton, using gauze material applied under tension while
than just over the pressure point. Just adding more cotton
wrapping the gauze circumferentially from distal to proxi-
over a pressure point without a doughnut may actually
mal, and applying it in such a fashion as to cause slight
increase the pressure over the point.
 intermal rotation of the limb (Figure 16-21, B). The gauze
When beginning application of the bandage, cast
should not be placed beyond the cotton padding. which
padding or roll cotton is placed circumferentially around
could cause vascular compromise. It is very easy to apply
the limb, always rolling the material from distal to proxi-
the rolled gauze too tight, so careful application is neces-
mal (Figure 16-21, A). The tips of the middle digits should
sary. When working on the proximal aspects of the bandage,
be barely showing from the end of the bandage. This will
it might be helpful to have the limb abducted to allow the
allow veterinary care providers and owners to check for
cast padding, rolled gauze, and Vet Wrap to be applied as
coolness and swelling of the digits, which might indicate
proximally as possible. When applying the tertiary outer
that the bandage is too tight. When applying material it 
layer  the  material  should be  loosely applied  by  either
is helpful to roll the material on from lateral to medial,
unwrapping it and then carefully re-wrapping it to loosen
overlapping by 50% and distributing pressure uniformly
the elasticity of the material and ensure the material is
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
291
C
Figure 16-21  Placement of a soft padded (modified Robert Jones) bandage. A, Application of rolled cotton. B, Application of rolled gauze to
provide compression. C and D, Application of the outer layer. Note: all layers are applied in a distal to proximal direction.
Soft-Padded Bandages
not applied too tight, or unroll some of the material, allow
the material to undergo elastic recoil, and then roll it on
The Robert Jones bandage is one of the most frequently
the limb as it is applied in a distal to proximal direction
applied coaptation bandages in veterinary medicine. It pro-
(Figure 16-21, C and D). Some practitioners apply a strip
of Elastikon at the most proximal aspect of the bandage to
before or after surgery. Overall the Robert Jones bandage
the skin to help prevent bandage slipping. Care must be
is a safe bandage and few complications are seen. The main
layer is rolled cotton, which yields the final diameter of the
such as the medial thigh, to avoid irritation of the skin by
bandage, which is 40% to 50% larger than the original
the adhesive.
limb. The modifed Robert Jones bandage is similar to
292
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
Type IA
Type IB
 Maximal Type Il
Minimal Type IlI
Tie-in
Figure 16-22 Classification of external fixator frame configurations. A, Type IA. One plane, unilateral. B, Type IB. Two plane, unilateral. C, Type
' 'sinon is 't pa bins yewr eus l 'nssoy wo) uno u-all t jeate ued oi ill ad a jeate 'aued auo ll
Mosby. Second and fourth images modified from Johnson AL, Dunning D: Atlas of orthopedic surgical procedures of the dog and cat, St. Louis,
2005, Saunders in Fossum, TW: Smal Animaf Surgery ed. 4, St Louis, 2013, Mosby.)
the Robert Jones, except less cotton layer is applied, thus
number of sides of the limb from which the fixator
significantly decreasing the size of the bandage. The modi-
 protrudes.
fed Robert Jones bandage provides the same advantages
 Type 1A is unilateral-uniplanar; usually applied to the
as the Robert Jones bandage, yet it is more economical
medial aspect of the radius or tibia and to the lateral
and tolerable for the patient. The modified Robert Jones
humerus or femur.
 bandage is the most commonly applied bandage following
 Type 1B is unilateral-biplanar; usually applied to the
surgeries of the elbow or stifle, or distal to these joints.
radius or tibia.
However, neither the Robert Jones bandage nor the modi-
 Type 2 is bilateral-uniplanar; applied only to the radius 
fied Robert Jones bandage provides adequate stabilization
or tibia, it cannot be applied to the humerus or femur
for fractures. Bandages should be changed daily up to
because of the close proximity to the body on the
weekly as directed by the veterinary surgeon.
medial side.
 Type 3 is bilateral-biplanar; applied only to the radius
or tibia, it cannot be applied to the humerus or femur
Bandaging an External Fixator
because of the close proximity to the body on the
Extemal fixators are used to repair fractures or joint luxa-
medial side.
tions and may be applied in various configurations. They
The number of pins and planes directly affect the strength
can counteract the forces of rotation, bending, shearing.
and stiffness of the extemal fixator. When an extermal
and distraction. Extermal fixator configurations can be
fix ator is used with an IM pin, it is called a tie-in configura-
designed to meet the stabilization needs of a fracture and
tion, and results in greater strength and stiffness of the
can be subsequently modifed or destabilized throughout
fixation.
the healing process.?l Pin factors, such as pin type, size,
Pins may be placed in different ways. Half pins pene-
number, location and length, and frame configuration,
trate both cortices of the bone but only one skin surface.
affect the stiffness of the fixator and its ability to resist the
Full pins penetrate both cortices and both skin surfaces.
forces associated with weight bearing, such as bending.
 Clamps and connecting rods adjoin fixator pins and con-
 axial loading, and rotation.
necting bars to each other.
There are three main types of linear extermal fixators
Circular or Ilizarov ring extermal fixators are multipla-
(Figure 16-22). The fixator configurations are named for
nar and multilateral, facilitate distraction of long bones,
the number of planes occupied by the fixator and the
and may be used to correct angular limb deformities.
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
293
Special wires or small pins are placed through the bone
pins protruding from the apparatus should be covered to
and connected to rings with clamps. Distraction osteogen-
protect the patient. The ability to improvise is important;
esis induces new bone formation between two bone ends
items used to cover pin points include rubber caps, injec-
(after an osteotomy is performed) that are distracted over
tion caps, and sponges folded over the pin point and
time. The rate of distraction osteogenesis is 1 mm per day
securely taped (Figure 16-23, C). Next the apparatus is
and the rhythm is 0.25 mm four times a day.21
wrapped with cast padding, roll gauze, and Vet Wrap.
Extermal fixators provide a bandaging challenge. Although
noting that the limb itself is not incorporated in the bandage
there are many different methods to bandage an extermal
(Figure 16-23, D through I) unless edema is present or
fixator, certain principles should be followed. Each pin-
wounds must be covered. In these cases, the bandage is
skin interface should be covered with a primary contact
placed similar to a modifed Robert Jones bandage, incor-
layer. Often a sterile nonadherent pad is cut to accommo-
 porating the extermal fixator as previously described. An
date the pin and trimmed to an appropriate smaller size.
adequate but minimum amount of cast padding should be
Sterile triple antibiotic ointment is placed on each pad
applied because if the bandage is too large it may slip off.
before applying the contact layer to the patient (Figure
Extemal fixator bandages should be rechecked weekly.
16-23, A). The pads can be held in place with recycled
The bandage is removed, the apparatus is assessed for
dry scrub sponges placed around the pins, connecting rods,
loosening or drainage, and radiographs are taken at the
and linkage devices (Figure 16-23, B). The sponges also
veterinarian's discretion. While the patient is still sedated
provide padding for the patient and the apparatus. All sharp
from the radiographs, the pin tracts are thoroughly cleaned
D
Figure 16-23 Bandage placement over an external skeletal fixator. A, Nonadherent pads cut to accommodate external fixator pins for treat-
ment of a fracture of the humerus. B, Recycled scrub sponges, cleaned and dried, can be used to hold the nonadherent pads in place and provide
01 paydde s! bupped ises uonoy '3 pue a 'luawuouaua pue juaied ayi paioid oi sjuiod ud jaaos oi pasn aq ues sdes uosalul '5 bupped
the apparatus.
294
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
G
Figure 16-23, cont'd F, Roll gauze is applied in a similar manner. G, An outer wrap is applied in a similar manner. H, Note that the limb is 
not included in the bandage, unless edema is present or wounds must be covered. I, Finished product: bandage placed over an external skeletal
fixator of the humerus.
and supplies are prepared for bandage change (Figure
16-25). When accessible it may be necessary to scrub and
16-24). Using a cotton ball or gauze sponge and chlorhexi-
rinse portions of the limb. The limb is allowed to air dry
dine scrub, gently scrub around the pin tracts to remove
or a hair dryer placed on the cool and low setting can be
dried exudate; sterile cotton tipped applicators also may be
used to expedite the drying process as tolerated by the
used. Gently rinse with warm saline on a cotton ball, gauze,
patient. Depending on radiographic healing the veterinar-
ian may choose to remove some pins, exchange connecting
each pin tract until all are free of dried exudates (Figure
rods, or remove the device entirely. Removing the fixator
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
295
Splints
A splint is essentially a bandage with incorporation of a
stiff supportive device. Splints can be made from various
materials. Commercial splints are available, such as spoon
 splints, Mason Metasplints, and Quick Splints (Jorgensen
Laboratories, Loveland, CO). Some splints can be custom
made using aluminum rods or casting material. Finding the
appropriate size of commercially available splints for a
particular patient can present a challenge. It is important
that the splint fit properly. Mason Metasplints and Spoon
Splints should cradle the caudal aspect of the limb and
not extend proximal to the elbow or tarsus. Quick Splints
should ft properly at every joint angle. It is important the
splint is applied between layers of the bandage, most com-
Figure 16-24 Wound management and bandaging materials
Spica splints are used to immobilize all joints of the
needed for bandage change of an external fixator bandage of the
humerus.
forelimb or hind limb, but are more commonly applied to
the forelimb. The Spica splint can be applied in cases of
 humeral fracture repair, and closed or open reduction of an
elbow luxation. The Spica splint envelops the affected limb
and the torso of the patient. The limb is held in a functional
standing position. After cast padding has been applied, the
splint material, such as premeasured and prebent rods or
fiberglass cast material, is applied from the distal digits
over the dorsum to the proximal scapula of the contralateral
limb. Roll gauze is then applied followed by an outer wrap.
Monitoring the splint after application is important because
Spica splints can cause abrasions in the axillary area.
Casts
Casts are a conservative method to stabilize fractures
 in young patients after closed reduction. Common frac-
tures include simple fractures of the radius and ulna or
fractures of the radius with the ulna intact. Similarly simple
Figure 16-25  Pin tracts are cleaned with dilute chlorhexidine scrub
fractures of the tibia and fibula or fractures of the tibia with
and warm saline to remove exudate.
the fibula intact may be managed with a cast.
Cast application involves making sure the leg is clean
and dry before application. Long hair should be clipped to
in stages gradually reduces the stability of the fixator and
a shorter length before cast placement, but not surgically
increases loading of the bone, which helps to stimulate
clipped or shaved. To maintain patient comfort during
callus development and maturation. The extermal fixator is
reduction of the fracture and application of the cast, the
rebandaged at each recheck or adjustment. The process of
patient is lightly anesthetized or heavily sedated with ade-
weekly rechecks continues as directed by the veterinarian
quate analgesics. Tape stirrups are applied to either the
aq uo smeedde aun pue paeay seu Ainfun au inun
 medial and lateral or cranial and caudal aspects of the distal
removed.
limb. An appropriate sized stockinette is applied to the leg.
Pin loosening is the most common postoperative com-
Traction is then placed on the limb to aid in fracture reduc-
plication of extermal fixators. Factors that contribute to pin
tion. The fracture site may be palpated and manipulated to
Joosening are excessive micromotion, damage to the bone
aid in reduction. It is important that the limb is not placed
at the time of insertion, and fatigue failure of the bone
such that varus or valgus deformation of the limb is present.
cortex.77 Pin tract infections can also occur and result in
To avoid these deformations the limb may be placed so that
increasing purulent discharge from the pin-skin interface,
the limb is hung from the ceiling during fracture reduction
reduced limb use, and pain with palpation over the site. In
to make alignment of the limb easier.
addition, delayed fracture healing, joint stiffness, and iat-
 Circular pads or doughnuts are applied over bony prom-
rogenic fracture are other complications that can occur.
inences. Cast padding is then applied, moving in a spiral
296
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
Figure 16-26
5To maintain coverage and protection of a bandage.
commercially made bandage covers can be used.
Figure 16-27 The Velpeau sling maintains the carpus, elbow and 
patterm from distal to proximal, overlapping by 50%, with
 shoulder in a flexed, non-weight-bearing position.
up to two to four layers applied. Fiberglass cast material
is immersed in tepid water (70-75° F). The warmer the
water, the faster the cast will harden. When the cast mate-
daily for swollen toes, slipping of the bandage, moisture,
rial is immersed bubbles will be released. After bubbling
soiling, drainage, or foul odor. The extermal coaptation
has ceased (10-15 seconds), the material can be removed
device should be changed immediately if any of these is
from the water and shaken, but not squeezed, to remove
present, or if the device is damaged or loosened. If the
excess water. A second person maintains the limb in trac-
bandage has been well tolerated and the patient begins to
tion with the fracture reduced while the cast is applied.
lick or chew at the bandage or toes, the bandage should be
After making a final assessment of the limb for proper
a ap aod e a si aa asna p
alignment, the cast material is applied in a distal to proxi-
bandage that should be addressed as soon as possible, such
mal spiral patterm, overlapping by 50%. After the first layer
as a wound infection, moisture that is irritating the skin, or
is applied the tape stirrups and stockinette are turmed up to
wound dehiscence.
incorporate them into the cast. Continue to apply cast
Complications of Bandaging
material so that two to four layers are applied. Gently
laminate the layers together and allow for adequate curing
The complications of bandaging include pressure sores and
time. The cast material undergoes an exothermic reaction
ischemic injury, infection, damage to the surrounding soft
that creates heat during the curing process.
tissues, neuropraxia, contracture, malunion, and angular
A saw may be used to cut the cast on the medial and
deformities. The complications from a bandage can be
lateral aspects of the limb after curing to bivalve the cast.
e p une a rd aar sn
When cutting the cast material with the saw, it is important
care cannot be overstated.
to hold the saw stationary as it cuts. Moving the saw back
Slings
and forth while cutting may result in cutting the patient's
skin. Bivalving of the cast facilitates regular rechecks and
A sling is designed to prevent the patient from weight
assessment of the limb undermeath. The patient may weight
bearing on the affected limb. A Velpeau sling maintains
bear on a casted limb as early as 20 minutes after applica-
the carpus, elbow, and shoulder in a fexed, non-weight-
tion is complete when using fiberglass casting material.
bearing position (Figure 16-27). The Velpeau sling can be
applied in cases of scapular body fracture, bicipital teno-
Maintenance of the External
synovitis, and medial shoulder luxation. To apply a Velpeau
Coaptation Device
sling: Flex the shoulder and elbow while adducting the
 It is very important to keep all bandages, splints, slings,
limb against the body; start by applying two or three layers
and casts clean, dry and intact. The extemal coaptation
of cast padding around the patient's torso and affected
device must be protected from adverse weather. Plastic
forelimb, incorporating the forelimb such that it is secured
bags, recycled and dried fuid bags, or commercially made 
to the thoracic wall. Some layers should go in a cranial to
bandage covers (e.g., Medipaw, MediVet Products, Fogels-
caudal direction around the limb to prevent slippage of the
ville, PA) may be used to cover the distal end of a bandage,
incorporated limb. Apply rolled gauze in the same manner
splint, sling, or cast when walking outside (Figure 16-26).
 to provide mild compression. Finally apply the outer wrap
The patient should be housed inside while wearing an
 in the same manner to provide support.
extermal coaptation device and the plastic covering should
An Ehmer sling maintains the hock, stife, and hip in
be removed when inside to prevent moisture buildup inside
fexion, with intermal rotation of the hip (Figure 16-28).
the bandage. Bandages should be checked several times
The Ehmer is commonly used following closed or open
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
297
A
B
C
Figure 16-28 Ehmer (figure-of-8) sling. A, Application of the sling begins with placing some padding on the plantar surface of the metatarsus.
B, Conforming roller gauze bandage is wrapped around the metatarsus (1) from lateral to medial, being sure to include most of the metatarsal
pad. After several wraps to secure it, the gauze is carried medial to the flexed stifle (2) and over the cranial surface of the thigh. This internally
rotates the limb at the hip joint. Finally (3) the gauze is brought medial to the tibia and tarsus and over the plantar surface of the tarsus. Several
more circuits are made in the same manner. C, The gauze is continued in a figure-of-8 fashion around the flexed hock and paw to secure it. The
entire bandage is then covered with elastic adhesive tape that overhangs the gauze to anchor the sling to the hair. Although some construct the
leueno ayi uo uoe uys algelapisuos oi speal Ageeaui sun 'us ayi ot padde adei aisaupe yis bueis Aq azneh Aue inoun ahepueg
thigh region as well as the difficulty of removing the large amount of tape. D, It is difficult to keep the sling from slipping down over the stifle
on short-legged breeds. One solution is to attach wide adhesive tape to the paw area of the completed sling (1), then carry the tape upward over
the back (2) and around the belly (3). This is simple in the bitch or cat, but care must be taken to avoid the sheath in the male dog. (Adapted
from Piermattei, DL, Flo GL, DeCamp CE: Handbook of small animal orthopedics and fracture repair, ed 4, St. Louis, 2006, Saunders.)
reduction of craniodorsal hip luxations, as well as some
sling. A pelvic limb sling can be applied following fracture
acetabular fractures, and can be maintained for up to two
repair of the femur and tibia or in other situations where
weeks. To apply an Ehmer sling, place several layers of
 joint motion is desired without full weight bearing.
cast padding around the metatarsal region. Next wrap roll
A carpal fexion sling prevents weight bearing on a
gauze over it several times. Fully fex the stife and wrap
forelimb and removes stress from fexor tendons (Figure
the rolled gauze around the thigh by bringing it medial to
16-30). However, it is important to remember that pro-
the thigh. Next, pull the gauze firmly and bring it over the
longed application results in limitations in carpal extension
front of the thigh to maintain fexion. Wrap the gauze over
and may require stretching and range of motion to reestab-
the lateral aspect of the thigh and then wrap it distally
lish normal extension of the carpus and digits. A carpal
medial to the tarsus. The wrap is continued around the
fexion sling can be applied following fexor tendon or
plantar aspect of the metatarsals, wrapping from medial to
fracture repair.
lateral to returm to the original starting position. Repeat the
The 90/90 fexion sling is designed to maintain the tarsus
patterm with rolled gauze three or four times. Finish with
and stife in 90 degrees of fexion and is primarily used to
a layer of Elastikon applied in the same manner.
prevent contracture of the quadriceps following repair of
The pelvic limb sling, also known as a Robinson sling.
fractures of the distal femur in young dogs. To apply a
 prevents full weight bearing without maintaining the joints
 90/90 fHexion sling, fex the stife and tarsus to 90 degrees
in a highly fexed position (Figure 16-29). A pelvic limb
 of fexion. With cast padding, wrap several layers around
sling suspends the metatarsals to a bellyband and can be
the metatarsal region and over the distal thigh. Adhesive
maintained for many weeks. Periodic recheck examina-
tape or Elastikon is then wrapped around the fexed tarsal
tions are needed to maintain the integrity of the sling;
and stifle joints to maintain 90 degrees of fexion.
replace it if the sling becomes soiled or wet. An e-collar is
Hobbles may be applied to the distal antebrachii or
recommended to prevent the patient from removing the
 cruses to allow full weight bearing and walking, but prevent
298
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
A
C
padde s uose no adei aisaupe jo aaid huol v huped ises no uoo y papped si uobal peseieiaw aul 'v buns uosuo -at ani
around the metatarsal region, and the tape is stuck to itself near the foot. A belly wrap is also placed by wrapping the caudal abdomen with cast
padding or roll cotton. Adhesive tape or Elastikon is then wrapped around the cotton. B, The medial strip of tape is then placed alongside the belly wrap,.
yi dean Aaq au ot panas s! dus sul bupueis uaua iooy aul uo buaq subiaa suaaaid ot se os yhual areudoidde ue oi adel aun bunuanous
additional tape. C, The lateral strip of tape is then passed over the lateral surface of the thigh and attached to the belly wrap with additional tape. (From
Piermattei, DL, Flo GL, DeCamp CE: Handbook of smaff animal orthopedics and fracture repair ed 4, St. Louis, 2006, Saunders.)
hobbles that may be customized to the patient are available
(Shoulder Stabilization System, DogLeggs, Reston, VA).
Aftercare and Complications of slings
If care is not taken in placing slings, serious complications
may arise such as tissue necrosis, neuropraxia, and severe
limb edema. Toes should be checked at least twice daily
for excessive swelling and warmth. If the toes are cool or
swollen, the sling should be immediately removed and a
new one placed after the clinician is certain that there are
no circulatory problems. Other commercial altermatives
have become available in recent years, using Velcro fasten-
ers to make application easier (DogLeggs, Reston, VA).
These slings are reusable and washable and allow for daily
removal and reapplication for treatments such as passive
Figure 16-30 Carpal flexion sling. This sling prevents weight
range of motion exercises (Figure 16-31).
bearing on a forelimb and removes stress from flexor tendons.
 Postoperative Management of Bowel
and Bladder
abduction. The most common use is in dogs with medial
Patients often have decreased intestinal motility while in
glenohumeral instability or ventral coxofemoral luxation.
the hospital and thus may not defecate for days after
Cast padding is placed around both distal limbs. Adhesive
surgery. Clients frequently express concermn and want to
tape may then be wrapped around the limbs to secure
know what they can do. Multiple factors contribute to
them in a standing position, but one which will not allow
decreased defecation, including discomfort when postur-
abduction to occur. More recently commercially fabricated
ing to defecate or constipation or pain when defecating.
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
299
Tricks of the Trade
The following are a few notes regarding specific situations
Or operations.
 TPLO patients may develop edema around the hock a
client may call and express concem. The veterinary staff 
can explain that this pocket of fuid around the hock has
developed as a result of the patient's lymphatic system
being disturbed as well as a decrease in circulation from
reduced limb use. The client can be instructed to perform
gentle soft tissue massage to move the fuid up the leg
and increase lymphatic retum. The fuid pocket will
resolve with time. In addition, warm compresses may
help the edema to resolve sooner. If edema continues
and there is any drainage from the incision, the patient
should be evaluated for possible infection.
Figure 16-31  Removable and reusable slings are commercially
· Also regarding postoperative TPLO patients, occasionally
available for the rear limbs. Slings are also available for the forelimbs
a client may call expressing concerm that their dog was
(not shown).
walking very well, then suddenly became lame on the
operative leg and now is sensitive around the surgical site.
such as following a pelvic fracture. Metamucil, DsS, or
It is prudent to recheck these cases as soon as possible to
lactulose may be administered to soften stools. Another
evaluate for postoperative complications. Complications
treatment that is simple and economical is the addition of
imclude, but are not limited to, infection, fracture of the
cooked pumpkin to the food, which is high in fiber and
 proximal fibula, screw breakage or loosening of the screw,
serves as a source of insoluble fiber.
 patella ligament swelling, fracture of the patella or tibial
 Urine present in the patient's cage is not evidence that
tuberosity, or rarely, fracture of the tibia.?3 Radiographs
the patient can urinate voluntarily or that the urinary system
and a good orthopedic exam are essential in diagnosing
 is intact after trauma. Appropriate evaluation of the urinary
complications. Fractures of the fbula, patella, or tibial
system should be made to be certain that it is intact after
tuberosity usually result from too much activity, which
trauma. Urinary retention can lead to serious urinary tract
applies excessive forces on bones, combined with the
infections, possibly even ascending to the kidney, which
acute changes in biomechanics following rotation of the
may induce acute renal failure. Overdistention of the
tibial osteotomy. Fractures of the fibula heal with proper
bladder can lead to permanent atony of the detrusor muscle
conservative management consisting of pain medication
 and incontinence. Regardlss, knowledge of a postopera-
amd crate confinement. Fractures of the tibia, screw break-
tive patient's urinary status is paramount, and the patient
age, or plate loosening generally require additional surgery.
should be directly observed urinating within 6 hours post-
and treatment should be determined by the veterinary
operatively. In addition, the patient's bladder should be
surgeon. Patella ligament swelling also occurs as a result 
evacuated immediately before and after surgery, especially
of overuse before a period of tissue adaptation. Enforced
if an epidural has been administered.
rest and symptomatic treatment generally result in resolu-
tion of patella ligament swelling.
Advice for Clients
 Dogs that have surgery of the foot, carpus, or tarsus or
 Client education begins before surgery. In discussing post-
distal limb fractures may have marked distal limb edema
surgical follow-up care including cage confinement and
following surgery. The veterinary staff should be dili-
restricted activity, patient limitations should be made
gent in checking the toes to ensure that the bandage, if
explicitly clear. Also advisement about certain forbidden
any is used, is not too tight. Distal limb edema can be
activities (running, jumping, playing with other dogs, etc.)
attended to multiple times a day with superficial thermal
and the risk of implant failure or reinjury if the patient
modalities and massage, in conjunction with antinflam-
is not made to follow recommendations must be clearly
 matory medication and bandaging.
explained. Despite the veterinary staff's best efforts these
 In the immediate postoperative period following patella
instructions may still be ignored. Providing written instruc-
luxation repairs, care should be taken with passive range
tions for the owners is important for good follow through.
of motion exercises, particularly stife fexion. In some
One altermative approach is to remind owners that the
cases, reluxation may occur if passive range of motion
surgical procedure is an investment, and if they follow post-
is too aggressive. In complex repairs of patella luxation,
passive range of motion may be contraindicated in the
investment and avoiding costly treatment for complications.
first 2 weeks following surgery.
300
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
Nursing Care for the Neurologic Patient
Bladder Care
Urinary bladder management is a comerstone of neuro-
logic nursing care. The type of bladder management neces-
sary depends on the location of the lesion and type of spinal
injury. Bladder management in the neurologic patient plays
an extremely important role in the overall recovery of the
patient. Recurrent bladder infections can complicate the
health of neurologic patients. Patients with intervertebral
disk disease localized to the T3-L3 thoracolumbar region
 develop an upper motor neuron (UMN) bladder, whereas 
those with lower lumbar or sacral region lesions develop a
(LMN) lower motor neuron bladder. Upper motor neuron
 bladders have a hypertonic bladder sphincter and are dif-
Figure 16-32  Bladder expression of the neurologic patient.
ficult to express. Lower motor neuron bladders have a very
relaxed, hypotonic sphincter, are easily expressed, and are
  sra g s   n
Place the hands under the abdomen between the last
Overdistention of the bladder with resultant bladder damage
rib and the pelvis with one hand on either side of the
if the bladder is not evacuated regularly.
patient. Slowly and gently palpate the patient's caudoven-
Many neurologic patients are able to urinate voluntarily
 tral abdomen for the presence of a bladder. Depending on 
but choose not to. If they are unable to ambulate, they
the size of the bladder it may be located more cranially
sometimes will not urinate on their own. An opportunity
than one may anticipate. Place the hands cranially while
to urinate outside should always be given first. If a patient
applying gentle constant pressure to force the bladder to
has been given the opportunity to urinate outside and is
 move caudally in between the caregiver's hands. It can be
unsuccessful, the bladder must be emptied either by expres-
described as feeling somewhat like a water balloon that
sion or catheterization.
slips between your hands.
It is extremely important to understand the difference
After the bladder is located, apply constant gentle pres-
between voluntary urination and bladder overfow and
sure by compressing the two hands together, until urine is
distention. Urine present in the patient's cage is not evi-
expressed. The bladder will gradually "deflate"' as it empties
dence that the patient can urinate independently. Knowing
(Figure 16-32). Bladder expression often can be extremely
the difference is critical to proper bladder management.
difficult, depending on the tenseness of the abdomen or if
Bladder overdistention can eventually result in permanent
the patient is morbidly obese. Also, the difficulty to express
 atony of the detrusor muscle. The bladder must be evacu-
may be caused by the underlying neurologic condition;
ated frequently and kept to a small size to avoid this
with UMN bladders, spasm of the urethral sphincter may
problem. If urine is noted in the cage of a neurologic
decrease or obstruct urine fow while expressing. Pharma-
patient, bladder palpation should be performed to ensure
cologic agents may be used to alter sphincter tone; the
the bladder has been emptied. If the bladder remains large
medication selected depends on whether bladder dysfunc-
and palpable, and attempts to urinate outside were unsuc-
tion is caused by UMN or LMN disease. Diazepam can be
cessful, there is likely overfow and bladder expression
initiated if a UMN bladder is present to relax the skeletal
should be performed.
portion of the urethral sphincter. This is especially impor-
tant in male dogs. The initial dose of diazepam is 2 to
can become a serious threat to the patient's health. Clinical
 5 mg orally 30 minutes prior to bladder expression every
signs of a urinary tract infection include foul odor to
 8 hours but can be increased as needed up to 10 mg. In
the urine, bloody or dark-colored urine, focculent or puru-
addition, drugs may be used to relax the smooth muscle
 lent material in the urine, urine dribbling, constant licking
portion of the bladder, such as prazosin (1 mg/15 kg of
of the genital area, depression, loss of appetite, and, in
body weight q 8 hours) or phenoxybenzamine (0.25 mg/
advanced cases, fever.
kg po sid-bid, pm). Lower motor neuron bladders already
have decreased sphincter tone, which makes it easy to
Bladder Expression
express the bladder.
There are many options for bladder palpation techniques
Bladder Catheterization
 and patient positioning. Ensuring the patient is relaxed
minimizes stress involved with bladder expression. Placing
Most neurologic patients that have lost their ability to
the patient in a standing position or lateral recumbency
urinate can be managed with bladder expression alone.
helps the caregiver to palpate the bladder more easily.
However, in some cases bladder catheterization is
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
301
appropriate and often necessary. In a large recumbent
Procedure for Male Catheterization
patient, even if the ability to urinate is not lost, bladder
Two people are required for the catheterization of a male
catheterization may be necessary because of the inability
 dog. The dog is placed in lateral recumbency. The person
to rise and move around. It must be noted that an increased
restraining the dog extrudes the penis. The prepuce and
risk for urinary tract infections exists in catheterized
penis are gently cleaned with antiseptic solution, such as
patients. The choice of whether to intermittently catheter-
dilute chlorhexidine. With the penis extruded, the person
ize the patient or use an indwelling system depends on the
placing the catheter wears sterile gloves and is sterilely
type of urinary catheter, the experience and availability of
handed the urinary catheter and sterile lube. Sterile lube
the veterinary staff, and clinician preference.
is placed over the catheter tip. The catheter is introduced
The type of urinary catheter and length are important
into the tip of the penis and the catheter is gently advanced
 into the urethra until urine starts to fow. If an indwelling
tent catheterization (two to three times daily) is warranted,
catheter system is required, a sterile extension set is
a red rubber or a soft polyvinyl catheter can be used. If
attached to a urine collection bag. To ensure the catheter
a more long-term indwelling system is desired, a softer,
is anchored in the bladder, the balloon of the device is
less irritating catheter such as a Foley catheter with a
filled with water, with the amount dependent on the size
balloon device for anchoring within the bladder can be
of the catheter. The amount needed is noted on the neck
used. Whichever system is used, sterile placement is
of the catheter. If the catheter is temporary, a three-way
important.
stopcock may be attached to the end of the catheter and a
 60-cc syringe may be used to empty or measure the urine
Materials Needed for Female Catheterization
(Figure 16-33).
·Scrub solution
 Tiemann or Foley catheter, appropriate sizes
Catheter Care
·Sterile gloves
Indwelling urinary catheter systems should be cleaned
·Sterile lubricant
with a mild disinfectant solution at the prepuce of males
· Sterile speculum
and the vulva of females. Check four times daily to be
·
Water and syringe for balloon device
sure the catheter is in place and urine is continuing to fow
·Extension set
into the collection bag. The urine bag should be placed
· Urine collection system and bag
on a clean surface below the patient, but not on the
foor. Exam gloves should be wom when emptying
Procedure for Female Catheterization
the urinary collection bag. The extension set clamp is
Two people are required for catheterization of a female
closed, and the exit valve on the collection bag is opened.
dog. The dog is placed in stemal recumbency. Sedation
 Urine is collected in a graduated cylinder or bowl to be
is often necessary to decrease patient discomfort during
measured. Care should be taken to maintain sterility of the
catheter placement. The vulva is cleaned with scrub solu-
 collection system as much as possible. Remember to open
tion. Sterile gloves are worm and the urinary catheter and
the clamp on the extension set when finished to allow urine
lubricant used are also sterile. Lubricant is placed on the
to fow.
catheter end. The sterile vaginal speculum should be intro-
Special Considerations
duced vertically through the vulva lips and then turmed
horizontally. Two small indentations are on the foor of
Cervical Neurologic Patients
the vestibule. One is near the clitoral fossa; the other is
 Atlantoaxial subluxation occurs when instability between
the urethral opening set on the urethral papilla. The cath-
the first two vertebrae causes a compression of the spinal
eter should be carefully introduced through the urethral
cord. This disorder usually occurs in young toy or small
papilla. After urine starts to fow, the balloon is inflated
breed dogs but can also be seen in larger breeds. Clinical
with water as indicated on the catheter, and attached to a
signs can be of congenital origin or traumatic. The severity
urine collection system. Most female urinary collection
of the clinical signs will determine the course of treatment.
systems are indwelling because of the difficulty associated
Clinical signs can vary from mild ataxia to severe neck
with repeated cathterizations.
 pain, tetraparesis, or tetraplegia. Conservative management
for mildly affected cases includes strict cage confinement
Materials Needed for Male Catheterization
and brace placement for 4 to 6 weeks. The brace can be
·Antiseptic solution
made from Thermoplast or fiberglass cast material, and
·Sterile red rubber or Foley catheter
extends from mid stermum cranially to the chin. The brace
· Sterile gloves
prevents the patient from ventral fexion of the neck (Figure
·Sterile lube
16-34). The brace should be closely monitored for exces-
·Extension set (if indwelling)
sive tightness, areas of irritation, and wetness. If any of
·Urine collection system and bag (if indwelling)
these occur, the brace should be removed and replaced.
·Syringe, three-way stopcock, and bowl (short-term)
Assure that the brace is not too tight, to allow the patient
302
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
Figure 16-33  Urinary catheter placement in a male dog. A, The penis is extruded and the catheter is aseptically inserted. The catheter is passed
until urine starts to flow. B, To anchor the catheter in the bladder, the balloon is inflated. C, For a closed collection system, a sterile extension
 set is aseptically connected to a collection bag.
Figure 16-34 Coaptation for atlantoaxial luxation. A, Proper brace application to prevent the patient from ventral flexion of the neck.
B, Lateral view of atlantoaxial brace. Note that the brace extends from the head to the cranial thorax.
Chapter 16
Nursing Care of the Rehabilitation Patient
303
to eat and drink. Many animals have difficulty eating, so
syringe feedings with water and pureed food may be
required. Keeping the patient in a comfortable position is
very important. Positioning pillows and blankets around
patients allows them to remain stermal, making it easier for
them to eat, drink, and visualize the environment. For more
severely affected cases, surgery is often required. Stabiliza-
tion of the joint between Cl and C2 is performed. After
surgical stabilization, a brace is still required for 4 to 6
weeks postoperatively.
Cervical spondylomyelopathy, also known as Wob-
bler's, is a condition primarily affecting large breed dogs.
Clinical signs vary from ataxia to tetraplegia. Treatment
options vary depending on the severity of the signs. Con-
servative management of mildly affected cases includes
strict cage confinement for 4 to 6 weeks with only short
walks outside with a harmess. The use of neck leads or
 Figure 16-35 An assistive device, such a Hoyer lift, can be used to
leashes should be avoided in cervical neurologic patients.
Analgesics are administered as needed to control pain
although many dogs with Wobbler's do not experience
pain. Indications for surgery include substantial neurologic
deficits or progression of signs despite conservative man-
agement. The surgical technique depends on the specific
 pathogenic changes identified on imaging, using MRI, CT,
or myelography.
 Postoperatively the cervical spinal cord patient can be
very challenging. Frequently these patients are large to
giant breed dogs that cannot be managed by the owner at
home, requiring lengthy hospitalization until function 
retums. Early basic exercises focusing on activities of daily
living are important for recovery. In severe cases patients
may be so painful and weak that they are unable to lift their
 head. Foam supports and manual support or placement are 
required if the patient cannot maintain stermal recumbency.
Figure 16-36 An assistive device, such as an abdominal sling, can
Nonambulatory tetraplegic patients should be assisted into
be used to help a thoracolumbar patient stand and ambulate.
stermal recumbency, or a standing position if capable, to
eat and drink to prevent aspiration and regurgitation.
cryotherapy, electrical stimulation, gentle massage, moist
Passive range of motion exercises to peripheral joints
heat (not within 72 hours postoperatively), and therapeutic
should be performed three to five times daily to prevent
laser may provide additional pain control for the patient.
contracture and allow for joint nourishment. Assistive
Often patients with paraparesis drag themselves with
devices such as wheelchairs or a sling-lift system are fre-
the fore limbs. It is essential to discourage this behavior,
quently needed for postoperative cervical patients that are
because it can cause severe skin wounds and abrasions,
tetraparetic or tetraplegic (Figure 16-35).
increase potential for urinary tract infections (especially in
females), and place significant stress on the forelimbs.
Thoracolumbar Neurologic Patients
 Proper fitting with a sling (Figure 16-36) in the immediate
Intervertebral disk disease (IVDD) is the most common
postoperative period is recommended for paraplegic and
cause of thoracolumbar spinal injury in dogs. However,
 paraparetic patients. A wheelchair or cart (Figure 16-37) is
spinal tumors, fibrocartilaginous embolus, and trauma may
indicated if the disability is expected to last longer than 4
also cause neurologic deficits. Hemilaminectomy to relieve
to 6 weeks (potentially earlier in large and giant breed
the spinal cord compression is the most common surgical
patients).
treatment of IVDD. Postoperative care of the IVDD patient
focuses on pain control, bladder care, attention to bedding
Summary
or housing, and postoperative rehabilitation. Often patient
handling can be challenging if pain is not adequately con-
Nursing care of the rehabilitation patient is an essential
trolled. In addition to oral and parenteral pain medications,
part of the rehabilitation program. Several factors,
304
Section IlI
 Patient Assessment and Management
8. Bohling Mw, Henderson RA: Differences in cutaneous
wound healing between dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 36(4):687-692, 2006.
 9. McDowell JH, McFarland EG, Nalli BJ: Use of cryotherapy
for orthopaedic patients, Orthop Nurs 13(5):21-30, 1994.
10. Rexing J, Dunning D, Siegel AM et al: Effects of cold com-
pression, bandaging, and microcurrent electrical therapy after
cranial cruciate ligament repair in dogs, Vet Surg 39(1):54-58,
2010.
 11. Weresh MJ, Bennett GL, Njus G: Analysis of cryotherapy
 penetration: a comparison of the plaster cast, synthetic cast,
Ace wrap dressing, and Robert-Jones dressing, Foot Ankle
Int 17(1):37-40, 1996.
12. Fossum TW: Principles of Surgicat Asepsis. Small animat
surgery, ed 3, St. Louis, 2007, Mosby, pp 1-2.
Figure 16-37 An assistive device, such as a cart, can be used to
13. Fossum TW: Surgical infections and anitbiotic selection.
 help a thoracolumbar patient stand and ambulate.
 Smallanimat surgery, ed 3, St. Louis, 2007, Mosby, pp 79-89.
14. Barber M: Methicillin-resistant staphylococci, J Clin Patho!
14:385-393, 1961.
including the procedure and owner expectations, must be
15. American Veterinary Medical Association: Backgrounds:
considered when caring for the rehabilitation patient in
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: https://www
order to have a successful outcome. Whether the patient
.avma. org/KB/Resources/Backgrounders/Pages/Methicillin-
has had an orthopedic or neurologic injury or surgery, the
resistant-Staphylococcus-aureus.aspx; Accessed 6/24/2009.
ultimate goal is the same: to assist and care for the patient
16. Devriese LA, Van Damme LR, Fameree L: Methicillin
to achieve a functional recovery.
(clox acillin)-resistant Staphylococcus aureus strains isolated
from bovine mastitis cases, Zbl Vet Med B 19:598-605,
1972.
REFERENCES
17. Weese JS, Dick H, Willey BM et al: Suspected transmission
1. Swaim SF, Votau K: Prevention and treatment of decubital
of  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  between
ulcers in the dog, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 70(9): 1069-1074,
domestic pets and humans in veterinary clinics and in the
1975.
household, Vet Microbiof 115:148-155, 2006.
2. Sikes R: Postoperative management of the neurosurgical
18. Hanselman BA, Kruth SA, Rousseau J et al: Methicillin-
patient, Probt Vet Med 1(3):467-477, 1989.
Tesistant Staphyfococcus aureus colonization in veterinary
3. Fiorucci S, de Lima OM Jf, Mencarelli A et al: Cyclooxy-
 personnel, Emerg Infect Dis 12:1933-1938, 2006.
genase-2-derived lipoxin A4 increases gastric resistance to
19. Slatter DHE: Textbook of small animal surgery, vol 1-2, ed
aspirin-induced damage, Gastroenterology 123(5):1598-
2, Philadelphia, 1993, Saunders, pp 1661-1664.
1606, 2002
 20. Leroux MA, Cheung HS, Bau JL et al: Altered mechanics
4. Laitinen OM, Puerto DA: Surgical decompression in dogs
and histomorphometry of canine tibial cartilage following
with thoracolumbar intervertebral disc disease and loss of
joint immobilization, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 9(7):633-640,
deep pain perception: a retrospective study of 46 cases, Acta
2001.
Vet Scand 46(1-2):79-85, 2005.
 21. Ilizaroy GA: The tension-stress effect on the genesis and
 5. Herperger LJ: Postoperative urinary retention in a dog fol-
 growth of tissues: Part I1. The influence of the rate and fre-
lowing morphine and bupivacaine epidural analgesia, Can
quency of distraction, Clin Orthop Relat Res 239:263-285,
Vet J 39:650-652 1998.
1989.
6. Kona-Boun J, Pibarot P: Myoclonus and urinary retention
 22. Aron DN et al: Primary treatment of severe fractures by
12 sop e ul uogoefui suydiou piouyoeneqns suimooy
external skeletal fixation: threaded pins compared with
Anesth Anatg 30:257-264, 2003.
smooth pins, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:659, 1986.
 7. Gefen A: How much time does it take to get a pressure ulcer?
 23. Stauffer KD, Tuttle TA, Elkins AD et al: Complications asso-
Integrated evidence from human, animal, and in vitro studies,
ciated with 696 tibial plateau leveling osteotomies (2001-
Ostomy Wound Manage 54(10):26-28, 30-35, 2008.
2003), J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 42(1):44-50, 2006.
Devices for Ambulation
Assistance in Companion
Animals
Denis J. Marcellin-Litle and David Levine
'ndependent locomotion is critically important in dogs
should not interfere with blood fow. If a device is too tight
and cats. In fact companion animals that have lost
blood fow to an extremity will be decreased, potentially
the ability to walk independently are at risk of being
leading to a loss of tissue oxygenation or impaired venous
euthanatized.' Many devices have been conceived to
drainage with resultant swelling of the lower part of the
provide ambulation assistance and independence from
limb. Devices should be stable on the limbs to avoid prob-
owner care.? Humans use canes, crutches, braces, orthoses,
lems created by constant friction, slippage, or rotation. The
 and prostheses to assist with locomotion.3.4 In recent years 
condition of the limb should be assessed each time the
the veterinary profession has been increasingly involved in
device is removed. Skin redness, bruising, or focal hair loss
physical rehabilitation for weak and paretic patients, and
should be noted early and immediately addressed, by
multiple devices aimed at providing ambulation assistance
potentially modifying the assistive device (removing hard
to animals have been created and used.?5 The devices used
material responsible for skin wear or adding foam protec-
tion). Devices should be inspected for wear and damage
unstable joints or feet (orthoses, boots); replace a missing
and cleaned daily. Cleaning is especially important if there
portion of a limb (prostheses); or facilitate locomotion
are any incisions, wounds, or open sores in contact with
(slings, carts, ramps, steps). Assistive devices may also
the assistive device.
decrease the complications present in recumbent patients,
including decubitus ulcers.? The purpose of this chapter is
Boots
to present the range of ambulation assistive devices and
discuss their purpose, benefits, construction, and functional
Boots are used to protect pads and feet from abrasion or
use for companion animals.
to provide support. They may be used in normal dogs to
 protect against abrasions created by rough surfaces; for
General Considerations when Using
example, for search and rescue dogs working in areas with
Assistive Devices for Ambulation
 broken glass. Sled dogs may wear feece boots to avoid the
accumulation of ice on their feet or to avoid skin lesions
Assistive devices present unique challenges to rehabilita-
from ice crystals, for example (Figure 17-1). Boots may be
tion clinicians because their design, fabrication, fitting, and
used to avoid abrasions of the dorsal surface of digits and
the patient training are most often unique. Their successful
metatarsal bones of dogs with sciatic nerve palsy, provided
use requires an accurate assessment of the biologic situa-
that they have some residual hock function. If the hock is
tion and the mechanical needs of the patient, requiring
faccid, a support orthosis may also be necessary to main-
knowledge in the fields of orthopedics, rehabilitation, bio-
tain the lower limb in a functional standing position. Simi-
mechanics, and prosthetics.6
larly boots may be used to protect the dorsal surface of the
Dogs wearing assistive devices should not be left unsu-
manus in patients with palsy of the branch of the radial
pervised because they may damage their assistive devices
nerve that innervates the extensor muscles of the antebra-
or injure themselves. Assistive devices may be tolerated
chium (Figure 17-2). Because most radial nerve palsies or
differently by individual animals. They may present risks
brachial plexus injuries also affect the triceps brachii
when they are partially dislodged. As a general rule hair
muscle and therefore severely limit weight bearing by the
protects the skin from abrasions and hair should be left
entire forelimb, boots may not provide adequate support
intact unless it interferes with the performance of an assis-
alone. Boots may also be used in dogs with degenerative
tive device. In patients with long hair, the hair may be
myelopathy and other conditions that lead to scuffing of
trimmed or clipped to enhance the fit of a device. New
the feet. Boots must be lightweight, particularly for patients
devices should be worm under controlled conditions (i.e.,
 that have weak motor function because the added weight
indoors and under direct supervision) and for limited
of the boot on the foot may further decrease limb use.
periods of time, starting with a few minutes. Devices 
Boots may be made of nylon mesh, cotton, feece,
305
306
Section Ill
 Patient Assessment and Management
neoprene, rubber, or other materials. They may have a
rubber sole for increased traction.? They may be held in
place through the use of straps or hook-and-loop fasteners.
Bootstraps are most often placed immediately proximal to
the distal portion of the metacarpal or metatarsal bones in
order to secure the boot.
Orthoses, Including Sleeves and Braces
Orthoses are devices applied to limbs for support and pro-
tection. They are applied on limbs in order to assist or
limit joint motion. The most common orthoses are used to
restrict the excessive joint motion present in patients with
ligamentous or tendinous problems, including patients
with ruptures of their palmar fibrocartilage or common
calcaneal tendon (Figure 17-3). Orthoses function by
Figure 17-1 Fleece boot made for a sled dog. The boot has a
simple design, with a single hook-and-loop band used to secure it in
placing the limb segments proximal and distal to unstable
place. These boots are placed on all feet during sled dog races. They
joints in a foam-lined rigid shell. Orthoses are most often
protect the pads from abrasions and other injuries caused by snow
made of rigid thermoplastics. They may be lined with
and ice.
foam, feece, or terry cloth. They are most often held in
place with hook-and-loop fasteners. Orthoses may be
commercially available premade or they may be custom
made. Premade orthoses are affordable and are best
suited to patients with normal anatomy and healthy skin
(i.e., patients with rupture of the common calcaneal
tendon). Custom orthoses are usually necessary in patients
with abnormal anatomy (limb deformity, abnormal skin
Figure 17-2  Golden retriever with a partial brachial plexus avul-
sion sustained as a result of a fall from a moving vehicle. A palsy of
 the radial nerve is present. Function of the triceps brachi is weak
and antebrachial extensor function is absent. The dog is seen wearing
a sock, a folded bandana taped on the caudal aspect of the carpus,
and a support orthosis (inset placed inside a boot, stabilized with
athletic tape. Although gait abnormalities remain (the affected fore-
limb is placed under the chest by abducting and externally rotating
his humerus at a walk), the dog is nevertheless able to bear weight 
on his affected limb.
Figure 17-3 Siberian husky with ectrodactyly (lobster claw defor-
mity) of his right forelimb. The right carpus collapses when bearing
weight (upper inset. A custom orthosis has been made that supports
his carpus (fower inset). The stability of the limb within the orthosis
could be optimized by placing a third strap across the distal aspect
of the radius.
Chapter 17
Devices for Ambulation Assistance in Companion Animals
307
contours) and in very small or very large patients. They
Braces are placed across a joint, usually to limit its
are generally based on a cast of the abnormal limb made
range of motion or promote its stability. Braces may be
by use of semirigid or rigid fiberglass or plaster of Paris.
elastic or rigid. Rigid braces may also be used to modify
They may also be based on a computed tomography-
the position of joints in nonfunctional limbs. This could be 
based replica of the limb. Solid replicas may be made of
considered in patients with contractures, for example in
cyanoacrylate-impregnated plaster, ABS plastic, or laser-
 patients with chronic grade IV medial patellar luxations
cured photopolymers.? Orthoses may be hinged to enhance
that may have severe intermal rotation of their tibia in rela-
       
tion to their femur. These patients may lose 60 degrees of
shells placed around the pes (or manus) and the crus (or
stifle joint extension or more because of the shortening of
antebrachium). These hinges may be passive or dynamic
their hamstring muscles as a result of the deformities and
(i.e., spring loaded). Passive hinges may be made of nylon
poor function of the quadriceps mechanism. A rigid brace
or metal (Figure 17-4). Orthoses with passive hinges may
may be considered in these patients with severe patella
enhance limb function because part or all of the motion of 
luxation and loss of stifle joint extension, when surgery is
the tarsus (or carpus) may be maintained. Orthoses may
 not a consideration or has failed (Figure 17-5). Braces may
have dynamic hinges that may be used to enhance the
be made of foam-lined metal or thermoplastic, neoprene
support of weak joints or to stretch contracted joints.
 possibly reinforced with metal strips, or nylon. Most braces
Hinges are made dynamic by using springs embedded in
are hinged to allow joint motion. Hinged braces may be
the hinges or elastic bands.
made of thermoplastic, neoprene, nylon, or other material.
 Sleeves may be placed around limbs to provide protec-
tion or support, but they do not cover the feet. Although
some sleeves offer protection of abnormal skin surfaces,
for ex ample in dogs with elbow hygromas or in recumbent
patients at risk of developing decubitus ulcers, little is
known about the benefits of sleeves for ambulation assis-
tance. Sleeves may be reinforced, essentially becoming
semirigid orthoses, by creating a pocket along their long
axis and sliding a plastic or metal strip in that pocket.
4
C
Figure 17-5 A, Yorkshire terrier with medial patellar luxation,
Figure 17-4  Labrador retriever with a nonunion fracture of the
 internal rotation of the tibia in relation to the femur and lack of stifle
metatarsal bones, hyperextended digits (fower inset), and a chronic
joint extension, making the leg nonfunctional. He has been fitted with
nonhealing wound on the plantar surface of the foot. A hinged
a rigid orthosis (B, C). The orthosis matched the dimension of his leg.
orthosis with a nylon hinge (upper inset) restores the dog's
and is made of thermoplastic, foam, and three hook-and-loop straps
mobility.
fitting around the thigh, crus, and pes.
308
Section Ill
Patient Assessment and Management
B
Figure 17-6 A, Doberman pinscher with an idiopathic loss of carpal extension. B, The antebrachial flexor muscles are stretched using a dynamic 
hinged brace that is worn for several hours at a time. The torque placed on the carpus is slowly increased over a period of weeks.
The hinges may be passive or dynamic (Figure 17-6). For
shell. Most prostheses have custom shells made of rigid
example in the canine stife joint, a brace theoretically
thermomoldable plastic, fiberglass, or carbon fiber. Ther-
could be used to decrease the stress placed on healing liga-
moplastics are cheapest, and their relative lack of strength
ments after traumatic stife luxation, to limit the cranial
and stiffness relative to other materials does not represent
thrust occurring while weight bearing in cranial cruciate
a significant drawback in smaller patients. Fiberglass or
deficient joints, or to improve the tracking of the patella.
carbon fiber may be preferred for large patients. Little is
Despite efforts to design and commercialize several stife
known about the optimal shape of extermal prostheses for
Aiad on sadde e arn ou si ara sang nuo
partially amputated forelimbs or pelvic limbs in compan-
achieve any of these theoretical goals at this time. Knee
ion animals. However, it is likely that a longer residual
braces are commonly used in humans for a variety of
limb will provide better stability and reduce chances of
reasons, including protecting healing ligaments or improv-
skin breakdown. The stability of the prosthesis can be
ing patellar tracking.? Functional knee braces do not
defined as axial, angular, and torsional. Axial stability is
 aagu on neadde AauL or'sueunq u uogexnqns qujof quaaid
the displacement of the prosthesis along the long axis of
a role in the anterior cruciate deficient knee, but only in
the limb (i.e., the lack of movement of the prosthesis when
it is being pulled on and pushed on). Axial stability is for
stabilizing the cruciate ligament deficient stife is the con-
the most part the consequence of the shape of the bone and
formation of the rear limb, and the slope of the tibial
surrounding soft tissues. It is also infuenced by skin
 plateau at a standing angle. To eliminate subluxation of the
mobility in relation to underlying soft tissues. Axial stabil-
tibia relative to the femur, it would be necessary to com-
ity often relies on the presence of bone prominences that
pletely compress the soft tissues of the femur and tibia with
 are used to lock the prosthesis in place, creating suspen-
the splint, severely compromising these tissues.
sion. Companion animals, as a general rule, have more
discrete bone prominences than humans and the process of
Prostheses
locking the prosthesis in place is harder to achieve. Angular
stability is the lack of movement of the prosthesis in rela-
Prostheses are extermal devices used in most instances to
tion to the residual limb when mediolateral and craniocau-
replace a missing manus or pes. Like custom orthoses,
dal forces are applied to it. Angular stability is most often
prostheses are often fabricated based on casts of the
the consequence of the length of a residual limb segment:
affected and opposite limbs. The layer of the prosthesis that
the longer the better. Torsional stability is the lack of
contacts the skin, named contact layer, may be a silicone
 motion of the prosthesis in relation to the residual limb
liner or foam adhering to a shell. Standard pediatric sili-
when intermal or extermal torsion is applied. Torsional sta-
cone liners may be used for long antebrachia. Custom sili-
bility may be hard to achieve when a limb segment has a
cone liners may be used for smaller or larger patients and
 small diameter and is relatively round. This is particularly
for other body parts (i.e., thighs). Liners may be secured
relevant in the antebrachium. Axial and torsional stability
to shells using locking pins embedded in their distal por-
of prostheses are increased when the prostheses span a
tions or they may be held in place by friction within the
joint (i.e., the hock, stife, or elbow joint). This is often
Chapter 17
Devices for Ambulation Assistance in Companion Animals
309
Figure 17-8  Labrador retriever with a sciatic neuropathy, weak
hock flexion, and scuffing of hind limb toes. Elastic bands within
nylon sleeves are connecting his pes to his dorsal midline. The bands 
Figure 17-7  Sheltie who lost his toes after surgical resection of a
 promote hock flexion and eliminate scuffing.
soft tissue sarcoma of his thigh. The distal portion of his stump is
sensitive to touch. His stump is placed in a silicone-lined glove finger
and fitted in a hinged prosthesis held in place with four hook-and-
loop fasteners.
achieved through the use of hinges placed over the center
of rotation of the joint proximal to the end of the residual
limb.
Adjustable devices may facilitate the function of the
distal portion of these prostheses.? The weight-bearing
surface of prostheses is most often rounded and made
of low-wear, nonskid rubber. The rubber stiffness is
chosen based on patient size, mobility, and anticipated
level of activity. Some prostheses are hinged at the carpus
or tarsus. These hinges may enhance the stability of the
prosthesis on the limb by increasing the contact area
between the shell and the skin without excessively interfer-
ing with joint motion. Hinges may also be included in the
with weight bearing. Hinges add complexity and cost to
Figure 17-9 Dalmatian is supported by a chest and pelvic limb
(Figure 17-7).
sling. The sling has a longitudinal chest handle and a transverse pelvic 
handle. It may be used to control the dog and to avoid falls.
Straps and Bands
Straps and bands may be used for ambulation assistance.
Slings
Elastic bands designed to assist patients with compromised
hock fexion, for example in patients with sciatic or pero-
Slings may be used to support weak patients with neuro-
neal nerve palsy, are commercially available (Figure 17-8).
logic or musculoskeletal conditions. They may also be
These elastic bands are attached to the mid-metatarsal
used to control dogs or avoid falls. Examples include
region and to a ring on a chest hamess. Elastic bands or
patients recovering from orthopedic procedures of their
tape may also be used to form hobbles, limiting forelimb
pelvic limbs, such as total hip arthroplasty. Slings may be
Or pelvic limb abduction. Pelvic limb hobbles are most
made of neoprene or other material, including cotton or
often used in the management of patients recovering from
sual aqnsne ue ym sdens aay uao saus uou
ventral hip luxations. Forelimb hobbles are most often used
for comfort of the therapist and should also be washable
to manage patients with injuries of the medial glenohu-
(Figure 17-9). Thin support sling bands may be used
meral ligament.
to control dogs recovering from injuries or surgery
310
Section Ill
Patient Assessment and Management
Figure 17-10 Labradoodle with an amputation of his left pelvic
limb. The dog is recovering from a total hip replacement of his right
hip joint preformed to manage a femoral malunion with severe
 osteoarthritis. The dog is trotting on a treadmill, controlled and sup-
Figure 17-11 Saluki supported by a paracart. The pelvis is sup-
ported by a chest harness and a belly sling. The sling is made by
wrapping self-adherent bandaging tape around a surgical gown.
ported by a rigid base made of foam-covered tubing. The non-
functional pelvic limbs are held in a slightly flexed position, off the
ground. The dog's back is horizontal, and weight distribution between
forelimbs and pelvic limbs appears optimal. (Courtesy of Mari Hiruma,
Dog will Project, Tokyo, Japan.)
(Figure 17-10). Slings supporting the abdomen may be
used in conjunction with slings supporting the pelvic limbs
and thoracic limbs. Subjectively abdominal slings do not
appear to assist with locomotion as effectively as pelvic
Rigid resting surfaces usually are foam-covered aluminum
limb slings in dogs with pelvic limb weakness. Specialized
tubing. Cart slings are most often made of neoprene with
slings are available to assist forelimb amputees (Appen-
nylon straps and side release clips but they may be made
dix). Slings may be combined with exercise bands to
of nylon mesh, cotton canvas, or other material. Optimal
improve the rehabilitation and locomotion of neurologic
support materials are strong, breathable, washable, soft,
patients recovering from injuries or surgery. Patients who
and have some elasticity. Subjectively, rigid resting sur-
cross their pelvic limbs may benefit from the placement of
faces may be ideally suited to dogs without motor function
a rolled cotton towel within a pelvic limb sling.
dogs with residual or intact motor function that need pelvic
Carts
limb support. Dogs can spend several hours each day in
 properly fitted and balanced carts. Forelimb paracarts may
Carts provide temporary or permanent assistance to non-
also be used to support the chest of dogs with forelimb
ambulatory patients through support and prevention of
problems. This may be done using a special balanced two-
the deleterious effects of recumbency. Several companies
wheeled cart or a quad cart (one with four wheels). Two-
in North America have commercially available carts
wheeled carts are more compact, more maneuverable, and
(Appendix—Manufacturers of Supplies and Equipment).
cost less than quad carts. Tetraparetic or tetraplegic patients
Carts may be made of wide variety of materials. Their
are usually fitted with "quad' carts. Like para carts, quad
frames may be made of aluminum rods or tubing, or PVC
 carts are available with rigid resting surfaces or slings.
piping.'? Tires may be rigid or pneumatic. Wheels may be
Most carts are custom made. Cart measurements are
connected using ball bearings. As a consequence, the per-
specific to each manufacturer. The standing measurements
formance, weight, durability, and cost of ambulation carts 
required for cart constructions include: height of the dorsal
are quite variable.
midline, caudal to the scapula and at the lumbosacral joint;
 Paraparetic or paraplegic patients are usually fitted with
forelimb circumference proximal to the elbow joint; chest
carts that have two wheels or, possibly, three wheels if a
length and circumference, thigh length and circumference
small wheel is used on the caudal aspect of the cart. These
at the fank fold; height at the groin; width of the chest,
paracarts support the lumbar spine and pelvic limbs by
abdomen, and pelvic regions; and width between the front
offering a rigid resting surface for the pubic and ischial
legs. Some carts, however, are adjustable in height, width,
symphyses or by slinging the pelvic limbs (Figure 17-1 1).
and length.
Chapter 17
 Devices for Ambulation Assistance in Companion Animals
311
REFERENCES
Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Minneapolis, MN,
1. Lawler DF, Evans RH, Larson BT, et al: Infuence of lifetime
2008.
food restriction on causes, time, and predictors of death in
 8. Levine JM, Fitch RB: Use of an ankle-foot orthosis in a dog
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 226:225-231, 2005.
with traumatic sciatic neuropathy, J Smatl Anim Pract
 2. Adamson C, Kaufmann M, Levine D, et al: Assistive devices,
44:236-238, 2003.
orthotics, and prosthetics, Vet Clin North Am Smalf Anim
9. Powers CM, Ward SR, Chan LD, et al: The effect of bracing
Pract 35:1441-1451, ix, 2005.
on patella alignment and patellofemoral joint contact area,
3. Bateni H, Maki BE: Assistive devices for balance and mobil-
Med Sci Sports Exerc 36:1226-1232, 2004.
ity : benefits, demands, and adverse consequences, Arch Phys 
10. Rink PC, Scott RA, Lupo RL, et al: Team physician #7. A
Med Rehabil 86:134-145, 2005.
 comparative study of functional bracing in the anterior cruci -
4. Twiste M, Rithalia S: Transverse rotation and longitudinal
ate deficient knee, Orthop Rev 18:719-727, 1989.
translation during prosthetic gait—a literature review,
11. Marcellin-Little DJ, Levine D, Canapp SO Jr: The canine
J Rehabit Res Dev 40:9-18, 2003.
shoulder: selected disorders and their management with
5. Howard DM: Artificial legs for a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
physical therapy, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 22:171-182,
139:564, 1961.
2007.
6. Bedotto RA: Biomechanical assessment and treatment in
12. Bertocci G, Fowler E, BS, Bieger N, et al: Design and
lower extremity prosthetics and orthotics: a clinical perspec-
devetopment of a low-cost wheeled mobility device.Pro-
tive, Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am 17:203-243, 2006.
ceedings of the International Symposium on Rehabilitation
7. Marcellin-Little DJ: Rehabilitation engineering. Proceedings
and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Minneapolis,
of the International Symposium on Rehabilitation and
MN, 2008.
SECTION IV
Therapeutic Modalities
Superficial Thermal Modalities
Ludovica Dragone, Kristinn Heinrichs, David Levine, Tyler Tucker, and Darryl Millis
hermotherapy is the use of superficial heat and
 Cryokinetics combines cryotherapy with motion (passive,
cold as a therapeutic modality for the treatment of
active-assisted, or active) to facilitate normal, pain-free
disease or trauma, and it may be applied using
 movement, and to reduce edema through a muscle pumping
many different methods.
action to facilitate the returm of lymphatic fuid to the vas-
 Superficial heat and cold have been used for centuries
cular system. The primary benefit of cryokinetics is to facili-
to manage soft tissue and joint injuries with the specific
tate the patient's ability to perform pain-free exercise early
goals of relieving pain, altering the physiologic processes
in the rehabilitation process as long as the level of exercise
underlying tissue healing, and affecting the elasticity
remains below that which causes further injury. As signs of
of connective tissue, including muscle, tendon, ligament,
acute infammation begin to subside, the clinician may elect
and joint capsule.'  The primary goal of any thermal
to transition to the use of heat if indicated.
modality is to facilitate the ultimate therapeutic modality
Superficial  heat  is best applied before performing
of exercise.
stretches or exercises to improve range of motion (ROM).
A dog adjusts its temperature based on the information
This is to take advantage of the benefits of tissue tempera-
supplied by the peripheral receptors, and, based upon the
ture elevation, including alteration of tissue viscoelastic
information, activates mechanisms such as trembling.
 properties, which results in increased soft tissue extensibil-
sweating, and modifying the local circulation. Thermo-
ity and decreased joint stiffness. In addition heat causes
therapy works on this latter process.'
vasodilation, which increases tissue ox ygenation and trans-
Thermotherapy applications may be simple or sophisti-
port of metabolites to the exercising tissue, and increases
cated, being delivered through hot or cold water, hot or
the rate of enzymatic and biochemical reactions that
cold packs, hot or cold whirlpools, ice massage, contrast
 may facilitate tissue healing. However, heat applied to0
baths, cold compression units, and other methods.
early in the healing process may result in increased
Before the application of heat or cold, the skin should
inflammation, increased enzymatic activity detrimental to
be checked for the level of sensation, and if decreased
cartilage (e.g., collagenase and gelatinase), and increased
Or absent, extreme care must be used when applying
 local metabolism.
thermal modalities to prevent injury. The skin should also
be checked for any redness, bums, scabs, or wounds
because these may alter the thermal transmission or affect
The Physics of Thermotherapy
the method of treatment. The area being treated should
be cleaned to remove dirt or any other substance on the
Thermotherapy applications fall in the infrared portion of
skin that could decrease conductance or alter the unifor-
the electromagnetic spectrum just beyond the wavelength
mity of the modality. The skin should also be inspected a
 and frequency ranges for visible light.? The shorter the
short time after applying the modality to check for exces-
sive temperature changes, and the skin should be moni-
the depth of penetration. The thermal electrophysical
tored throughout the treatment. Cryotherapy is most
modalities discussed in this chapter fall within the category
effectively used immediately following trauma (accidental
of "near infrared'" and possess shorter wavelengths than
or following surgical procedures) to provide analgesia,
electrical stimulating currents. Therefore, infrared electro-
control bleeding, and reduce infammation, edema, and
physical agents penetrate to a shallower depth compared
muscle spasm.
with electrical stimulating currents. The biologic effects of
312
Chapter 18
Superficial Thermal Modalities
313
electromagnetic radiation depend on the frequency used,
Evaporation—vapocoolant sprays are used to cool the
duration of exposure, tissue characteristics, and power
skin and underlying tissues by causing evaporation and
density.?
ex tracting heat from the tissues.
Electromagnetic energy and its transmission through
Conversion—the conversion of a nonthenmal form of
the body are govermed by several physical laws. The first
energy (mechanical, chemical) that penetrates the
law is the Amdt-Schultz Principle': Tissue must absorb the
tissues and is converted to heat. (Example: therapeutic
energy produced by the thermal agent to stimulate the tis-
ultrasound; sound waves being converted to thermal
sue's normal function. If the energy absorbed is insufficient
energy within the tissues)
to stimulate the tissue, there is no effect. If too much
 Most thermal techniques transfer energy by conduction.
energy is absorbed, tissue damage may occur. The second
Energy travels down a thermal gradient, with energy (heat)
law, related to the first, is the Law of Grotthus-Draper,
being removed from an object, rather than cold being
which determines the fate of the energy. If a tissue does
added. Heat always travels from the warmer object to the
not absorb the energy, it is transmitted to deeper tissue
cooler.3 According to Knight,4 the rate at which heat trans-
layers. If the energy is absorbed more superficially, less
fer occurs depends on the following factors:
energy is transmitted to deeper layers and less penetration
The temperature difference between the body and the
 of the energy occurs. When electromagnetic energy
modality: The greater the difference, the more quickly
encounters the body's tissues, it has three possible fates: it 
the transfer of heat occurs.
may be reflected (e.g., reflected from the skin's surface), it
Regeneration of body heat and modality cooling: As
may be refracted (e.g., at the interface between the dermis
tissue gives up heat, the heat lost is replaced by circulat-
and subcutaneous fat), or it may be absorbed (e.g., by
ing blood and surrounding tissues. Cold application
muscle). The estimated depth of penetration for most infra-
tends to result in greater tissue temperature changes at
red thermal modalities (cold or hot packs, whirlpools, par-
 greater tissue depths as compared with superficial
 affin baths, or luminous infrared devices) is approximately
heating modalities. For example, after a 20-minute ice
1 to 2 cm.
 pack application to the thigh muscles, the intramuscular
 Heat may be transferred by the following mechanisms:
temperature declined more slowly than the subcutane-
· Conduction—the transfer of heat by the direct interac-
ous temperature, and there was less cooling at deeper
tion of the molecules in one area with those in another
tissue levels (and never reached as cold a temperature
area (assuming the areas have a temperature difference).
as the subcutaneous tissue). When the ice pack was
(Example: cold/hot packs)
removed the subcutaneous tissue temperature rose
·Convection—heat transfer by movement of air or fuid
steeply, whereas the intramuscular temperature contin-
from a warm area to a cooler area. (Example: the cir-
ued to decline for a period of time, possibly because heat
culatory system, air temperature)
was transferred from the deeper tissues to warm the
· Radiation—the exchange of electromagnetic energy
superficial tissues, resulting in continued tissue tempera-
that occurs when there is a difference in temperature
ture decreases at the greater tissue depths (Figure 18-1).
between two objects. Heat transfers from a warmer to
The heat storage capacity of the modality: The more
cooler area. (Example: sun, infrared lamps)
energy it takes to convert a solid to a liquid (e.g., ice to
35-
Intramuscular temperature
30-
(2.3 cm deep)
Figure 18-1  Intramuscular versus subcutaneous tissue
2
Subcutaneous
20-
temperature
trocnemius) and subcutaneous temperatures during and
after a 20-minute ice pack application. Note that intramus-
cular temperature declined much more slowly than subcu-
taneous temperature and continued to decrease after the
10-
ice pack was removed. (Redrawn from Hartviksen K: Ice
therapy in spasticity. Acta Neurof Scand 38(suppl 3):79-84.
1962.)
lce packs
40
60
02
22
Time (min)
314
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
water), the greater its latent heat of fusion and its capac-
The primary effect of cryotherapy is the vasoconstric-
ity to remove heat from a tissue. For example crushed
tion mediated by a local reflex and the central nervous
ice packs require more energy for this conversion to
system. The resulting reduced blood fow is useful not only
occur as compared with semisolid gel packs. Therefore
to decrease swelling, but to control hemorrhage and the
ice packs cool tissues for a longer time and to a greater
fow of inflammatory cells as well. The Hunting reaction,
extent than gel packs.
first described by Lewis in 1930, refers to the cyclical
·The size of the modality: The larger the modality (e.g..
temperature oscillation of 2° to 6°C every 8 to 15 minutes
large cold pack), the greater the energy storage
after the tissue temperature approaches 2°C. This effect
capacity.
begins 20 to 40 minutes after cryotherapy application. He
The area of the body in contact with the modality: For
attributed these oscillations to cold-induced vasodilation
example cold water immersion results in the greatest
(CIVD) as an attempt to protect tissues from cold-induced
tissue temperature decline compared to other methods
damage. However, his results have been incorrectly and
 Of cold delivery because a greater surface area is in
widely applied to the sports medicine literature in an
contact with the cooling modality. Vapocoolant sprays
attempt to explain the success of cryokinetics.' Knight
result in the least temperature decline and provide only
et al.? replicated Lewis' experiment and concluded that
superficial cooling because of the relatively small
 Lewis' observation during cold immersion and subsequent
surface area cooled.
rapid increase in temperature after cryotherapy are caused
· The application duration: The longer the contact time
by temperature effects, not CIVD and subsequent increased
between the two surfaces, the more opportunity for
blood fow. Based on these studies, the primary benefits of
energy exchange to occur.
cryotherapy are twofold: decrease in cellular metabolism
·Individual variability: Individuals with lower body fat
and analgesic effects to permit cryoexercise to facilitate
rehabilitation.4.&
greater amounts of subcutaneous fat.
The analgesic response to cryotherapy treatment is
mediated by the peripheral nervous system. Peripheral
Cryotherapy
thermal receptors are categorized as cutaneous myelinated
type MI or A delta, which are sensitive to pricking or sharp
pain and cold; unmyelinated type IV or C receptors for
 Physiologic Effects of Cryotherapy
aching pain; and unmyelinated type IV or C cutaneous
One of the oldest methods of physical therapy is cryo-
receptors for pain and temperature (Table 18-1).
therapy, the application of cold after trauma or surgery.
 The unmyelinated cutaneous receptors respond to abso-
Cryotherapy is used not only during the acute phase
lute temperature and the rate of temperature change.? The
of tissue injury and healing to mitigate the effects and
cold-sensitive receptors begin firing at 36°C and increase
sequelae of tissue injury, but also after exercise during
their firing rate until reaching their maximum at approxi-
 rehabilitation to minimize adverse secondary inflammatory
mately 25° C. The firing frequency drops sharply at tem-
responses.s-7
peratures below 20°C and is minimal by the time the
 The most important physiologic effects are:
receptors are cooled to 10° to 12° C. Conversely, the warm
· Vasoconstriction
receptors also begin firing at 33° to 36°C, rapidly reach
· Decreased blood fow
their maximum fring frequency at 43°C, and drop to a
·Decreased swelling
minimal fring rate at 45C.910 Both the hot and cold recep-
·Reduced enzyme-mediated tissue damage
tors rapidly adapt to temperature changes.
·Analgesia
Central thermosensitive neurons in the preoptic and
The decrease in blood fow slows edema formation after
anterior hypothalamus respond to temperature changes
injury or after surgery. The cooling of the tissue reduces
with autonomic responses to stimulate heat retention by
the metabolic rate of the treated tissue, decreases the rate
the body, by altering cutaneous blood fow and thermo-
of reactions related to the acute inflammatory process,
regulatory behavior such as panting. Figure 18-2 illustrates
causes the inhibition of enzymatic effects related to inflam-
the regulation of temperature by the hypothalamus. The
mation and minimizes the release of histamine, which
anterior hypothalamus also controls thermoinsensitive
reduces the tissue damage.6.7 At a temperature of 30° C or
neurons, such as those that are sensitive to osmolarity and
Jower, cartilage-degrading enzymes (protease, hyaluroni-
glucose concentration.911 Stimulating the posterior hypo-
dase, collagenase) are inhibited. The vasoconstriction of
thalamus by heating does not result in the autonomic
blood vessels also may help to decrease pain by decreasing
responses characteristic of the anterior hypothalamus, but
pressure on nociceptors, which may be stimulated as a
behavioral responses to the heat load occur. Local warming
result of increased tissue swelling and edema, as well as
 Of the medulla increases respiratory frequency. Autonomic
by other physiologic means such as decreased nerve con-
thermoregulatory responses also take place at the spinal
duction velocity.
cord level.1 The sympathetic nervous system response to
Chapter 18
Superficial Thermal Modalities 
315
Table 18-1 
 Sensory Receptors: Anatomy, Location, and Function
Conduction
Sensory Nerve
Diameter
Velocity
Receptor
Type
Classification
Location
(μm)
(m/sec)
Sensory Function
Sensory
A
Ia
Muscle
12-20
72-120
Muscle spindle primary
(afferent)
ending (or 1-degree
myelinated
ending)
A
Ib
12-20
72-120
Golgi tendon organ
Rate of muscle shortening
A
IⅡI
Muscle
6-12
36-72
Muscle spindle, secondary
ending (or 2-degree
ending) muscle length
changes
IⅡI
Skin
6-12
36-72
Vibration, discriminatory
touch, pacinian
corpuscles
A
Skin
1-6
6-36
Pricking, sharp pain,
temperature (cold),
light touch
 Unmyelinated
C
IV
Muscle
~1
0.5-2.0
 Aching pain
C
IV
Skin
~1
0.5-2.0
Pain, temperature
From Guyton AC: Sensory receptors and their basic mechanisms of action. In Textbook of medical physiology Philadelphia, 1986, Saunders.
Heat
loss
/ Pant,
Sweat
Figure 18-2  Central hypothalamic control of thermo-
37
regulation. Diagram shows neuronal control of various
Heat
Peripheral
-un '- indun Aroexe '+ sasuodsan Aoeinanor
retention
WARM
tory input; dashed line, thermoneutral temperature; C,
receptors
Behavior,
cold sensitive neuron; F, neuronal firing rate; T, hypotha-
Skin Blood
Flow
lamic temperature; W, warm sensitive neuron. (Redrawn 
 fro Bouland JA, Dean JB: Temperature receptors in the
37
Heat
central nervous system, Ann Rev Physiol 48:639-654.
production
1986.)
Peripheral
Shivering,
COLD
/Non-shiver
receptors
Thermo-
genesis
thermal load is also chemically mediated through the
 neural transmission is blocked.12.13 Nerve cooling also
release of the neurotransmitters epinephrine and norepi-
increases the duration of the refractory period, the time
nephrine from the adrenal medulla to induce cutaneous
when a nerve cannot be stimulated by a second impulse.14
vasoconstriction.?
Conversely raising the subcutaneous tissue temperature
A primary effect of cryotherapy is analgesia and the
increases sensory nerve conduction velocity, with the
 concomitant reduction of refex muscle spasm. This may
 greatest effect occurring during the initial 2° C temperature
be caused by the decreased nerve conduction velocity that
elevation.' Another mechanism postulated for the analge-
occurs when nerves are cooled. This relationship, known
sic effect afforded by cryotherapy is that the cold receptors 
as the Q10 effect, is thought to be linear until 10° C, when
 are overstimulated by cryotherapy, resulting in pain control
316
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
at the spinal level by preventing pain transmission to
 and assists in muscle pump activity to reduce acute injury-
higher centers via the spinal gate control theory of pain
related edema.
transmission.
Because of these effects, cold is most effective when
Cryotherapy decreases muscle spasm through a number
applied during the acute phase of trauma, typically in the
of possible mechanisms. Muscle spasm compromises 
first 72 hours after injury or surgery. Cryotherapy may also
venous returm and promotes lactate accumulation and aci-
 be useful in chronic pain situations such as arthritic joints.
dosis. The muscle spindle receptors and Golgi tendon
With this condition it can be used to reduce pain, edema,
organ receptors fire more slowly when cooled, although the
collagenolysis, synovial inflammation, and joint destruc-
effect is less pronounced on the Golgi tendon organs.16
tion.l4.5 As a result of its analgesic effect, cryotherapy may
Sudden cooling has an excitatory effect on the muscle
permit decreased use of drugs for pain. This was noted in
spindle, resulting in increased alpha motoneuron activity
 human medicine in a study examining numerous patients 
and increased muscle guarding. As the temperature contin-
after anterior cruciate ligament surgery. Cryotherapy is
ues to decrease, primary spindle afferent activity dimin-
 currently used in postoperative treatment for swelling and
 ishes.12 Muscle spasm, resulting from the pain-spasm-pain
pain, in musculoskeletal injury, muscle spasm, and after
cycle, stimulates the static stretch response of the type II
exercise to prevent edema or pain.
tissue afferents. Applying superficial heat until the tem-
 This thermal modality may also have a significant influ-
 perature is above 42°C decreases the muscle spindle dis-
ence on the effectiveness of laser therapy, given its effects
charge rate while it increases the firing rate of the Golgi
on blood fow and the saturation of blood chromophores
tendon organ.16This sequence of events results in a decrease
in the tissue. Where tissue perfusion is reduced with cryo-
in the fring rate of the alpha motor neuron. Thus cold may
therapy, the absorption of laser energy may be improved,
raise the threshold stimulus for muscle spindle activity,
decreasing muscle spasm.17
 This use of cryotherapy before laser therapy treatment
Thermal effects on strength and endurance have also
could be useful for large dogs in which the target tissue is
been observed by a number of authors. The force-velocity
deeply located.29
curve of muscle contraction shifts downward with decreas-
ing temperature."8 For a given concentric contraction
Cryotherapy Applications
velocity, cooler muscles have a lower force output. Inter-
Cold application may be applied in several ways: cold
 estingly, some studies suggest that proprioception, joint
water-circulating blankets, reusable ice packs, ice cubes
position, and balance remain largely unaffected by cryo-
wrapped in a towel, ice cups, cold immersion, cold com-
therapy, whereas others indicate that joint position aware-
pression devices, vapocoolant sprays, or contrast baths
(Figure 18-3). Selection of the method depends on the
Although most authors agree that changes occur in
desired effects, depth of penetration desired, stage of tissue
muscle torque production with cooling, it is less clear
healing, treatment area, and physiologic goals.
whether those effects are specific to a particular contrac-
Cryotherapy may be achieved by the following physical
tion mode (concentric acceleration or eccentric decelera-
mechanisms:
tion). One group of researchers reported that eccentric
Conduction (ice/cold packs, iced towels, ice massage,
muscle action is augmented following cryotherapy,22
contrast bath, cold compression units)
whereas another group found increases in concentric, but
 not eccentrc, torque?3 Still others found no effects on
peak torque, but increased muscle endurance following
cooling.?4 Functionally, vertical jump performance, an
indicator of lower extremity explosive power, is adversely
caution must be used in making recommendations for per-
formance following cryotherapy. Clearly the literature on
this subject is undecided as to the specific effects of cold
(both immediate and delayed) on muscle strength. These
findings have the most implication for dogs who are
engaged in work or competitive athletic pursuits. It also
requires that the clinician understand the physiology
and biomechanics of muscle actions and sport demands.
Cold and exercise are an effective combination in the treat-
ment of acute musculoskeletal dysfunction unless restric-
Figure 18-3 Cryotherapy options (clockwise starting top right):
tions in fexibility are present.2728 Combining movement
Popsicle-type molds for ice massage, alcohol-water slush plastic bags.
with cold allows for relatively greater pain-free exercise
cotton wraps, commercial cold wraps, fluoromethane cold spray.
Chapter 18
Superficial Thermal Modalities
317
Convection (cold baths)
packs may also be applied. Packs that freeze solid (e.g..
· Evaporation (vapocoolant sprays)
DuraKold) perform better than frozen gel packs, which
Local application of cold may increase connective tissue
contain gelatin or antifreeze to make them more pliable
stiffness (sometimes with decreased tensile strength) and
(Figure 18-5).4 Cold packs containing ethylene glycol anti-
may temporarily increase muscle viscosity (with decreased
freeze should not be used in animals because the contents
 n d  
are toxic if ingested. As with the alcohol-water mixture,
Generalized application of cold over the whole body, or
use caution because the risk for frostbite is greater than
large portions of it, causes decreased respiratory rate; gen-
when using a crushed ice bag (see Figure 18-5).
eralized vasoconstriction in response to cooling of the
Bocobo et al studied the effects of cryotherapy on
hypothalamus; increased muscle spindle bias, which can
intraarticular temperature in dogs' knees. Four treatment
 increase spasticity (opposite to the effect of localized cold
application); and increased muscle tone, which may be
(1) 5 minutes, (2) 15 minutes, (3) 30 minutes, and (4) local
accompanied by shivering. Knowing this, if a patient has
ice bath immersion for 15 minutes. Intraarticular tempera-
Jower motor neuron flaccidity, cryotherapy may be used to
ture decreased in a time-dependent fashion, with tempera-
temporarily facilitate muscle contraction.
tures decreasing 2.2° C, 4.1°C, and 6.5°C after 5, 15, and
 For sanitary reasons and to improve patient comfort and
 30 minutes of ice pack application, respectively. Tempera-
prevent damage by cryotherapy to the treated tissues, a thin
tures continued to drop for a short period of time after the
towel or other material (e.g., towel or pillowcase) is com-
ice pack was removed, and required 21.7, 33.2, and 27.8
monly placed between the cold source and the skin. It is
minutes to returm to pretreatment temperatures, respec.
very important to observe the skin for response to cold
 tively. Ice bath immersion resulted in the greatest decrease
during the treatment. A normal response at the end of a
in joint temperature, 20.2° C and had the greatest rewarm-
cryotherapy treatment is reddening of the skin, and an
ing time of 59.8 minutes. Interestingly, rectal temperature
     sn 
did not decrease with 5 or 15 minutes of ice pack applica-
occurred is whitening or blanching of the skin. Because of
tion, and only decreased 0.5°C with 30 minutes of treat-
skin pigmentation in some dogs, these color changes may
ment. Ice bath immersion caused a 1.6°C drop in rectal
not be apparent, so it may be better to err on the side of
temperature, however. These data indicate that under
caution and reduce the length of application time if there
normal circumstances, local application of ice packs results
 Sunp uonesuas ui saueuo paoadxa aui uogsanb Aue st
in tissue cooling in a time-dependent manner with minimal
a treatment follow the acronym IBAN: intense buming,
effects on core body temperature. Furthermore, the cooling
aching, and numbness.8
 effect appears to plateau after 30 minutes, suggesting that
Cryotherapy is a superficial treatment, but effects of up
 treatments longer than 30 minutes offer no further benefit
to 1 to 4 cm of tissue depth may be noted. The depth
in regards to intraarticular temperature decrease. Immer-
depends on the amount of adipose tissue and local blood
 sion in an ice bath results in more rapid and greater cooling
fow. For these reasons, cryotherapy may be more effective
 than ice pack treatment. There was a prolonged rewamming
in the distal area of the limbs where joint capsules, tendons,
period in all tissues after the removal of cryotherapy, and
and ligaments are more superficial and there is less adipose
these results should be considered before beginning cryo-
tissue.3.15.30
therapy treatment.
Vannetta et al. also examined the effects of a 20-minute
Ice Packs/Cold Packs
Examples of ice packs/cold packs are crushed ice placed
ture as well as intramuscular blood fow.3l Temperatures
in a moist towel; a plastic bag wrapped in a moist towel;
and blood fow ratings were recorded for each minute of
or water and rubbing alcohol of a 3:1 ratio in a sealed
the application and for 80 additional minutes following the
plastic bag and placed in a freezer (this should result in a
removal of the cold pack (Figure 18-6). They found that
slush-type consistency). Numerous types of cold packs are
the temperature of the skin and subcutaneous tissues
available commercially (Figure 18-4). The treatment time
decreased to a greater degree than did the tissues at depths
is generally 10 to 20 minutes for an application of
of 1 and 3 cm. The temperature of the superficial tissues
cryotherapy.
rose sharply following removal of the cold pack but the
The latent heat of fusion is lower for the alcohol-water
temperature of the deeper tissues continued to decrease for
mix than for water alone, therefore it performs similarly to
10 minutes and remained decreased for 60 minutes before
crushed ice alone but at a lower temperature. Use caution
 beginning to returm to baseline. Blood fow was decreased
with the water-alcohol mix because the potential for cold-
in the superficial tissues and remained decreased after the
 induced injuries is greater. Never apply this type of cold
cold pack was removed. Blood flow at 1- and 3-cm depths,
pack directly to the skin. Instead, apply using a layer of
however, were initially decreased but began to rise before
toweling, either wet or dry (wet conducts cold more
the treatment ended and remained above baseline levels for
rapidly), between the cold pack and skin. Commercial cold
the 80 minutes following the cold pack removal. This study
318
Section IV
Therapeutic Modalities
B
Figure 18-4 A, Example of a cryotherapy treatment using a cold pack wrapped around a dog's hind limb. B, Canine stifle icer. C, Carpal icer.
35
Figure 18-5  The effect ofthe heat offusion
30-
can be seen in this comparison of several
2
25
forms of cold packs. The crushed ice and
 DuraKold packs cool the skin more than the
20
Chattanooga frozen gel pack. The effect is
Key
even greater when application is delayed for
15
lce-immediate
DuraKold-immediate
20 minutes after the packs are removed
10
Chattanooga-immediate
from their cooling devices. (Knight KL, A
lce-delayed
re-examination of Lewis' cold-induced vaso-
DuraKold-delayed
dilation in the finger and ankle. J Atht Train
5
 Chattanooga-delayed
15:238-250, 1980.)
0
-10
门
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Time (min)
Chapter 18
Superficial Thermal Modalities
319
40
35
30
25
20
15
10+
1020304050607080
¥90100
Time (min)
 Cutaneous clipped 
- 1 cm clipped
— 3 cm clipped
A
40
Figure 18-6 A, Temperature of caudal thigh muscles during αyo-
ayi y shop ui buweman pue sainujw oz iof uojedde Adeiau
35
hair clipped. Note that the most dramatic temperature changes occur
in the skin. Changes in the deeper tissues occur slower, but the effects
30
are more prolonged, presumably as a result of heat tansfer from
Temperature
25
sanu oz iot uoedde Adenayoo bunp sapnw yun lepnen jo
and rewarming in dogs with hair. Note that the most dramatic tem-
perature changes occur in the skin. Temperature decrease is greater in
20
saso buian pue 'uoedde Adeayo bunp jiey y shop
more quickly, likely because of the insulating effect of the hair. Changes
15
in the deeper tissues occur slower, but the effects are more prolonged,
presumably as a result of heat transfer from regions of higher tem-
10 +
perature to lower temperature. C, Temperature of the skin over the
D
1020
¥30
40
¥50　60
¥708090100
sanuw oz io, uoedde Adenayioo bunp sapsnw youn lepnes
Time (min)
and rewarming in dogs with the hair clipped or with hair intact. Note 
that greater changes occur in haired dogs, suggesting that hair pro-
 Cutaneous haired  — 1 cm haired —- 3 cm haired 
vides an insulating effect.31
B
40
35
Temperature
30
20
15
10 +
D
1020
30
40
5060
¥8090100
Time (min)
 Cutaneous clipped
— Cutaneous haired
C
320
Section IV
Therapeutic Modalities
concluded that the temperature of deeper tissues may
2° to 16°C (35° to 60° F), and the treatment generally lasts
remain decreased for up to 70 minutes following a cold
 for 10 to 20 minutes. Cold water immersion results in the
 pack treatment. Also blood fow increases following the
greatest decrease in tissue temperature because the largest
removal of a cold pack in deeper tissues, perhaps in an
surface area is in contact with the cold source. This is a
 attempt to rewamm the tissues back to their baseline levels.31
difficult form of cryotherapy to use in veterinary medicine
The effects of cold -16°C (3°F) compresses were
because of compliance issues, and it requires the patient to
studied on epaxial muscles in dogs. The gel compress was
stand in the immersion vessel. The target tissues should be
applied for 5, 10, and 20 minutes in random order and
the only areas immersed in the water. Cold water immer-
temperature changes at 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 cm of tissue
sion should not be used in the presence of large wounds
depths were measured. At 10 minutes, the cold decreased
 because of the risk of infection, and delayed healing may
tissue temperature at 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 cm depths 7°C,
result.26
4.7°C, and 4°C, respectively. At 20 minutes the cold
further decreased tissue temperature to 8.2° C, 6.5° C, and
Contrast Baths
4.7°C at the respective depths. The dogs were of ideal
Contrast baths are applied by altermate immersion of an
body condition making the results a good guide, but not
area in warm and cold water. This modality produces alter-
applicable to all dogs. The differences between 10- and
nating vasodilatation and vasoconstriction and is some-
 20-minute applications were significant but applications of
 times used to decrease edema. Contrast baths are appropriate
10 minutes were sufficient for cooling.32
not only in the acute phase, but during the early subacute
 phase of tissue healing as well. During the acute phase of
Cold-Compression Units
tissue healing, the cycles of altermating immersion should
Cold-compression units altermately pump cold water and
have greater emphasis on cold water. An example of this
air through separate tubing in a sleeve wrapped around a
would be immersion in the cold water for 3 minutes and
patient's limb. The temperature of the water is usually set
then immersion in warm water for 1 minute. As the stage
between 2° and 10°C (35 to 50°F) to provide cooling.
of tissue healing progresses, the times spent in warm water
Compression is applied by intermittent infation of the
may increase as the time spent in the cold decreases. Treat-
sleeve with air. Units manufactured for humans may be
ment time for this method of cryotherapy may last from 15
noisy, and the sleeves for human use do not typically
to 30 minutes. Contrast bath treatment for edema should
conform well to dogs. Commercially available units are
end with cold. The varying sensory stimulus is also thought
now made for use in dogs (Figure 18-7) and can be a highly
to promote pain relief and desensitization. This treatment
effective treatment during the acute phase of inflammation
should be considered for conditions such as chronic edema,
or tissue healing.
subacute trauma, sprains, strains, and tendonitis. Altemat-
ing hot and cold packs has also been proposed as an alter-
Cold Immersion
native to contrast baths.
Cold immersion treatments consist of immersion of an
Ice Massage
affected body part in a container of cold water. The tem-
 perature of the water for this type of treatment is usually
Freezing water in cups or any other form of cylinder can
be used to form an ice massage medium (Figure 18-8). To
Figure 18-7 Game Ready cold compression device with stifle
sleeve, http://www.gamereadycanine.com.
Figure 18-8  Ice massage being performed on dog's hind limb.
Chapter 18
Superficial Thermal Modalities
321
Cryotherapy Applied with Coaptation
apply the massage the therapist holds onto the cup, exposes
Devices in Place
the ice surface, and puts it in direct contact with the
 patient's skin. Treatment time is generally 5 to 10 minutes 
Dogs and cats frequently have extemal coaptation devices,
 Or until the affected area is erythematous, slightly pink or
such as bandages or casts, placed over limbs following
red, and numb. This technique can be useful for small,
injury or surgery. Because cryotherapy is useful during the
irregular areas. For large areas, a cold pack is more effec-
acute postinjury phase, it would be beneficial to apply
tive regarding efficient use of time.
cryotherapy over coaptation devices to achieve the benefi-
cial effects of the cryotherapy without the need to remove
Vapocoolant Sprays
and reapply coaptation devices. In the case of cast applica-
These sprays are liquids used to achieve a brief and rapid
tion following fracture treatment, it would not be practical
cooling effect when applied to the skin. The spray absorbs
 or advisable to remove and replace a cast several times
heat as it hits the skin, and the increase in temperature
daily.
causes it to change from a liquid into a vapor. To use the
 In general it is believed that a cast or bandage prevents
vapocoolant spray to treat trigger points, place the affected
 or reduces the effects of cold on the skin when applied over
muscle in a position of slight stretch and spray from proxi-
a cast or bandage. Several studies have addressed the use
mal to distal at a rate of 10 cm/sec from a distance of
of cryotherapy over casts or bandages in people, and
30 cm (12 inches). Repeat four or five times until the
although specific studies are not available in animals, these 
affected area has been covered. It is important to cover the
findings may serve as guidelines for use in animals.
entire length of the muscle with the spray, and the muscle
One study evaluated the magnitude of temperature
should be stretched during and after the application. This
 changes at the skin of the ankle after the application
type of treatment is frequently applied directly over the
of frozen ice packs to the surface of various casts and
-e[ndod ueunq u uiod ass e on [eiyuadns isnf us
bandages both in normal and swollen ankles.3 A Robert
tions.33 This can be a difficult modality to apply to dogs
 Jones bandage, elastic support bandage, a below-knee
because of the hair covering the skin surface. Also, some
plaster cast, or synthetic below-knee cast were applied
of the commercially available sprays may be harmful to
to patients, and two frozen ice packs were placed around
animals if they contact an animal's eyes or are ingested.
the cast or bandage. Although skin temperature under
dressings and casts decreased significantly relative to the
Treatment, Duration, and Frequency
baseline temperatures with application of two frozen
Cryotherapy treatment times depend on the modalities 
ice packs in all groups, less skin temperature decrease
  un an n an an   s
occurred with the Robert Jones bandage (32° to 23° C) as
usually 15 to 20 minutes and may be repeated throughout
compared with casts (31° to 16°C with fiberglass casts).
the day. A common method is to repeat the cold application
In addition, the length of time to achieve the lowest
every 2 to 4 hours during the first 24 to 48 hours after the
ae um paedon sn gt panban aadan us
 injury, or treat 10 to 15 minutes on and 10 to 15 minutes
minutes for the Robert-Jones bandage and fiberglass cast,
off twice. An ice treatment should not be applied for more
respectively. Furthermore this study only evaluated skin
than 20 minutes per session to avoid tissue damage. Local
temperature decrease, so the effects on deeper tissues are
hypothermia should never exceed 30 minutes per treatment
unknown.
session for the same reason, as well as to avoid stimulating
A related study found similar results.36 Over a 90-minute
unwanted local vasodilatation and edema formation.
 period of ice pack application, the average final skin tem-
perature was 16.5°C under a plaster cast, 18.8°C under a
Precautions and Contraindications
synthetic cast, 21.2°C under an Ace wrap dressing, and
The therapeutic effect of cryotherapy is believed to occur 
28.7°C under a Robert-Jones dressing. The authors con-
when the tissue temperature reaches 15 C° to 19°C, but
cluded that ice application effectively decreased skin tem-
this is dependent on the tissues normal temperature. Previ-
peratures through the plaster cast, synthetic cast, and Ace
ous regions of frostbite should be avoided. Although it may
wrap dressing, but the Robert-Jones dressing prevented
be difficult to check skin color of dogs for redness or
adequate cooling. Other studies have similarly concluded
blanching because of pigmentation and hair coat, it should 
that a synthetic or plaster cast does not eliminate tissue
be done after the first 5 to 10 minutes to be certain that
cooling when crushed ice packs are applied to the surface
continued treatment is safe. Apply cryotherapy with caution
of the casts, but the time required for maximum cooling is
Over superficial nerves; open wounds (because of the vaso-
approximately 1 hour,37 and bulky dressings inhibit ade-
constriction that occurs); fractures; areas where there may
quate cooling.33
be sensory or motor nerve impainment; previous frostbite;
in patients with hypertension (cold may increase blood
Postoperative Cryotherapy
 pressure with systemic application); to areas with decreased
A recent study compared cold compresses, a modified
 Or absent sensation; and in very old or very young patients.3
Robert Jones bandage, cold compresses plus a Robert
322
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
Jones bandage, and microcurrent electrical stimulation in 
 about 50° C (122° F).17.34 Any increase of enzymatic activ-
combination with a Robert Jones bandage. The use of cold 
ity results in an increased rate of cellular biochemical reac-
compresses alone or with a modified Robert Jones bandage,
tions. This can increase oxygen uptake and accelerate
or using microcurrent electrical stimulation in combination
healing but may also increase the rate of destructive
with a modified Robert Jones bandage decreased soft tissue
processes.
swelling over 72 hours more than bandaging alone after
 Thermotherapy may cause vasodilation by a variety of
mechanisms, including direct refex activation of the
following TPLO surgery found that cold compression
smooth muscles of the blood vessels by the cutaneous
therapy decreased signs of pain, swelling, and lameness,
thermoreceptors, indirect activation of local spinal cord
and increased range of motion during the first 24 hours
refexes by the cutaneous thermoreceptors, or by increasing
 after surgery.40
the local release of chemical mediators of infammation
(histamine, prostaglandin, bradykinin). These cause an
increase in capillary permeability as well.
Heat Therapy
Superficial heating agents stimulate increased activity
of the cutaneous thermoreceptors. It is proposed that trans-
Few therapeutic procedures have been historically used for
mission from cutaneous thermoreceptors, via their axons,
as long as heat; it is one of the oldest forms of physical
communicate directly to nearby cutaneous blood vessels to
therapy. Superfcial heating agents penetrate to tissue
cause the release of bradykinin and nitrous oxide. Brady-
depths up to approximately 2 cm, whereas deep heating
kinin and nitrous oxide act as vasoactive mediators stimu-
agents elevate tissue temperature to depths of 5 cm.
lating relaxation of the smooth muscles of the blood vessel
Although skin temperature may increase 10°C or more,
walls causing vasodilation. This vasodilation occurs
tissues at 1 cm in depth are typically raised less than 3°C
locally, in the area where the heat is applied. Cutaneous
and tissues at 2 cm less than 1°C.
thermoreceptors also project, via dorsal root ganglia, to
synapse with intermeurons in the dorsal hom of the gray
matter of the spinal cord. These intermeurons synapse with
Physiologic Effects of Heat
sympathetic neurons in the lateral gray hom of the thora-
The effects of heat are opposite those of cold, except
 columbar segments of the spinal cord to inhibit their firing
that heat and cold both may relieve pain and muscle
 and thus decrease sympathetic output. This decrease in
spasm. With an increase in tissue temperature, there is
sympathetic activity causes a reduction in smooth muscle
a sedative and analgesic effect, increased leukocyte
contraction, resulting in vasodilation both at the site of heat
migration into the heated area, increased metabolic rate,
application and in the cutaneous vessels of the distal
and arteriolar dilation that results in increased capillary
extremities. This distal vasodilative effect of thermother-
blood fow (which can promote edema) and decreased
apy may be used to increase cutaneous blood fow to an
blood pressure (if heat is applied for a prolonged time or
 area where it is difficult or unsafe to apply a heating agent
Over a large surface area).1.3441 Other benefts of superf-
directly. The vasodilation of the vessels of the distal
cial heat may include reducing edema (however, heat
extremities can promote the reabsorption of edema, but in
should not be used during acute infammatory periods
the same way can promote edema if applied during times
because edema may be exacerbated) and increasing
 Of acute inflammation.34
 patient comfort. The most important beneficial physio-
 Local application of heat increases sensory and motor
logic effects of heat are:
nerve conduction velocity. An increase or decrease in con-
Increased circulation (vasodilation)
duction velocity reduces pain and muscle spasm. Nerve
·Pain relief
· Increased soft tissue extensibility
for every 1°C (1.8° F) increase in temperature.34 The clini-
·Relaxation of muscle spasm
cal implications of these effects are not well understood.
Heat causes vasodilation and increases the rate of blood
They may contribute to reduced pain perception or
and lymph fow, thus potentiating the reabsorption of
improved circulation that occurs in response to the increas-
edema, which helps to remove tissue metabolites, and
ing tissue temperature. Nerve firing rate (frequency) also
increase tissue oxygenation and metabolic rate. Normally
changes in response to changes in temperature. Elevation
the metabolic rate increases two to three times for every
of muscle temperature decreases the firing rate of type II
10° C (18° F) increase in temperature. Increased enzymatic
muscle spindle efferents and gamma efferents and increases
and metabolic activity has been observed in tissues at 399
the firing rate of type Ib fibers from Golgi tendon organs.
to 43°C (102° to 109° F), and the activity rates continue to
These changes in nerve firing rates are thought to contrib-
 increase until 45°C (113°F). Beyond this temperature, the 
ute to a reduced firing rate of alpha motor neurons and thus,
protein constituents of enzymes begin to denature and
to a reduction in muscle spasm. The decrease in gamma
enzyme activity rates decrease, ceasing completely at
neuron activity causes the stretch on the muscle spindles
Chapter 18
Superficial Thermal Modalities
323
to decrease, reducing afferent firing from the spindles. The
neuron and the transmission of pain stimuli. The gate
decreased spindle afferent activity results in decreased
  s n a sn   
alpha motor neuron activity and thus, relaxation of muscle
only non-nociceptive nerves can inhibit pain. One area of
contraction.1.2
the brain involved in reduction of pain sensation is the
Another effect of heat is to relieve pain. Several studies
periaqueductal gray matter that surrounds the third ven-
 demonstrate that the application of local heat can increase 
tricle and the cerebral aqueduct of the ventricular system.
an individual's pain threshold. The inhibitory control of
Stimulation of this area produces analgesia by activating
pain at the spinal cord level was explained in the gate
descending pathways that directly and indirectly inhibit
control theory of Melzack and Wall in 1965.42 This theory
nociceptors in the laminae of the spinal cord. It also acti-
suggests that the perception of pain is not a direct result
vates opioid receptor-containing parts of the spinal
of activation of nociceptors, but instead is modulated
cord 27.342 Therefore the control of pain produced by ther-
by the interaction between different neurons, both pain-
transmitting and non-pain-transmitting. The theory asserts
by activation of cutaneous thermoreceptors, but may indi-
that activation of nerves that do not transmit pain signals
rectly be the result of improved healing, decreased muscle
can interfere with signals from pain fibers and inhibit
spasm, or reduced ischemia.
an individual's perception of pain. The gate control
 Muscle strength and endurance may decrease during the
theory suggests that sensory inputs of pain are modulated
-dns io daap jo uonndde  iae san oe ren
through ascending and descending pathways in the central
cial heating agents. It is proposed that this initial decrease 
nervous system. Descending neural pathways potentiate or
in muscle strength is the result of changes in the firing
attenuate pain signals infuencing the amount of neu-
rates of type I muscle spindle efferent, gamma efferent
rotransmitter released by the incoming neurons or by
and type Ib fibers from Golgi tendons organs caused by
changing the sensitivity of the ascending nerves in the
heating of the motor neurons. Beyond 30 minutes after the
spinal cord to these neurotransmitters. Afferent pain-
application of heat and for the next 2 hours, muscle strength
receptive nerves, those that bring signals to the brain, are
gradually recovers and then increases to greater than pre-
comprised of at least two kinds of fibers: a fast, relatively
treatment levels.11
thick, myelinated A delta fiber that carries messages
 Increasing the temperature of soft tissue increases its
quickly with intense pain and a small, unmyelinated, slow
extensibility. When soft tissue is heated before stretching.
C fiber that carries the longer-term throbbing and chronic
the length gained is maintained for a greater amount of
pain. Large-diameter A beta fibers are non-nociceptive (do
time after the stretching force is applied, less force is
not transmit pain stimuli) and inhibit the effects of firing
required to achieve the increase in length, and the risk of
by A delta and C fibers.
tissue damage is reduced. If heat is applied to collagenous
The peripheral nervous system has centers at which pain
soft tissue such as tendon, ligament, scar tissue, or joint
stimuli can be regulated. Some areas in the dorsal horm of
capsule before prolonged stretching, plastic deformation,
the spinal cord that are involved in receiving pain stimuli
whereby the tissue increases in length and maintains most
from A delta and C fibers also receive input from A beta
of the increase after cooling, can be achieved. In contrast,
fibers. The non-nociceptive fibers indirectly inhibit the
if collagenous tissue is stretched without prior heating.
effects of the pain fibers, "closing a gate' to the transmis-
elastic deformation, whereby the tissues increase in length
sion of their stimuli. In other parts of the laminae, pain
while the force is applied but lose most of the increase
fibers also inhibit the effects of non-nociceptive fibers,
when the force is removed, may occur.34.43 For this reason,
psixa Ar uonuo Aoarun u a a suuado,
thermotherapy can be used clinically to increase joint
with A beta and C fibers, which may form a synapse on
 ROM and decrease joint stiffness. Both of these effects are,
the same projection neuron. The same neurons may also
 in fact, the result of the increase in soft tissue extensibility
-us ose u unaau Aoa ue ym sasds uo
that occurs with increased soft tissue temperature. Increas-
 apses on the projection neuron, reducing the chance that
ing soft tissue extensibility contributes to increasing joint
the latter will fire and transmit pain stimuli to the brain.
 ROM, especially if stretching is performed immediately
The inhibitory intermeuron fires spontaneously. The C
after the application of heat or during it. If the tissues are
allowed to cool before being stretched, the effects of prior
rectly increasing the projection neuron's chance of firing.
 heating on tissue extensibility are lost.34
The A beta fiber, on the other hand, forms an excitatory
Decreased muscle spasm may be a result of relieving
 commection with the inhibitory interneuron, thus decreasing
 the ischemia caused by the chronic contraction of a muscle
the projection neuron's chance of firing. (Like the C fiber,
and partial occlusion of the blood vessels. Superficial
the A beta fiber also has an excitatory connection on the
heating also decreases muscle spindle activity by decreas-
projection neuron itself.) Thus, depending on the relative
rates of firing of C and A beta fibers, the firing of the non-
for the decrease in spasm as well as breaking the pain-
nociceptive fiber may inhibit the firing of the projection
spasm cycle.34
324
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
Heat Applications
of tissues that may be affected by the modality in relation
Superficial heating agents typically heat the skin and sub
to the tissues intended to receive benefit.
cutaneous tissues to a depth of 1 to 2 cm. Although skin
Hot packs may be reusable and usually can maintain an
temperature may increase 10°C or more, tissues at 1 cm
elevated temperature for 20 to 30 minutes. The therapist
 in depth are typically raised less than 3°C and tissues at
should be certain that the hot pack is not too warm. A good
2 cm less than 1°C. The tissues are usually heated for 15
rule of thumb is that if the hot pack is comfortable when
to 20 minutes to promote hyperemia.34
it is placed on the back of the therapist's neck, it should be
Heat therapy may be transmitted by:
safe for the patient. Placing the therapist's hands under the
·Conduction (hot packs, paraffin, hydrotherapy)
hot pack and against the animal's skin is also a good way
·Convection (hydrotherapy, air temperature)
to check for appropriate temperature. To further avoid
·Radiation (UV lamps, infrared)
burns to the treated tissues, the therapist should place a
Heat therapy (Figure 18-9) may be used to relieve pain,
towel between the heat source and the skin. It is very
relax muscle spasm, increase the blood supply to an area,
important to observe the skin's response to the treatment
and increase soft tissue extensibility. Subacute and chronic
and whenever the skin feels very warm or hot or looks red,
infammation or traumatic conditions such as contusions,
another layer of toweling should be added between the
sprains, strains, and myositis can also beneft from heat
pack and skin. If overheated, dogs with normal sensation
therapy.
willtry to move away from the pack but dogs with impaired
Superficial heating agents may include: hot packs, heat
sensation may not realize the area is overheating and are
wraps, hosing with warm water, whirlpools, paraffin baths,
especially susceptible to bums. Hot packs are a relatively
circulating warm water blankets, electric heating pads,
safe form of thermotherapy because they cool during treat-
and infrared lamps. The last two are considered to have
ment, minimizing the risk of bum.
a higher risk of bums in animals. Another common fonm
The effects of wanm 47°C (116°F) compresses were
of superficial thenmotherapy is heated beds for dogs,
studied on epaxial muscles in dogs. The gel compress was
which have been used for comfort or conditions such as
applied for 5, 10, and 20 minutes in random order and
 arthritis.
temperature changes at 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 cm tissue depths
were measured. The compress significantly increased
Hot Packs
tissue temperature of the lumbar region (>2° C) at 0.5 and
Different forms of hot packs include heated sacks with a
1.0 cm depths, but heating was minimal at 1.5 cm depth.
canvas covering that may be filled with cracked corm,
The compresses in this study were not as hot as many
beans, bentonite (hydrophilic silicate gel), or other inert
commercial products and the dogs were of ideal body
materials; electric heating pads; damp microwaved towels;
condition making the results a good guide, but not appli-
Or circulating warm water blankets. There are different
 cable to all dogs and all hot packs.4
kinds of hot pack shapes and sizes designed to fit different
 areas of the body, but it is important to consider the depth
lawm uwm
Warm water is another way of applying superficial heating.
Water may be applied directly to the area being treated,
towels heated with warm water may be used, or the affected
segment may be immersed in a warm water bath or a
whirlpool. If the last method is chosen, be mindful that
systemic heating with a warm bath may decrease blood
 pressure and increase the heart rate.34 whirlpools have the
advantage of also providing increased hydrostatic pressure
to submerged body parts, which may reduce edema.
Increased hydrostatic pressure helps to increase lymphatic
and venous fow from a distal to proximal direction. The
temperature of a whirlpool is based on the needs of the
individual animal. For example, patients with chronic con-
ditions may be treated with warmer water than patients
with more acute disorders. When using an underwater
treadmill in conjunction with thermotherapy, the tempera-
ture may range from approximately 27° to 35°C (80° to
 95° F), depending on how vigorously the dog is exercising.
The animal may be immersed in water at approximately
30°C after exercise to have a moderate heating effect,
Figure 18-9  Example of a hot pack placed over a dog's hip.
which continues to increase blood circulation and promote
Chapter 18
Superficial Thermal Modalities
325
the removal of lactic acid and other metabolites produced
swelling. The treatment times depend on which method is
following intense exercise.34
chosen.34
Paraffin Baths
Precautions and Contraindications
Warm, melted paraffin is another method of thermother-
 Electric heating pads and infrared lamps are forms of ther-
apy. For this application, the paraffin is mixed with mineral
motherapy that have a higher risk of bums. Electric heating
oil in a 6: 1 or 7: 1 ratio of paraffin to oil to reduce the
pads should never be placed under an anesthetized or
melting temperature of the paraffin from 54° C (129° F) to
heavily sedated animal or one with decreased superficial
between 45° and 50°C(113° to 122° F). Paraffn can safely
skin sensation. In general animals should never be left
be applied at this temperature because of its low specific
unattended during treatment and the skin should be moni-
heat and thermal conductivity. Paraffin is usually used for
tored frequently.
heating the distal extremities because it can maintain good
The patient should be protected from bums by insulat-
contact with these irregularly contoured areas.34 Treatment
 ing hot packs with towels and by examining the skin every
time for this method is 15 to 20 minutes. The use of paraf-
few minutes. If the skin feels excessively hot, more towels
fin baths in veterinary medicine is messy, and therefore
should be added to the insulation layer or the hot pack
uncommon.
 should be removed and allowed to cool before reapplying.
Heat therapy should be modifed or abandoned if it causes
Infrared Lamps
pain or there is an exacerbation of pathologic signs.
 Infrared lamps emit electromagnetic radiation in the fre-
When hot packs are applied to an infected site or
quency range that gives off heat when absorbed by matter.
 abscess, the suppurative process is enhanced. Because of
 The tissue temperature increase produced by infrared lamp
the increased circulation, more phagocytes and antibodies
radiation is directly proportional to the amount of radiation
enter the site, which is a positive response. Too much heat
that penetrates the tissue. This is related to the power
may increase pain in these cases, however, and it is better
and wavelength of the radiation, the distance of the
s     s a 
radiation source from the tissue, and the absorption coef-
Heat promotes tissue extensibility of joint capsules,
ficient of the tissue. Higher power infrared delivers more
tendons, and scar tissue and decreases joint stiffness, so
radiation to the skin.'s Infrared lamps emit infrared
precautions must be taken to not overstress these tissues
light that penetrates the skin to promote increased blood
because joints are less stiff and more mobile during treat-
fow and circulation. This method of thenmotherapy is used 
ment. Although thermotherapy may reduce pain of any
to warm large areas of the body. The lamps are positioned
etiology, it is not recommended as a treatment for pain
30 to 40 cm from the affected area. The therapist should
caused by acute inflammation because an increase in tissue
place his or her hand under the heat lamp for several
temperature may aggravate other signs of infammation,
minutes at the desired height to be sure that the temperature
 including heat, redness, and edema.34
is comfortable. Because of the dog needing to remain
 Precautions are needed for patients that are pregnant,
stationary during treatment, this method of heating is
extremely obese, have impaired circulation, poor thermal
umcommon.
regulation, or cardiac insufficiency. Also, animals with bur-
sitis, tendonitis, impaired circulation, or noninflammatory
Treatment Duration and Frequency
edema have decreased resistance to heat and should be
given heat therapy with caution.4 The natural thermoregu-
The duration and frequency of thermal treatment depend
latory mechanisms are less effcient in very young animals.
on the severity of the injury, the stage of tissue healing, the
 In older patients, the temperature-regulating systems may
area of the injured tissues, and the desired outcome. Heat
function poorly or the patient's sensitivity to pain may be
treatments generally last from 15 to a maximum of 30
impaired. The lessened cardiovascular and respiratory
minutes and may be repeated three or four times daily. If
reserves in older animals may cause them to be less toler-
white areas (due to rebound vasoconstriction) or red
ant of heat.45
mottled areas appear on the skin, the treatment should be
Local application of heat is contraindicated in the fol-
lowing situations: active bleeding, acute infammation,
when the temperature is increased between 2° and 4°C in
thrombophlebitis, cardiac insufficiency, fever, malignancy.
the tissues. Tissue temperatures greater than 45°C can be
presence of swelling or edema, and poor body heat regula-
painful and cause irreversible tissue damage.α Hot packs
tion.34 It should be used with extra caution in cases of
have their greatest application in combination with other
decreased or impaired sensation and in cases of decreased
physical procedures. They may be applied before or even
or impaired circulation in the area to be treated (to avoid
during massage, exercise, or electrical stimulation. It is
 Overheating). If there is a wound and heat cannot be applied
recommended that heat be applied no earlier than 48 hours
to this area, a hot pack may be applied to a remote area
 after an injury, because earlier application may potentiate
with an excellent blood supply in the hope that reflex
326
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
vasodilatation will occur at the treatment site, which may
5. Bocobo C, Fast A, Kingery W et al: The effect of ice on
promote better wound healing.
intra-articular temperature in the knee of the dog, Am J Phys
Med Rehabil 70:181-185, 1991.
 6. McMaster W: A literary review on ice therapy in injuries, Am 
Conclusion
J Sports Med 5:124-126, 1977.
7. Olson J, Stravino V: A review of cryotherapy, Phys Ther
62:840-853, 1972.
Heat therapy and cryotherapy are powerful adjuncts in the
 8. Knight KL: A re-examination of Lewis' cold-induced vaso-
rehabilitation of musculoskeletal injuries in dogs. Success-
dilation in the finger and ankle, J Atht Train 15:238-250,
ful management depends on an accurate assessment of
1980.
the dog's presenting problems at the beginning of each
 9. Yarnitsky D, Ochoa JL: Warm and cold specific somatosen-
treatment session. Some effects and clinical indications
sOry systems: psychosocial thresholds, reaction times, and
for the use of cryotherapy and heat therapy are the same,
peripheral conduction yelocities, Brain 114:1819-1826,
but others are very different. There are some situations
1991.
 10. Iggo A: Cutaneous thermoreceptors in primates and sub-
in which either may be used, and others in which only
 One would be appropriate. Careful consideration should be
primates, J Physiot 151:332-341, 1969.
 11. Buolant JA, Dean JB: Temperature receptors in the central
taken to choose the proper therapeutic modality to achieve
nervous system, Annu Rev Physiol 48:639-654, 1986.
an appropriate effect and understand how the modality
12. Lippold O, Nicholls J, Redfearn J: A study of the afferent
 Cryotherapy and cryokinetics are most useful during
discharge produced by cooling a mammalian muscle spindle,
J Physiol 153:218-231, 1960.
the acute infammatory stages of tissue healing. Two
13. Lowitzsch K, Hopf HC, Galland J: Changes of sensory con-
recent papers on cruciate repairs have demonstrated the
duction velocity and refractory periods with decreasing
effectiveness of cryotherapy to minimize inflammation.39.40
tissue temperature in man, J Neuro! 216:218-231, 1977.
Because tissue healing is initially established with rela-
14. Evans T, Ingersoll C, Knight K: Agility following the appli-
tively weak tissue strength, it is susceptible to injury from
cation of cold therapy, J Atht Train 30:231-234, 1995.
exercise that is too aggressive or from changing from
15. Lowdon B, Moore R: Determinants and nature of intramus-
cold to heat too early, thus exacerbating the inflammatory
cular temperature changes during cold therapy, J Atht Train
30:231-234, 1995.
response. After new tissue has been established and the
16. Curtier DP, Kramer JF: Sensory nerve conduction heating
tensile strength of the tissue continues to increase with
effects of ultrasound and infrared, Physiother Can 34:281,
healing. the emphasis shifts to promoting a mobile scar,
1982.
normal range of motion, and normal fexibility. In patients
17. Mense S: Effects of temperature on the discharge of
with limitations in these areas, concurrent application of
muscle spindle and tendon organs, Pfugers Arch 374:159-
superficial heat and fexibility exercises results in benefi-
166, 1978.
cial plastic changes to the tissues that may be relatively
18. Ratanunga Kw: Infuence of temperature on the velocity of
permanent. Superficial cold and heat modalities may
shortening and rate of tension development in mammalian
be a very useful adjunct in a rehabilitation program to
skeletal muscle, J Atht Train 316:35-36, 1981.
facilitate nature's ultimate therapeutic modality, controlled
19. La Riviere J, Ostermig L: The effect of ice immersion on joint
position sense, J Sport Rehabil 3:58-67, 1994.
exercise.
 Selection of the appropriate modality depends largely
20. Pincivero D, Gieck J, Saliba E: Rehabilitation of a lateral
 On an understanding and accurate assessment of the stage
ankle sprain with cryokinetic and functional progressive
exercise, J Sport Rehabil 2:200-207, 1993.
(acute infammatory, proliferative, or tissue remodeling) of
 21. Thieme H, Ingersoll C, Knight K: Cooling does not affect
tissue healing, an accurate clinical assessment of the dog's
knee proprioception, J Atht Train 31:8-11, 1996.
functional abilities, the established treatment goals, and
 22. Catlaw K, Arnold B, Perrin D: Effect of cold treatment on
continued reevaluation as the patient's (and tissues') status
concentric and eccentric force-velocity relationship of the
changes.
quadriceps femoris, Isokinet Exerc Sci 5: 157-160, 1996.
 23. Ruiz D, Myrer J, Durrant E: Cryotherapy and sequential exer-
cise bouts following cryotherapy on concentric and eccentric
REFERENCES
strength in the quadriceps, J Atht Train 28:320-323, 1993.
1. Prentice WE: Therapeutic modalities in sports medicine,
 24. Kimura I, Gulick D, Thompson G: The effect of cryotherapy
New York, 1996, McGraw-Hill.
on eccentric plantar fexion peak torque and endurance,
2. Ritter HTM: Thermat agents in rehabilitation, Philadelphia,
J Atht Train 32:124-126, 1997.
1996, Davis
 25. Gallant S, Knight K, Ingersoll C: Cryotherapy effects on leg
3. Palmer JE, Knight KL: Ankle and thigh skin surface tem-
press and vertical jump force production, J Atht Train 3 1:S18,
perature changes with repeated ice pack application, J Athf
1996.
Train 31:319-323, 1996
 26. Grecier M, Kendrock Z, Kimura I: Immediate and delayed
4. Knight KL: Cryotherapy in sport injury management,
uv f e pue pmod peuogouny uo Adeyoso go soe
Champaign, IL, 1995, Human Kinetics.
Train 31:S32, 1996.
Chapter 18
Superficial Thermal Modalities
327
 27. Dufresne T, Jarzabaski K, Simmons D: Comparison of super-
37. Metzman L, Gamble JG, Rinsky LA: Effectiveness of ice
ficial and deep heating agents followed by a passive stretch
 packs in reducing skin temperature under casts, Clin Orthop
on increasing the fexibility of the hamstring muscle group,
Relat Res Sep(330):217-221, 1996.
Phys Ther 74:70, 1994.
38. Ibrahim T, Ong SM, Taylor GJSC: The effects of different
28. Taylor B, Warning C, Brasher T: The effects of therapeutic
dressings on the skin temperature of the knee during cryo-
application of heat or cold followed by static stretch on
therapy, The Knee 12:21-23, 2005.
hamstring muscle length, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 21:283-
39. Rexing J, Dunning D, Siegel AM et al: Effects of cold com-
286, 1995.
 pression, bandaging, and microcurrent electical therapy
29. McGowan C, Goff L, Stubbs N: In Animat physiotherapy:
after cranial cruciate ligament repair in dogs, Vet Surg 39:54-
Assessment, treatment and rehabilitation of animats, 2007,
58, 2010.
 Blackwell Publishing.
40. Drygas KA, McClure SR, Goring RL et al: Effct of cold
30. Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessel TM: Principles of neuraf
compression therapy on postoperative pain, swelling, range
science, New York, 2000, McGraw-Hill.
of motion, and lameness after tibial plateau leveling
 31. Vannetta M, Millis DM, Levine D et al: The effects of cryo-
osteotomy in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 238(10):1284-1291,
therapy on in-vivo skin and muscle temperature, and intra-
2011
muscular blood fow, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 36( 1):A47,
 41. Gentry SJ, Mann FA: Postoperative care of canine and feline
2006.
orthopedic patients, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:146-150,
32. Millard RP, Towle-Millard HA, Rankin DC et al: Effect of
1993.
 cold compress application on tissue temperature in healthy
42. Melzack R, Wall PD: Pain mechanisms: a new theory,
dogs, Am J Vet Res 74:443-447, 2013.
Science 150(699):971-979, 1965.
33. Travell JG, Simons DG: Myofasciat pain and dysfunction:
 43. Lehmann JF: Effect of therapeutic temperatures on tendon
the trigger point manual, vois I and 1ll, Baltimore, 1992,
extensibility, Arch Phys Med Rehab 51:481-487, 1970.
Williams & Wilkins.
44. Millard RP, Towle-Millard HA, Rankin DC et al: Effect of
34. Cameron, MH: Physical agents in rehabilitation: from
warm compress application on tissue temperature in healthy
research to practice, Philadelphia, 1999, Saunders.
dogs, Am J Vet Res 74:448-451, 2013.
 35. Okcu G, Yercan HS: Is it possible to decrease skin tempera-
45. Bockstahler B, Levine D, Millis D: Essentiat fact of physio-
ture with ice packs under casts and bandages? A cross-
therapy in dogs and cats: rehabilitation and pain manage-
sectional, randomized trial on normal and swollen ankles,
ment, Germany, 2004, Be- Vetverlag.
Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 126:668-673, 2006.
 46. Johnston SA: Conservative and medical management of hip
36. Weresh MJ, Bennett GL, Njus G: Analysis of cryotherapy
dysplasia, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 22(3):595-
penetration: a comparison of the plaster cast, synthetic cast,
606, 1992.
Ace wrap dressing, and Robert-Jones dressing, Foot Ankle
Int 17(1):37-40, 1996.
Therapeutic Ultrasound
David Levine and Tim Watson
he aim of physical rehabilitation is to reestablish
Coupling Techniques
normal function using modalities such as heat and
 electrical stimulation, mobilization, and therapeu-
The therapist must first consider the site of soft tissue
tic exercise.' Superficial heating agents penetrate soft
involvement, such as muscle, joint capsule, tendon, bursa,
tissues to a depth of approximately 1 cm. Deep heating
or scar tissue, and position the animal appropriately. Posi-
agents can elevate tissue temperatures at depths of 2 cm or
tioning is a compromise between patient comfort and
more. Deep heating agents commonly used include thera-
access to the target tissue.
peutic ultrasound (US) and diathermy. Although diathermy
The US beam is attenuated in air and refected at air-
is an effective deep heating modality, it requires the patient
 tissue interfaces. Consequently a coupling medium must
to remain stationary for 15 to 20 minutes and is not practi-
 be placed between the sound head and the skin.12 Methods 
cal in dogs.
for direct coupling, immersion, and use of coupling cush-
Therapeutic US is considered an effective treatment
ions have been described for dogs.13
modality  for  rehabilitating  musculoskeletal  conditions
Direct coupling is preferred when the surface to be
such as restricted range of motion (ROM) resulting from
treated is relatively fat and is larger than the transducer
joint contracture, pain and muscle spasm, and wound
head surface. A layer of water-soluble US gel is spread
healing.? There are advantages and disadvantages of US
over the skin, and the sound head is placed in contact
therapy (Box 19-1). Many protocols for the administration
with the gel. Elimination of as much air as possible maxi-
of US are based on tradition or extrapolated from basic
mizes the US energy entering the tissues. If there are
science research and remain to be tested in controlled clini-
 bony prominences in the treatment area or the surface is
cal trials.36 This chapter is based on a review of current
very small, smaller applicators (transducer heads) are
literature pertaining to the basic research findings (in
preferable.
 human and dogs) and the clinical application of US therapy
Commercially prepared water-soluble US gels are the
in dogs.
best and most practical coupling method. The gel may be
preheated. Coupling agents that are not recommended
include' substances that may irritate or penetrate through
Physical Principles
the skin?; electroconductive gels, such as for electrocardi-
ography or electromyography, which contain salts that can
Energy within a sound beam decreases as it travels through
damage the transducer face'; lanolin-based compounds,
tissue, because of scatter and absorption. Scattering is the
which would cause heating of the transducer head with
deflection of sound out of the beam when it strikes a
 poor transmission to tissue?; and mineral oil, which is
reflecting surface. Absorption is the transfer of energy from
the sound beam to the tissues. Absorption is high in tissues
should not be used because they generally do not provide
with high protein content?* and relatively low in adipose
effective transmission of US.
tissue.7.9
Other methods of coupling have been used. However,
For more detailed information regarding the compo-
research results on these indirect coupling methods are
nents of US machines, piezoelectric effects, sound genera-
 inconclusive, and further investigation is warranted.14 The
tion, and sound propagation through tissues, the reader is
underwater method was popular before smaller transducer
referred to other sources.10.11
heads became available.? Immersion should be considered
only when the surface to be treated is so uneven that direct
The authors acknowledge Janet Steiss and Laurie McCauley fortheir work on this chapter
contact is too difficult. The part of the body to be treated,
in the previous edition.
usually a distal limb, can be immersed in a container of tap
328
Chapter 19
Therapeutie Ultrasound
329
degassed tap water baths, and gel-filled condoms. The
Box 19-1
Advantages and Disadvantages of
authors recommended that if the direct method cannot be
Therapeutic Ultrasound
used because of the contour of the surface to be treated,
Advantages
clinicians should consider the use of commercially avail-
Produces local heating of deeper tissues
able gel pads. If other direct techniques are used, transmis-
Treatment time is short, approximately 10 minutes
sion is considerably less than with the direct coupling
Disadvantages
technique or commercial gel pads.14
The dosage is difficult to monitor
The Effect of the Hair Coat
tenderness of the treated area
The hair coat of dogs treated with US presents a problem
 not encountered with human patients. Because US energy
is absorbed by tissues with high protein content, and
water at room temperature. The water and the animal's skin
defection of the US beam occurs at tissue interfaces, it
must be clean.15 Water in a whirlpool is not recommended
would be expected that US penetration through the hair
if it has been agitated because air bubbles form in the
coat into underlying tissues would be poor. For horses, one
water. Deionized, degassed water is not necessary, but the
author has specifically recommended clipping the hair and
water may be boiled and cooled or allowed to stand to
using adequate coupling gel or having the horse stand in
remove air bubbles. Even so, small air bubbles tend to
water to reduce any air interphase.17
accumulate on the transducer face and the skin during
 A study was conducted in dogs to determine tempera-
treatment. The therapist can wipe these off quickly, but
tures in underlying tissues when delivering US through
should try to minimize his or her own exposure. With
 intact hair coats.α Despite application of a thick layer of
regard to container type, metal containers refect some of
gel on the skin, US delivered through short or long hair
the US beam, which could increase the intensity in areas
coats produced only minimal temperature increases in the
near the metal; rubber or plastic do not cause as much
underlying tissues, compared with therapy after the hair
reflection. During treatment, the transducer should be held
had been clipped, although there was considerable warming
underwater 0.5 to 3.0 cm from the skin surface. The inten-
within the hair coat and on the skin (Figure 19-1).
sity may be increased by 0.5 W/cm? to compensate for
 absorption by water.?
Treatment Variables
Immersion has not compared favorably with direct
coupling in several studies that examined the tissue tem-
The following list contains treatment variables that must
peratures achieved with these two methods. One study
be considered for each patient. These items should be
compared immersion to topical US gel on temperature
documented in the patient's record:
rise at a depth of 3 cm in the gastrocnemius muscle of
1.Frequency
humans.2 The treatment consisted of continuous US at
2. Intensity
1.5 W/cm? for 10 minutes, with the sound head moved at
3. Duty cycle
a speed of 4 cm per second. With direct coupling, tissue
4. Treatment area
temperature increased 4.8° C compared with 2.1°C with
 5. Treatment duration
 immersion. In another study the lateral epicondyle of pigs
6. Speed of the sound head
was treated with the transducer in direct contact with the
7. Treatment schedule
skin and with the limb immersed in a water bath with the
Sound waves above a frequency of 20,000 hertz (20 kHz)
applicator held 2 cm from the skin surface. The tempera-
exceed the upper range of human hearing and are termed
ture in the tendons of the extensor muscles originating at
US. The higher the frequency, the less divergent the sound
the lateral epicondyle rose into the therapeutic range (an
beam. Ultrasound beams are considered to be collimated,
increase of 2° or more) with direct coupling, but not with
and frequencies in the megahertz (MHz) range expose a
immersion.16
limited target area.
Another altermative to direct coupling is the use of a
Frequency, not intensity, determines depth of penetra-
coupling cushion.13 Placing a water-filled balloon between
tion. The frequency most often used is 1 MHz because it
the transducer head and the skin, with coupling gel at the
represents a compromise between deep penetration and
interfaces, has been described.1° A recent in vitro study
adequate heating. A frequency of 1 MHz frequency heats
compared the transmission properties of commercial gel
pads, bladder techniques, and water bath immersion,
 penetration decreases. A frequency of 3.3 MHz (com-
monly referred to as 3 MHz) heats at depths between 0.5
Insufficient acoustic energy transmission occurred with
and 3 cm.&.19.20 Therefore for superficial lesions, a fre-
degassed tap water in latex gloves, gel in a latex glove,
quency of 3 MHz is preferred; for deeper lesions, a setting
330
Section IV
Therapeutic Modalities 
 Clipped Dogs
0.1
5cm depth
Intensity = 0.5
0.1
10 cm depth
-0.2
-0.3-
1.2
Intensity = 1.0
0.8 
0.4
5cm depth
F
V)
10 cm depth
-0.4
Change
-0.8
2.5
 Intensity = 1.5
2
1.5
cm depth
1
0.5
10 cm depth
U
4
 Intensity = 2.0
3
5cm depth
10 cm depth
10
14
18
22
26
30
34
A
Time (min)
Figure 19-1 A, Intramuscular temperature changes measured at 5- and 10-cm depths during 1-MHz ultrasound at four intensities (w/cm²)
 applied to clipped skin over the caudal thigh in dogs. The vertical dashed line represents the end of 10 minutes of ultrasound exposure. The units
on the y-axis differ for each intensity.
Chapter 19
Therapeutic Ultrasound
331
Short-HairedDogs
3.5-
Intensity=0.5
3-
2.5 -
2-
1.5-
Hair coat
0.5
0
-0.5
10 cm depth
-1-
5cmdepth
8
Intensity = 1.0
7
6
3-
Hair coat
2-
V)
1
10cm depth
nange
-1
5 cm depth
14
Intensity = 1.5 
12
10
8-
6
Hair coat
4
2
5 cm depth
0
10 cm depth
-2
16
Intensity = 2.0
14
12
10-
8
Hair coat
6-
4
2
5 cm depth
0
10 cm depth
-2
0
10
14
18
22
26
30
34
B
Time (min)
Figure 19-1, cont'd B, Temperature changes measured intramuscularly at 5- and 10-cm depths and within the hair coat, during 1-MHz ultra-
sound at four intensities (W/cm?) applied over the caudal thigh in dogs with short hair coats (greyhounds). The vertical dashed line represents 
the end of 10 minutes of ultrasound exposure. The units on the y-axis differ for each intensity. (From Steiss JE, Adams CC: Effect of coat on rate
of temperature increase in muscle during ultrasound treatment of dogs. Am / Vet Res 60:76-80, 1999.)
332
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
of 1 MHz is needed.? If there is underlying bone, most
 dose of US energy. More recent recommendations seem to
of the US transmitted to that depth will be absorbed by
address this issue.
the bone and may cause periosteal pain.19-21 The intensity
When the treatment goal is to heat periarticular struc-
Sujapun aun eay o ygiy Aaa dn paum aq jou pinoys
tures, as is done when treating limited ROM, higher inten-
soft tissue if the bone is not adequately covered by soft
sities are chosen. Lower intensities may be used for the
tissues.'9 Low frequency or "long wave" US machines have 
relief of pain and muscle spasm, in which the mechanism
also been investigated.22 These units emit US at a lower
of action may be nonthenmal.
frequency, around 45 kHz. In an in vitro study using fibro-
Duty cycle refers to the fraction of time that the US
blasts, osteoblasts, and monocytes, both 45 kHz and
is emitted during one pulse period. With continuous
 1 MHz exposure enhanced cell proliferation, protein syn-
mode the US intensity is constant, whereas a pulsed wave
thesis, and cytokine production.22
is interrupted so that energy is delivered in an on/off
Intensity refers to the rate of energy delivery per unit
manner.
area. Most US machines indicate both watts (W) and
watts per centimeter squared (W/cm?). Available intensi-
Pulse duration (time on)
ties typically range from 0.25 to 3.0 W/cm?. Measure-
Duty cycle =
Pulse period (time on + time off)
ment of the total output (W) of the transducer divided by
the transducer surface area (cm?) is referred to as the
spatial average intensity. The greatest intensity anywhere
Typical duty cycles for pulsed mode US range from 0.05
within the beam is termed the spatial peak intensity. The
(5%) to 0.5 (50%). For pulsed mode, the terms temporal
beam nonuniformity ratio (BNR) compares the maximal
peak intensity and pulse average intensity are used. Obvi-
intensity from the transducer to the average intensity.
ously pulsing decreases the pulse average intensity and
This ratio should be low (between 2 and 6) to indicate
 decreases tissue heating. Pulsing may be used when the
that the energy distribution is relatively uniform, with
desired effect is based on a nonthermal mechanism or
minimal risk of tissue damage from areas of concentrated
when minimal heating is desired, such as treating near
US energy ("hot spots"). This risk is minimized when
bone. Low-intensity continuous mode could also be
the therapist keeps the US transducer moving during
chosen for these purposes.
treatment.
The treatment area should be two to four times the size
The higher the intensity, the greater and faster the tem-
Of the effective radiating area of the transducer head.19
perature increases. The depth of tissue penetration is not
Increasing the total area beyond the recommended area
 affected to a large degree. Generally intensities required
 decreases the dosage and the heating effect.
to increase tissue temperature 2°C or more vary from 1
Experimental evidence indicates that a duration of 5 to
to 2 W/cm? continuous wave US for 5 to 10 minutes. To
10 minutes is necessary to produce adequate tissue heating
heat an area with substantial soft tissue, intensities as high
 in an area equivalent to two to three times the diameter of
as 2 W/cm? may be used. If there is less soft tissue, or if
the sound head.2123 For instance when using direct cou-
bone is close to the skin surface, lower intensity and higher
pling with topical US gel, continuous mode at 1.5 W/cm?
frequency are appropriate. After selection of an initial
for 10 minutes, and moving the sound head at 4 cm per
intensity, the patient's tolerance to the heat produced by
second, it took nearly 8 minutes for the temperature to
the US is the final determinant of intensity.' This may be
reach therapeutic levels when temperature was measured
difficult to determine in pets. Many dogs lie quietly during
 at a depth of 3 cm in the gastrocnemius muscle of humans.12
US treatment. However, dogs sometimes begin to whine or
For an intensity of 1.5 W/cm? Draper recommends a dura-
otherwise seem uncomfortable within 5 to 10 minutes after
tion of approximately 5 minutes at 3 MHz and at least 10
 commencing US. It should be assumed that any distress
 minutes at 1 MHz, assuming that an area twice the size of
 demonstrated by a patient may indicate pain, and the inten-
 the effective radiating area of the transducer is treated.'9
sity of the US should be reduced or the session interrupted
 The findings in dogs (see Figure 19-1, A) support these
Or discontinued.
recommendations.
Most therapists tend to use intensities that produce no
The recommended speed at which the sound head is
detectable sensation in human patients. However, some
 moved over the skin is approximately 4 cm per second, or
clinicians advise that the intensity be increased until the 
slower, to achieve uniform distribution of energy to the
person feels vigorous heating, after which time the inten-
target tissues."° Moving the transducer too quickly dimin-
sity should be decreased if the patient experiences pain.19
ishes the heating and the therapist may have a tendency to
This is impractical in dogs. The US dosage that a patient
cover too large an area. Various longitudinal and circular
is receiving usually cannot be monitored. In the past, in an
 pattems may be used. The transducer should never be sta-
effort to avoid tissue damage, the dosages have been low
tionary when direct coupling is used. Because the US beam
and the patient experiences no sensation. However, there
is nonuniform, some target areas within the beam could
is the possibility that the patient is not receiving a sufficient
aen sasodspaid su rua jo gunoue ael n aaiana
Chapter 19
Therapeutie Ultrasound
333
areas to hot spots and tissue damage, including endothelial
 Testes. Temporary sterility could be associated with
damage and platelet aggregation. Keeping the transducer
heating.
moving is not as critical with underwater applications
Wounds that are contaminated. Ultrasound could drive
because hot spots occur in the near field of the beam. Hot
bacteria into the tissues?6; infectious processes may be
spots are situated in the water if a sufficient distance is
accelerated by heat.
maintained from the tissue. However, the distance may
 Recent incision sites. It has been recommended not
compromise the heating effect. Problems with achieving
to treat incision sites with continuous US for the first
adequate tissue heating with the immersion technique have
14 days to avoid dehiscence.17
been previously described.
 Exert precaution in the following situations:
Treatment schedules may include daily treatment ini-
 Bone fracture. This is controversial. Concerm exists that
tially, followed by less frequent sessions as the condition
high doses retard callus formation, delay calcification,'5
improves.? Bromiley* states that treatment can be given
 Or cause pathologic fractures, subperiosteal damage, or
daily for up to 10 days, but should not exceed two
demineralization.26 Others believe that US over fracture
10-day courses without a 3-week rest. Similar recom-
sites is acceptable unless sensation is impaired.? Experi-
mendations have been made for horses.7 However, the
mentally, low-intensity pulsed US may accelerate frac-
scientifc rationale for these recommendations is not
ture healing.10
clear.
 Bony prominences. Treat around bony prominences
rather than directly over them, to avoid concentrating
energy at the periosteum, or use an immersion tech-
Precautions and Contraindications
nique. Treat bony areas with low dosage levels to avoid
the danger of pathologic fractures.
Tissue burms are a major concerm of treatment.'3 These may
 Cold packs or ice before US. Cold alters pain and tem-
occur if the intensity is too high, treatment times are too
perature perception, limiting the patient's ability to
long, or the transducer is held stationary, thereby concen-
respond if the US intensity is too high.
trating energy in a small area. These same factors may put
Decreased blood circulation. Normal blood fow dissi-
the patient at risk for cavitation, a phenomenon in which
pates the heat that is generated.
bubbles of dissolved gas fonm and grow during each rar-
Decreased pain and temperature sensation. Pain
efaction phase.'° Also if the transducer is inadvertently
response serves as a sensitive monitor of excessively
held in the air while emitting US, the face of the transducer
may overheat. The transducer may become damaged, and
bums or other tissue damage.
the animal could be burmed if the overheated surface of the
Animals that are overly sedated, restrained, or under
transducer contacts the skin. Some units have a built-in
local anesthesia.
system to prevent the crystal from overheating. Regarding
 Physeal areas in immature animals.&.10.15 High intensi-
safety of the therapist, some US energy is unavoidably
ties could affect physes and bone growth.
 propagated through the housing of the sound head to the
 Injuries in the acute stage that should not receive heat
hand of the therapist, but the effects of this "parasitic'
therapy.17
exposure are umknown.
 Acute inflammatory joint disease. Intracapsular heating
Avoid direct US exposure to the following:
may accelerate destruction of articular cartilage in acute
 Cardiac pacemakers.
inflammatory joint disease.?
Carotid sinus or cervical ganglia. Ultrasound could
Note that metal implants are not necessarily a contraindica-
alter the normal pacing of the heart or stimulate
tion for US therapy. The effects of US on cementing com-
baroreceptors.?
 pounds such as methylmethacrylate are unknown.0
·]
Eyes. Because blood supply to the lens is poor, heat is
 poorly dissipated and could result in cataracts. Retinal 
damage could also result.10
Equipment Safety
Gravid uterus.
Heart. Electrocardiographic changes have occurred in
Ultrasound equipment falls under the rules and regulations
dogs.
 Of the FDA's radiation safety performance standards.15
 Injured areas immediately after exercise.1s.17
Verification of such features as output accuracy and timer
Malignancy. Utrasound applied to murine tumors
accuracy, as well as safety relating to the electrical com-
resulted in larger tumors compared with controls.24
ponents, is advised semiannually." Ultrasound power
Spinal cord if a laminectomy has been performed.?
meters are available for testing. The manufacturer estab-
However, US therapy has been advocated in the area
lishes the BNR of a transducer. Most equipment problems
around the spinous processes in horses? and would also
originate in the transducer or cable assembly. Recalibration
be acceptable in dogs if the bone is intact.
is necessary when a transducer is replaced, and yearly
334
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
calibration by the manufacturer is recommended even if
temperature, then it appears that US preceded by ice treat-
the transducer is not replaced. Some machines feature self-
ment yields little benefit. Experimentally, US alone
calibration tests, output power control in response to tissue 
increased tissue temperature an average of 4° C, whereas
loading, and automatic shutoff in case of transducer
US preceded by 5 minutes of ice increased tissue tempera-
Overheating.
ture only 1.8°C.?
One  prospective
randomized  experimental  study
examined the tissue temperature changes that occur at
Thermal Effects
various depths during 3.3 MHz US treatments of the
Early applications of therapeutic US were those for which
treatments (selected randomly), one at an intensity of
tissue heating was the goal.?6 More recently, attention also
1.0 W/cm? and one at 1.5 W/cm?. Needle thermistors
has been drawn to low-intensity US, which appears to
were inserted in the caudal thigh muscles below the skin
stimulate physiologic processes, such as tissue repair,
surface at depths of 1, 2, and 3 cm, directly under the US
without significant tissue heating.27
treatment area. Both intensities of US treatment were
The thermal effect is a major indication for the use of
performed on each dog over a 10-cm? area for 10 minutes
this modality. Increased tissue temperatures may increase 
using a sound head with an effective radiating area of
collagen extensibility, blood fow, pain threshold, and
 5 cm?. Tissue temperature was measured before, during.
enzyme activity, as well as mild inflammatory reactions,
and after US treatment until tissue temperature returmed
and changes in nerve conduction velocity. Heating is
to baseline. At the completion of the 10-minute US treat-
thought to alter the viscoelastic properties of collagen and
ment the temperature rise at an intensity of 1.0 W/cm?
collagen molecular bonding. Changes in blood fow in
was 3°C at the 1-cm depth, 2.3°C at 2 cm, and 1.6°C at
response to US have been measured with variable
3.0 cm (Figure 19-2, A). At an intensity of 1.5 W/cm?
results.2829 It is likely that with treatment for 10 to 20
tissue temperatures rose 4.6°C at the 1.0-cm depth,
minutes at high intensities, skeletal muscle temperature
3.6°C at 2 cm, and 2.4°C at 3 cm (Figure 19-2, B).
and blood fow increase.10 Inconsistent changes have been
Tissue temperatures returmed to baseline within 10
found with lesser intensities and durations.
minutes after treatment in all dogs. This study demon-
The degree of heat production depends on the intensity,
strated that significant heating occurs in the superficial
frequency, duration, and size of the treatment area. In addi-
thigh muscles of dogs during 3.3 MHz US, but the effect
tion, the tissue type must be considered. Ultrasound pen-
is relatively short-lived.
etrates skin and subcutaneous fat relatively well, with little
 Increasing tendon extensibility with the use of US was
attenuation, whereas tissues with high collagen content
also studied in dogs.3l This study evaluated tendon tem-
absorb more of the US energy and are affected to a greater
perature of the calcaneal tendon following US treatment,
extent. The order of tissue attenuation, from least to most,
and quantified hock fexion following US treatment of
is as follows: blood (approximately 3% attenuation), fat,
the tendon. Dogs were anesthetized and the calcaneal
muscle, blood vessels, skin, tendon, cartilage, and bone
tendon region was clipped free of hair. One leg was used
(approximately 96% attenuation). 10
to measure temperature increase of the tendon with four
To achieve the thermal effects of US, the tissue tem-
modes of US: continuous and pulsed mode US, at both
perature must be raised 1° to 4° C, depending on the desired
1.5 W/cm? and 1.0 W/cm?. The other leg was used to
outcome. Obviously this is difficult to judge because
ppuns p susn uoixan yoou u auuo aun anseau
thermistors are not inserted in clinical patients to monitor
amount of force, pre- and post-US treatment of the cal-
the temperature. Experimental studies in dogs and humans
caneal tendon using 1.5 W/cm? continuous-mode US.
can provide guidelines. In healthy adult people thermistors
Continuous-mode US resulted in significantly greater
were inserted into muscle at depths of 2.5 and 5.0 cm for
tendon heating than pulsed US (P < .001). In addition,
1 MHz treatment, and at depths of 0.8 and 1.6 cm for
1.5 W/cm? continuous US resulted in significantly greater
 3 MHz treatment.30 The rate of temperature increase per
tendon heating than 1 W/cm? continuous US (P < .001).
minute at the two depths for the 1 MHz frequency ranged
Mild increases in tendon temperature occurred with
from 0.04°C at 0.5 W/cm? to 0.38°C at 2.0 W/cm²,
pulsed mode US (all < 1.5°C), but there were no differ-
whereas the corresponding values for the 3 MHz frequency
ences between 1 and 1.5 W/cm? pulsed mode US. The
ranged from 0.3°C at 0.5 W/cm? to 1.4°C at 2.0 W/cm?.
 patterm of heating appears to be different between tendon
The 3 MHz frequency heated significantly faster than
and muscle. Muscle appears to have a relatively steady
1 MHz at all doses.
increase in tissue temperature during US treatment,
One method for treating humans consists of applying
whereas tendon temperature in this study increased
ice on the treatment area before US. Adding ice to the
relatively rapidly within the first 2 minutes, and then
water for US delivered underwater has been recommended
stayed relatively constant for the remaining 8 minutes
for horses also.? However, if the aim is to increase tissue
Of treatment time. Continuous mode 1.5 W/cm? US
Chapter 19
Therapeutie Ultrasound
335
41.0-
40.5
40.0
ure
39.5
39.0
38.0
37.5
37.0
3.0
0.0
3.0
6.0
9.012.015.018.021.024.0
Time (min)
Begin
End
ultrasound
ultrasound 
43.00-
42.00
41.00
40.00
39.00
38.00
37.00-
-3.00.03.06.09.012.015.018.021.024.0
Time (min)
Begin
End
B
ultrasound
ultrasound
Figure 19-2 A, Baseline, US treatment, and posttreatment tissue temperatures for 1.0 W/cm?, 3.3-MHz ultrasound at 1-, 2-, and 3-cm tissue
depths. Values are means ± SEM. B, Baseline, US treatment, and posttreatment tissue temperatures for 1.5 W/cm?, 3.3-MHz ultrasound at 1-, 2-,
temperature in dogs. Vet Surg 30:170, 2001.)
treatment of the calcaneal tendon resulted in significantly
·Soft tissue shortening (e.g., contracture, scarring)
increased hock fexion immediately after treatment, but
 Subacute and chronic infammation
by 5 minutes post-US, hock fexion retumed to near
 Pain (such as muscle guarding, trigger points)
baseline.
In human athletes, some experts consider that the most
beneficial results from US are in treating tendinitis.1 In
Clinical Conditions Treated
chronic tendinitis, recommended therapy includes heating
with Ultrasound
with US, followed by cross-frictional massage, to elimi-
nate scar tissue and increase ROM. Another indication is
The main indications for US therapy include the
the treatment of limited ROM associated with joint con-
following:
tracture, for which patients receive US before passive
336
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
ROM, stretching, or joint mobilization. A third indication
is for pain relief before activity, such as in athletes with
tendinitis that is mild enough to allow the person to con-
tinue training. The US treatment is administered before
activity to assist in the wanm-up and provide some pain
relief.
In horses, US therapy has been suggested for the treat-
ment of similar conditions. These include tendinitis, des-
mitis, sprains, joint lesions, lacerations, reduction of scar
tissue, edema, exostosis, and myositis.17
Tendinitis and Bursitis
Tendinitis and bursitis are treated with US because of the
ability to increase blood flow to aid healing, increase tissue
temperature to reduce pain, and drive antinflammatory
drugs across the skin by means of phonophoresis. In
Figure 19-3  Ultrasound applied over the hip joint before stretching
humans lateral epicondylitis (tennis elbow), subacromial
 in a patient with a femoral head ostectomy.
bursitis, and bicipital tendinitis are typical conditions con-
the stage at which US is given in the course of healing is
the physiologic mechanism underlying pain reduction
important. Application of US in the early phase of tendon
remains speculative, the probable mechanism of action is
repair could be detrimental.10
the ability of all three methods to elevate tissue tempera-
ture. Heating may elevate the activation threshold of free
Joint Contracture and Scar Tissue
nerve endings, produce counter-irritation, or activate
Ultrasound is often included in protocols for treating joint
large-diameter nerve fibers.'0 Peripheral nerve conduction
contractures and scar tissue." Joint contracture typically
velocities are either increased or decreased after US, par-
results from immobilization or trauma. The periarticular
tially depending on the intensity. Types A, B, and C
connective tissues have high collagen content, and if
nerve fibers have different sensitivities.? With intensities
tissues are not mobilized, they tend to shorten to their 
 of 1 to 2 W/cm? US reduces the nerve conduction veloc-
resting, immobilized length. The principle of "heat and
ity of pain-carrying C fibers. This may help to reduce
stretch' can be applied in this situation in an effort to
muscle spasm and reestablish circulation. Ultrasound
 increase ROM. Tissues are heated to approximately 45° C.
also has been used to treat pain associated with neuro-
mas, low-back dysfunction, and skeletal muscle spasm.
tends to be a greater residual increase in tissue length
The mechanism of action for reduction of skeletal
with either preheating or simultaneous heating. The effects
muscle spasm may be based on thermal effects that alter
of heat on ligament extensibility have been studied in
the skeletal muscle contractile process, reduce muscle
humans.32 Young adults underwent knee joint displace-
 spindle activity, or break the pain-spasm-pain cycle.0
ment tests before and after continuous-mode US (1 MHz,
1.5 W/cm? for 8 minutes). The investigators found small
Nonthermal Effects of Ultrasound to
increases (1.3 degrees) in varus/valgus excursion at 0- and
Enhance Tissue Repair
20-degree knee fexion and in recurvatum excursion, but
 not in anterior-posterior drawer excursion. Their conclu-
There are many situations in which US produces biologic
sion was that continuous-mode US at commonly used
effects and yet significant temperature change is not
intensities made some knee ligaments only slightly more
involved. It is not strictly true to talk about "nonthermal"
extensible in nonmal subjects. Scar tissue is denser than
 mechanisms, in that the delivery and absorption of energy
surrounding tissues, so it may be selectively heated by
in the tissues will result in a small temperature rise. The
US. However, more research is needed to determine which
term nonthermal in this context relates to the fact that there
 intensities and durations are most beneficial. Figure 19-3
is no apparent thermal accumulation in the tissues, and is
 demonstrates US treatment over the hip before stretching
sometimes now referred to as a microthe rmal effect.33 The
in a patient who has undergone a femoral head and
physical mechanisms thought to be involved in producing
neck ostectomy.
these nonthermal effects include cavitation and acoustic
Pain and Muscle Spasm
There is evidence indicating that nonthermal mecha-
Pain threshold is usually increased after US. Diathermy
nisms play a primary role in producing a therapeutically
and infrared therapy have a similar effect."° Although
significant effect, and the focus of this section relates to
Chapter 19
Therapeutie Ultrasound
337
these effects in relation to soft tissue injuries because these
the proliferative phase of wound healing US also has a
 are the most commonly treated conditions in practice
stimulatory effect (cellular upregulation), although the
 primary active targets are the fibroblasts, endothelial cells,
Ultrasound in Soft Tissue Repair
 normally active during scar production and US is therefore
The process of tissue repair involves a complex series of
 pro-proliferative in the same way that it is proinflammatory-
cascaded, cellular and chemically mediated events that
it does not change the normal proliferative phase, but maxi-
lead to the production of scar tissue that constitutes an
mizes its efficiency. Harvey et al."s demonstrated that
effective material to restore the continuity of the damaged
low-dose pulsed US increased protein synthesis, and
tissue. The process is more complex than can be described
 several research groups have demonstrated enhanced fibro-
in this chapter, but has been extensively reviewed
plasia and collagen synthesis505660
elsewhere.35
During the remodeling phase of repair, the somewhat
The effect of US during the repair process varies accord-
 generic scar that is produced in the initial stages is refined
 ing to the primary events that are occurring in the tissues.
such that it adopts functional characteristics of the tissue
Immediately following injury, during the tissue hemor-
-Qid jo iaqunu e Aq paaayoe s! su se suedai s! hi eu
rhage phase, it is generally inadvisable to use US because
cesses, but is mainly related to the reorientation of the
if it has the capacity to enhance local blood fow, and
collagen fibers in the developing scar and also to the
there may be a clinical disadvantage of treatment while
change in collagen type, from predominantly Type IlI col-
hemorrhage is occurring. After active bleeding has stopped 
lagen to a more dominant Type I collagen.6 The remodel-
(usually a matter of hours after injury or trauma), it is
 ing process is certainly not a short-duration phase (it can
appropriate to start using US as soon as it is feasible.
last for a year or more), yet it is an essential component of
During the inflammatory phase, US has a stimulating effect
quality repair and the application of US appears to enhance
on the mast cells, platelets, neutrophils, and macro-
the events normally associated with this phase.
Ultrasound can infuence the remodeling of scar tissue
the degranulation of mast cells, causing the release of
in that it appears to enhance the appropriate orientation of 
arachidonic acid, which is a precursor for the synthesis of
the newly formed collagen fibers and change the collagen
prostaglandins and leukotrienes that act as infammatory
profle from mainly type IMI to a more dominant type I
mediators63941By increasing the activity of these cells the
content, thus increasing tensile strength and enhancing
Overall infuence of therapeutic US is proinflammatory
scar mobility.$3 Other studies have demonstrated effects of
rather than antiinflammatory. The benefit of this mode of
 US therapy on collagen behavior in this latter repair
action is not to "increase'" the inflammatory response as
its function.53.60
stage, it is a possible outcome),41 but rather to act as an
 The application of US during the infammatory, prolif-
"inflammatory optimizer" by speeding the process up. The
erative, and repair phases is of value not because it changes
infammatory response is essential to the effective repair
the normal sequence of events, but because it has the
of tissue, and inhibition of these events serves to inhibit 
capacity to stimulate or enhance these normal events and
thus increase the effciency of the repair phases.27.3.47 It
inflammatory events can be completed, the more effec-
 appears that if tissue repair occurs in a compromised or
tively the tissue can progress to the proliferative phase of
inhibited fashion, the application of therapeutic US at an
repair. Studies that have tried to demonstrate the antin-
appropriate dose may enhance healing. If the tissue is
flammatory effect of US have largely failed to do so.45.46 It
is effective at promoting the normal inflammatory events,
and thus enable the tissue to reach its end point faster than
and as such has a therapeutic value in promoting the overall
it would otherwise. The effective application of US to
repair events.27.33.47.48
achieve these aims may be dose dependent,4964.67 although
Employed at an appropriate treatment dose with optimal
 some authors have challenged this thought.68
treatment parameters, the benefit of US is to make the
inflammatory phase as efficient as possible, and thus
Soft Tissue Wound and Fracture Healing
 promote the entire healing cascade.7.10:35.49 For tissues in
which there is an inflammatory reaction, but in which there 
The use of therapeutic US in wound healing recently has
is no “repair’ to be achieved, the benefit of US is
been reviewed (Figure 19-4).69 Reher et al.° suggested that
to promote the normal resolution of the inflammatory
the beneficial effects of US on wound healing, chronic
  s , n    s
ulcers, and fracture healing might be based on enhanced
effectively achieved in the tissues that preferentially absorb
angiogenesis. Therapeutic US stimulates production of
the energy, which are the dense collagenous tissues (liga-
angiogenic factors such as interleukin-8, fibroblast growth
 ment, tendon, fascia, joint capsule, and scar tissue). During
factor, and vascular endothelial growth factor. These effects
338
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
were noted with both 1-MHz and 45-kHz exposure. More
cm?, pulsed mode 1 : 4, 15 minutes per session) applied to
research is needed to establish the mechanism of action of
the area over the carpal tunnel, with the first 10 treatments
US at different stages of healing and with different treat-
 performed daily and 10 additional treatments perfonmed
ment parameters to optimize its effects.
twice weekly for 5 weeks. The improvements were sus-
Results may depend on variables such as the intensity
tained 6 months after treatment. It remains to be deter-
and duration of treatment and the timing of application
mined if any forms of nerve compression or entrapment in
after injury. Low-intensity continuous- or pulsed-mode US
dogs would benefit from a similar protocol.
has been used to treat acute and chronic wounds. Low
Ultrasound treatment may be useful in the treatment of
 r se   n  s
soft tissue calcification. In a randomized, double-blind
sities may have proinfammatory effects. Regarding the
comparison of US- and sham-treated human patients with
stage of healing, US therapy initiated while hemorrhage is
 symptomatic calcific tendinitis of the shoulder, US had a
still occurring may compromise repair, whereas US initi-
positive effect in resolving calcifications and was associ-
ated after this may be beneficial.
ated with short-term clinical improvement.77 Patients in
Dyson et al.?’ reported that US enhanced growth of
that study received 24 sessions of pulsed US over a 6-week
tissue in experimental wounds in rabbit ears. Because
period. The way in which US stimulates resorption of
the temperature increases were small, the investigators
calcium deposits has not been established. Bromiley? has
suggested that the mechanism may have involved acoustic
suggested that the excitation of calcium bound to proteins
streaming. Ultrasound has also been used to treat chronic
 promotes the fragmentation and resorption of calcified
skin ulcers. Rantanen et al.7? used a rat model of muscle
 masses within soft tissue. Ebenbichler et al.?7 speculated
 contusion injury to study the effect of therapeutic US on
that US may stimulate resorption of calcium deposits by
muscle regeneration. They concluded that therapeutic US
(1) activating endothelial cells that subsequently release
 promoted the early phase of muscle regeneration, namely.
substances such as cytokines and interleukins that aid in
the proliferation of satellite cells, but US did not seem
resorption, (2) increasing intracellular calcium levels, (3)
to significantly alter the final outcome. Low-intensity US
at high intensities, causing disruption of apatite-like micro-
may also have a role in the healing of fractures. Numerous
crystals, amd (4) causing increased temperatures that may
animal studies and controlled clinical trials have shown
lead to increased blood fow and metabolism, thereby
that low-intensity US can promote the healing of fresh
facilitating disintegration of calcium deposits.
fractures. Some evidence suggests efficacy in the treatment
Ultrasound may also have a role in reduction of swell-
 of delayed healing and nonunion fractures as well.73-75
ing. The mechanism has been attributed to acoustic stream-
ing.6 For this purpose pulsed US may be combined with
Other Conditions
cold therapy.
 There was significant improvement after US treatment in
Dosage
people with mild to moderate idiopathic carpal tunnel syn-
drome.76 Patients received 20 US sessions (1 MHz, 1 W/
Dosage for pulsed US is variable based on the tissue and
the stage of healing. In general, 20% pulsed US with an
 intensity of between 0.1-1.0 W/cm? is used.3.37
Phonophoresis
The use of US to enhance the delivery of topically applied
medications through intact skin is termed phonophore-
sis.7 The target for the drug may be local (antinflamma-
tory or analgesic) or systemic. Some of the local conditions
for which phonophoresis is used in humans and that paral-
lel conditions in animals are tendinitis, bursitis, chronic
sprains, rheumatoid arthritis, and osteoarthritis (OA).79
 include motion sickness and high blood pressure. Although
many studies have been conducted on humans and research
animals to evaluate the penetration of various drugs
through the skin with the assistance of US, few studies
 have been performed on companion animals with clinical
conditions. Therefore more research is needed to better
Figure 19-4  Ultrasound applied to a wound on the lateral aspect
define the benefits and limitations of this rehabilitation
of the stifle joint through a stand-off gel pad.
modality.
Chapter 19
Therapeutie Ultrasound
339
When a drug is applied topically it may transfer through
 alter adrenal function.? Another study of phonophoresis in
humans showed detectable blood levels of dex amethasone
denuding the epidermis to create minor abrasions, such as
sodium phosphate 30 and 60 minutes after treatment,
in shaving. Phonophoresis enhances transdermal drug
whereas none was detected in the blood of patients that had
delivery by altering the stratum cormeum, which is the
the drug applied topically with no Us.92
major barrier to drug penetration.8283 The mechanism of
When using phonophoresis on small amimals, the skin
action may be that US denatures the structural keratin
should be clipped and scrubbed. The drug may be either
proteins in the stratum comeum, strips or delaminates the
applied topically with a gel over it or compounded in
cormifed layers of the stratum cormeum, changes cell per-
glycerol, cream, oil, gel, or water. Many researchers believe
meability, or alters the lipid-enriched intercellular struc-
that gels are optimal because of their ability to transmit
tures between the cells.?8 After the stratum cormeum is
 US.97 Pulsed US is most commonly used because continu-
crossed the pharmaceutical molecules penetrate the dermis,
ous US increases blood fow to the area and may exacer-
are absorbed into the tissues and capillaries, and travel
bate infammatory conditions. One recent human study
throughout the circulatory system.80 In animals, shaving
compared ketoprofen phonophoresis (both 20% pulsed and
and scrubbing the skin with alcohol increase the rate of
100% or continuous US) to placebo phonophoresis in
which ketoprofen gel was rubbed over the area. Biopsies
intercellularly, but it occurs most readily through the hair
were performed on both adipose and synovial tissues of
follicles and sebaceous glands.84 Although heating the skin
-e sisaudouud re nou I Aiodde auy au
before treatment dilates the hair follicles to enhance pen-
cation. No significant differences were found between
etration, it also causes vasodilatation that enhances sys-
groups in the adipose tissue samples. In synovial tissues,
temic absorption anddecreases local delivery. Low-intensity,
both pulsed and continuous US produced significantly
longer duration US appears to be more effective at trans-
higher concentrations of ketoprofen compared with topical
ferring medication than high-intensity, shorter duration
application (P < .012 and P < .028, respectively).93
 doses.8 Higher concentrations of drugs applied topically
 One of the essential benefits of phonophoresis is that it
 also may increase tissue concentrations.79.86
 may deliver higher drug levels to the target area, decreasing
Another variable to consider is the transmission of US
systemic side effects as compared with parenteral or oral
energy through the drug and coupling agent. Some com-
 medications.94 Additionally, US is relaxing and may have
 pounds (with such active ingredients as diethylamine salicy-
 analgesic properties.46
late, hydrocortisone, alclometasone dipropionate, and
fuclorolone acetonide) are used to decrease soft tissue
REFERENCES
 infammation and did not allow transmission of US at three
1. Taylor RA: Applications of physiotherapy to sporting dogs,
different frequencies (0.75, 1.5, and 3 MHz) in one study.87
Rec Med Vet 167:799-805, 1991.
Because the sound waves were unable to penetrate the drug.
2. Draper DO, et al: Temperature changes in deep muscles of
they were also unable to penetrate the skin. Not only could
Apms oala ul ue :soideeun punosenin pue sot Suunp sueuny
using a drug that has poor transmission properties decrease
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 21:153-157, 1995.
3. Ebenbichler G: Critical evaluation of ultrasound therapy,
the success of phonophoresis, it may also negate the effec-
tiveness of the US therapy. Intensity, frequency, time, drug.
Wien Med Wochenschr 144:51-53, 1994.
 4. Gam AN, Johannsen F: Ultrasound therapy in musculoskel-
etal disorders: a meta-analysis, Pain 63:85-91, 1995.
 5. Fedorczyk J: The role of physical agents in modulating pain,
Several studies have been performed using steroidal
J Hand Ther 10:110-121, 1997.
antinflammatory drugs (hydrocortisone and dexametha-
 6. Feine JS, Lund JP: An assessment of the effcacy of physical
sone) and have shown decreased pain and increased ROM
therapy and physical modalities for the control of chronic
in human patients with OA, periarticular arthritis, and joint
musculoskeletal pain, Pain 71:15-23, 1997.
 Or muscle pathology.*° In a human study using hydrocorti-
7. Hayes KW: Physical agents, ed 4, Norwalk, CT, 1993,
sone phonophoresis (100 mg/g of ointment) on patients
Appleton & Lange.
with OA, tendinitis, or bursitis, there was improvement
8. Bromiley MW: Physiotherapy in veterinary medicine,
(marked decrease in pain and a substantial gain in active
Oxford, UK, 1991, Blackwell Scientific.
ROM) in 68 % of patients and partial improvement (decrease
9. Draper DO, Sunderland MS: Examination of the law of
 Grotthus-Draper: does ultrasound penetrate subcutaneous fat
 in pain but some pain remaining, and a gain in active ROM 
in humans? J Athiete Train 28:246-250, 1993.
with limitations still present) in 18% of patients as com-
10. Michlovitz SL: Thermal agents in rehabilitation, ed 2,
pared with 27% improvement and 16% partial improve-
ment when treated with US alone.° In one study using
Philadelphia, 1996, Davis.
11. Ter Haar G: Basic physics of therapeutic ultrasound,
dexamethasone sodium phosphate (7 g of 0.33% dexa-
Physiotherapy 64:100-103, 1978.
methasone using 1 MHz at 1.5 W/cm?) in humans, the
12. Draper DO, et al: A comparison of temperature rise in human
amount of dexamethasone delivered systemically did not
calf muscles following applications of underwater and topical
340
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
gel ultrasound, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 17:247-251,
34. Baker KG, Robertson VJ, et al: A review of therapeutic ultta-
1993.
sound: biophysical effects, Phys Ther 81(7):1351-1358, 2001.
13. Downer AH: Physical therapy for animals. Selected tech-
35. Watson T: Tissue repair: the current state of the art, Sportex-
niques, Springfield, IL, 1978, Charles C Thomas.
Med 28:8-12, 2006b.
 14. Klucinec B, et al: Transmissivity of coupling agents used to
36. Nussbaum EL: Ultrasound: to heat or not to heat—-that is the
deliver ultrasound through indirect methods, J Orthop Sports
question, Phys Ther Rev 2:59-72, 1997.
Phys Ther 30:263-269, 2000.
37. Fyfe MC, Chahl LA: Mast cell degranulation: a possible
15.B
Porter M: Equine sports therapy, Wildomar, CA, 1990,
mechanism of action of therapeutic ultrasound, US Med Biot
Veterinary Data.
8(1):62, 1982 (abstract).
 16. Forrest G, Rosen K: Ultrasound: effectiveness of treatments 
 38. Maxwell L: Therapeutic ultrasound: its effects on the cellular
given under water, Arch Phys Med Rehab 70:28-29, 1989.
& molecular mechanisms of inflammation and repait, Phys-
17.1
Mcllwraith CW, Trotter G, eds: Joint disease in the horse,
iotherapy 78(6):421-426, 1992.
Philadelphia, 1996, Saunders.
 39. Mortimer AJ, Dyson M: The effect of therapeutic ultrasound
18.S
 Steiss JE, Adams CC: Effect of coat on rate of temperature
on calcium uptake in fibroblasts, US Med Biot 14(6):499-
increase in muscle during ultrasound treatment of dogs, Am
506, 1988.
J Vet Res 60:76-80, 1999.
40. Leung MC, Ng GY, et al: Effect of ultrasound on acute
19. Schulthies SS: Interview with Dr David O Draper, Sports
infammation of transected medial collateral ligaments, Arch.
Phys Ther Sect Newslett, Am Phys Ther Assoc 12-13, Winter
Phys Med Rehabil 85:963-966, 2004.
1995.
41. Ciccone C, Leggin B, et al: Effects of ultrasound and trola-
20. Levine D, Millis DL, Mynatt T: Effects of 3.3 MHz ultra-
mine salicylate phonophoresis on delayed-onset muscle
sound on caudal thigh muscle temperature in dogs, Vet Surg
soreness, Phys Ther 71:666-675, 1991.
30:170-174, 2001.
42. Bhattacharyya T, Levin R, et al: Nonsteroidal antinflamma-
 21. Lehmann JF, et al: Therapeutic temperature distribution pro-
tory drugs and nonunion of humeral shaft fractures, Arthritis 
duced by ultrasound as modifed by dosage and volume of
Rheum 53(3):364-367, 2005.
tissue exposed, Arch Phys Med Rehab 48:662-666, 1967.
43. Hashimoto I, Nakanishi H, et al: Angiostatic effects of cor-
22. Doan N, et al: In vitro effects of therapeutic ultrasound on 
ticosteroid on wound healing of the rabbit ear, J Med Invest 
cell proliferation, protein synthesis, and cytokine production
49(1-2):61-66, 2002.
by human fibroblasts, osteoblasts, and monocytes, J Oral
44. Tsai W-C, Tang F-T, et al. Ibuprofen inhibition of tendon cell 
Maxillofacial Surg 57:409-419, 1999.
proliferation and upregulation of the cyclin kinase inhibitor
 23. Kimura IF, et al: Effects of two ultrasound devices and angles
p21CIP1, J Orthop Res 22(3):586-591, 2004.
 of application on the temperature of tssue phantom, J Orthop
45. El Hag M, Coghlan K, et al: The anti-inflammatory effect
Sports Phys Ther 27:27-31, 1998.
 of dexamethasone and therapeutic ultrasound in oral surgery,
24. Sicard-Rosenbaum L, et al: Effects of energy-matched pulsed
Br J Oral Maxillo Surg 23:17-23, 1985.
and continuous ultrasound on tumor growth in mice, Phys 
46. Hashish I, Hai HK, et al: Reduction of postoperative pain
Ther 78:271-277, 1998.
and swelling by ultrasound treatment: a placebo effect, Pain.
25. Denoix J, Pailloux J: Physical therapy and massage for the
33(3):303-311, 1988
horse, North Pomfret, VT, 1996, Trafalgar Square Publishing.
 47. Watson T: Ultrasound in contemporary physiotherapy prac-
26. Loving NS: Veterinary manuat for the performance horse,
tice, Ultrasonics 48:321-329, 2008.
Grand Prairie, TX, 1993, Equine Research.
48. Watson T, Young S: Therapeutic utrasound. Electrother-
27. Ter Haar G: Therapeutic ultrasound, Eur J Ultrasound 9:3-9,
apy: evidence based practice, Edinburgh, 2008, Churchill
1999 (review).
Livingstone-Elseviet.
28. Robinson SE, Buono MJ: Effect of continuous-wave ultra-
49. Watson T: Ultrasound dose calculations, In Touch 101:14- 17,
sound on blood fow in skeletal muscle, Phys Ther 75:145-
2002.
151, 1995.
 50. Ramirez A, Schwane JA, et al: The effect of ultrasound on
29. Fabrizio PA, et al: Acute effects of therapeutic ultrasound
collagen synthesis and fibroblast proliferation in vitro, Med
delivered at varying parameters on the blood fow velocity in
Sci Sports Exerc 29:326-332, 1997.
a muscular distribution artery, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
 51. Young S, Dyson M: Effect of therapeutic ultrasound on the
24:294-302, 1996.
healing of full thickness excised skin lesions, Ultrasonics
30. Draper DO, Castel JC, Castel D: Rate of temperature increase
28:175-180, 1990a.
in human muscle during 1 MHz and 3 MHz continuous 
 52. Young SR, Dyson M: The effect of therapeutic ultrasound on 
ultrasound, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 22:142-150, 1995.
angiogenesis, Ultrasound Med Biol 16(3):261-269, 1990b.
31. Loonam J, Millis DL, Stevens M, et al: The effect of thera-
 53. Nussbaum E: The infuence of ultrasound on healing tissues,
peutic ultrasound on tendon heating and extensibility.
J Hand Ther 11(2):140-147, 1998.
Proceedings of the 30th  Veterinary Orthopedic Society,
 54. Dyson M, Smalley D: Effects of ultrasound on wound con-
Steamboat Springs, CO, 2003.
traction. In Millner R, Rosenfeld E, Cobet U, eds: Uitra-
32. Reed B, Ashikaga T: The effects of heating with ultrasound 
sound interactions in biology & medicine, New York, 1983,
on knee joint displacement, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
 Plenum.
26:131-137, 1997.
55. Harvey W, Dyson M, et al: The stimulation of protein syn-
33.
Watson T: Electrotherapy and tissue repait, Sportex-Med
thesis in human fibroblasts by therapeutic ultrasound, Rheu-
29:7-13, 2006
matot Rehabil 14:237, 1975.
Chapter 19
Therapeutie Ultrasound
341
56. Enwemeka Cs: The effects of therapeutic ultrasound on
 76. Ebenbichler GR: Ultrasound treatment for treating the carpal
tendon healing. A biomechanical study, Am J Phys Med.
tunnel syndrome: randomised "sham" controlled trial, BMJ
Rehabil 68(6):283-287, 1989a.
316:731-735, 1998.
57. Enwemeka CS: Infammation, cellularity, and fibrillogenesis
77. Ebenbichler GR, et al: Ultrasound therapy for calcific tendi-
in regenerating tendon: implications for tendon rehabilita-
nitis of the shoulder, N Engt J Med 340:1533-1538, 1999.
tion, Phys Ther 69(10):816-825, 1989b.
78. Byl NN: The use of ultrasound as an enhancer for transcuta-
58.B
Enwemeka CS, Rodriguez O, et al: The biomechanical
neous drug delivery: phonophoresis, Phys Ther 75:539-551,
effects of low-intensity ultrasound on healing tendons, Ultra-
1995.
sound Med Biof 16(8):801-807, 1990.
79. Kleinkort JA, Wood F: Phonophoresis with 1 percent versus
59. Turner S, Powell E, et al: The effect of ultrasound on the
10 percent hydrocortisone, Phys Ther 55:1320- 1324, 1975.
healing of repaired cockerel tendon: is collagen cross-linkage
 80. Webster RC, Maibach HI: Individual and regional variation
a factor? J Hand Surg 14B:428-433, 1989.
with in vitro percutaneous absorption. In Bronaugh RL,
60. Huys S, Gan BS, et al: Comparison of effects of early and
Maibach HI, eds: In vitro percutaneous absorption: princi-
late ultrasound treatment on tendon healing in the chicken
ples, fundamentats, and applications, Ann Arbor, Ml, 1991,
limb, J Hand Ther 6:58-59, 1993.
CRC.
61. Vanable J: Integumentary potentials and wound healing. In 
 81. Scott R: In vitro absorption through damaged skin. In Bro-
Borgens R, ed: Electric fields in vertebrate repair, New York,
naugh RL, Maibach HI, eds: In vitro percutaneous absorp-
1989, Liss.
tion: principles, fundamentats, and applications, Ann Arbot,
62. By1 NN, Hill Toulouse L, et al: Effects of ultrasound on the
MI, 1991, CRC.
orientation of fbroblasts: an in-vitro study, Eur J Phys Med
 82. MacKie RM: Clinical dermatology: an ilfustrated textbook,
Rehabil 6(6):180- 184, 1996.
ed 3, New York, 1991, Oxford University Press.
63. Yeung CK, Guo X, et al: Pulsed ultrasound treatment accel-
 83. Cooper E: Alterations in skin permeability. In Chien YW, ed:
erates the repait of Achilles tendon rupture in rats, J Orthop
Transdermal controlled systemic medications, vol 31, New
Res 24(2):193-201, 2006.
York, 1987, Dekket.
64. Tsai WC, Pang JH, et al: Ultrasound stimulation of types I
 84. Bronaugh RL: A fow-through diffusion cell. In Bronaugh
and III collagen expression of tendon cel and upregulation
 RL, Maibach HI, eds: In vitro percutaneous absorption: prin-
of transforming growth factor beta, J Orthop Res 24(6):1310-
ciples, fundamentais, and applications, Ann Arbor, MI,
1316, 2006.
1991, CRC.
65. Sparrow KJ, Finucane SD, et al: The effects of low-
85. Shim SM, Choi JK: Effect of indomethacin phonophoresis
intensity ultrasound on medial collateral ligament healing
on the relief of temporomandibular joint pain, Cranio 15:345-
in the rabbit model, Am J Sports Med 33(7):1048-1056,
348, 1997.
2005.
 86. Davick JP, Martin RK, Albright JP: Distribution and deposi-
66. Demir H, Menku P, et al: Comparison of the effects of laser,
tion of tritiated cortisol using phonophoresis, Phys Ther
ultrasound, and combined laser plus ultrasound treatments in
68:1672-1675, 1998.
experimental tendon healing, Lasers Surg Med 35(1):84-89,
 87. Benson HAE, McElnay JC: Transmission of ultrasound
2004.
energy through topical pharmaceutical products, Physio-
 67. Watson T: Modality and dose dependency in electrotherapy,
therapy 74:587-589, 1998.
Physiotherapy 93(S 1):S674, 2007.
 88. Holdsworth LK, Anderson DM: Effectiveness of ultrasound
 68. Robertson VJ: Dosage and treatment response in randomised
used with a hydrocortisone coupling medium or epicondy litis
clinical trials of therapeutic ultrasound, Phys Ther Sport
 Clasp to treat lateral epicondylitis: pilot study, Physiotherapy
3:124-133, 2002.
79:19-25, 1993.
 69. Hart J: The use of ultrasound therapy in wound healing,
 89. Bare AC, et al: Phonophoretic delivery of 10% hydrocorti-
J Wound Care 7:25-28, 1998 (review).
sone through the epidermis of humans as determined by
70. Reher P, et al: Effect of ultrasound on the production
serum cortisol concentrations, Phys Ther 76:738-749,
of IL-8, basic FGF and VEGF, Cytokine 11:416-423,
1996.
1999.
 90. Griffn JE, et al: Patients treated with ultrasonic driven
71. Dyson M, et al: The stimulation of tissue regeneration by
hydrocortisone and ultrasound alone, Phys Ther 47:594-601,
means of ultrasound, Clin Sei 35:273-285, 1968.
1967.
72. Rantanen J, et al: Effects of therapeutic ultrasound on the 
 91. Franklin ME, et al: Effect of phonophoresis with dexametha-
regeneration of skeletal myofbers after experimental muscle
sone on adrenal function, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 22: 103-
injury, Am J Sports Med 27:54-59, 1999.
107, 1995.
73.B
 Hadjiargyrou M, et al: Enhancement of fracture healing by
 92. Conner-Kerr TA, et al: Efficacy of utilizing phonophoresis
low intensity ultrasound, Clin Orthop Rel Res 355:S216-
for the delivery of dexamethasone to human transdermal
$229, 1998
tissues, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 23:79, 1996.
74. Mayr E, Frankel V, Rueter A: Ultrasound: an alternative
93. Cagnie B, Vinck E, Rimbaut S, et al: Phonophoresis versus
healing method for nonunions? Arch Orthop Trauma Surg
topical application of ketoprofen: comparison between tissue
120:1-8, 2000
and plasma levels, Phys Ther 83(8):707-712, 2003.
75. Warden SJ, Fuchs RK, et al: Ultrasound produced by a con-
94. McNeill SC, Potts RO, Francoeur ML: Local enhanced
ventional therapeutic ultrasound unit accelerates fracture
topical delivery (LETD) of drugs: does it truly exist? Phar-
repait, Phys Ther 86(8): 1118-1127, 2006.
maceut Res 9:1422-1427, 1992.
20
Electrical Stimulation
David Levine and Barbara Bockstahler
Terminology Used in Electrical
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation, the primary focus
 of this chapter, is a fonm of clinical electrotherapy used
Stimulation
to treat a wide variety of physiologic disorders or injuries
 in humans and is recognized as a promising treatment
Electrical stimulation (ES) is a commonly used modality
modality for similar disorders in veterinary patients. By
in physical therapy, which is effective for many purposes,
including increasing muscle strength, muscle reeducation,
definition, NMES is the administration of an electrical
increasing range of motion (ROM), correction of structural
current generated by a stimulator that travels through leads
 abnormalities, improving muscle tone, enhancing function,
to electrodes placed on the skin to depolarize the motor
nerve and produce a skeletal muscle contraction. Stimula-
pain control, accelerating wound healing, edema reduction,
tion of motor end plates with electrical current causes
muscle spasm reduction, and enhancing transdermal
administration of medication (iontophoresis).' Terminol-
nerve depolarization and subsequent activation of muscle
ogy associated with electrical stimulation can be confusing.
fibers.2.3
This chapter describes the myriad of potential clinical
and, in 1990, a committee of the electrophysiologic section
uses of electrical NMES; therefore this term is used
of the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA)
throughout. In addition to the discussion of general uses
developed the Standards of Electrotherapeutic Terminol-
ogy, a document created to unify and standardize the terms
of NMES, specifc attention is paid to ruptured anterior
cruciate ligament (ACL)/cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL)
and definitions used by biomedical engineers, researchers,
educators, and clinicians. Historically, electrical stimula-
humans and dogs and the amount of research informa-
tors and the terminology related to them have been referred
tion that is currently available on the use of NMES for
to by their specific rehabilitative application, the use of the
knee/stife rehabilitation. The emerging use of electrical
inventor's name, or the commercial companies that pro-
stimulation to treat pain in the dog is also examined.
duced them. Examples include galvanic current, faradic
current, diadynamic current, high voltage, low voltage, low
frequency, medium frequency, transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation (TENS), electrical muscle stimulation
History of Electrical Stimulation
(EMS), functional electrical stimulation (FES), Russian
stimulation, and interferential stimulation. Unfortunately
Electricity has been used therapeutically since Scribonius
the multitude of names has created confusion regarding the
Largus used an electrical ray in a footbath to treat gout.
physiologic effects and clinical results. Transcutaneous
Benjamin Franklin used electrical shock to treat a frozen
electrical nerve stimulation has been widely used to iden-
shoulder in 1757.? Electrical muscle stimulation has been
tify stimulators that modify pain, whereas neuromuscular
specifically used in physical therapy since the mid-1700s.
electrical stimulation (NMES) or electrical muscle stimula-
when electrostatic generators were used to treat patients
tion (EMS) has been identifed with muscle reeducation,
with paralysis. In 1791 Galvani used galvanic current in
prevention of muscle atrophy, and enhanced joint move-
in vitro experiments using neuromuscular preparations.
ment. Accurate terminology dictates that almost all electri-
By the early 1800s Faraday had invented the faradic
cal stimulators are TENS units, as they work transcutaneously
current generator, which is the basis for most moderm
through surface electrodes to excite nerves. In the typical
muscle stimulators. Documentation of NMES to reduce the
scenario where the muscle is innervated by a motor nerve,
loss of muscle weight and prevent atrophy in denervated
NMES is the appropriate terminology, and when a muscle
muscles occurred in the early to mid-twentieth century.
is denervated and requires direct muscle fber activation
 Electrotherapy has since become commonplace in physical
through electrical stimulation, the term EMS is used.
medicine for the restoration of muscle function after
The authors would like to acknowledge Janna Johnson for her work on the previous
 injuries, before patients are capable of voluntary exercise
edition.
training.
342
Chapter 20
Electrical Stimulation
343
Basic Concepts of Electrical Stimulation
Box 20-1
Typical Parameters Available in
Neuromuscular Electrical
To understand the benefits that electrical stimulation may
Stimulation Devices
provide in veterinary practice, a basic explanation and def-
nition of the electrical current parameters used are sum-
Waveform: The shape of the visual representation of pulsed
marized in Box 20-1.
current on a current/time plot or voltage/time plot. Can be
symmetric, asymmetric, balanced, unbalanced, biphasic,
Electrical Current/WWaveforms
monophasic, polyphasic, and so forth.
Amplitude: The current value in a monophasic pulse or for any
Three types of currents are commonly used: (1) continuous 
single phase of a biphasic pulse.
direct current (DC) (Figure 20-1, A), (2) continuous alter-
 Phase/pulse duration: The duration of a phase or a pulse,
nating current (AC) (Figure 20-1, B), and (3) pulsed current
usually measured in microseconds.
(either AC or DC) (Figure 20-1, C). Continuous direct
 Pulse rate or frequency: The rate of oscillation in cycles per
current is a unidirectional electrical current that flows for
second, expressed as pulses/sec (pps) or hertz (Hz). Often
1 second or longer; altermating current changes the direc-
labeled as pulse rate or pulses/sec, or frequency on
tion of fow at least once every second. Continuous direct
stimulators.
current (also called galvanic current) has been used for
 On/off time: The amount of time the stimulator is delivering
wound healing, iontophoresis, and in the treatment of 
current compared with the rest period between contractions,
denervated muscle. In current clinical practice it is used
usually measured in seconds.
Ramp: The time in seconds from when the current begins to the
only for iontophoresis. Continuous altermating current is
peak current (example: 3-second ramp up, 6-second
 not used therapeutically, but is our typical line current (see
contraction, 2-second ramp down).
Figure 20-1, B).
Polarity: Electrode may be either the anode (+) or cathode (-).
Pulsed current consists of a unidirectional or bidirec-
(This is not relevant when using AC.)
tional fow of charges (DC or AC) that periodically stops
Amplitude
apr
A
Time
B
Time
Biphasic
Monophasic
Time
c
Figure 20-1 A, Continuous direct current. B, Continuous alternating current. C, Pulsed currents (AC and DC).
344
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
Phase duration
Amplitude
de
Pulse duration
Time
A
Time
Figure 20-2  Phase and pulse duration.
for a finite time period. All NMES devices are pulsed
current stimulators. Phase duration (also referred to as
phase width) is defined as the time in which the current
fows from the baseline in one direction and back to the
baseline (Figure 20-2).
Pulse duration (also referred to as pulse width) is defined
as the time during which charge fows in both directions
(see Figure 20-2). In a monophasic current, the pulse dura-
tion and the phase duration are the same. In a biphasic
current, two phases make up one pulse. Pulsed current
consisting of a bidirectional flow of charge is called bipha-
sic pulsed current.
Time
When the fow in each direction is the same in time and
B
amplitude-dependent features, the biphasic current pulse is
Figure 20-3
 A, Symmetric biphasic current. B, Asymmetric biphasic
considered symmetric (Figure 20-3, A). If the time- and
current.
amplitude-dependent features differ, then the biphasic
current is termed asymmetric (Figure 20-3, B). Balanced
asymmetric biphasic pulsed current occurs when the total
charge in one phase equals the total charge of the other
Si asud yoa u aeu po a  (t-oz anst aseud
unequal, it is termed unbalanced (Figure 20-5). Both
 pulsed AC and DC current fonms are commonly used in
ide
portable and clinical model NMES units.
Stimulator Parameters
Current amplitude (also called magnitude or intensity) is
defined as the vertical distance from the highest to the
lowest peak during one electrical wave and is typically
measured in milliamperes (mA) (Figure 20-6). Increasing
the amplitude induces a stronger force of muscle contrac-
Time
tion by recruiting additional muscle fibers at greater dis-
Figure 20-4  Balanced asymmetric biphasic pulsed current.
tances from the electrodes.'.3
Skin produces resistance to current fow by ohmic resis-
tance and capacitive impedance. Capacitive impedance is
of the skin, potentially making the treatment more
patient dependent and cannot be modifed. Clipping or
comfortable.'.3
shaving the hair coat and cleaning the skin with alcohol to
 Increased current amplitude is required to produce a
wash away skin oils or other substances helps to lower
 given amount of muscle contraction force if the pulse
ohmic resistance. Lowering the skin resistance diminishes
or phase durations are short (<100 μusec). Portable NMES
the driving voltage that is necessary for current penetration
units are not always capable of producing the current
Chapter 20
Electrical Stimulation
345
On
 time
Off
 time
ude
olit
olit
Time
Time
Figure 20-5 Unbalanced asymmetric biphasic pulsed current.
Figure 20-7  Duty cycle.
may be produced with frequencies as low as 20 Hz, but
only submaximal muscle contractions are typically pro-
 duced in this range. Maximal force of contraction generally
0ccurs between 60 and 100 Hz. However, as frequency
increases the rate of fatigue also increases. Lower tetanic
(mA
frequencies in the range of 35 to 50 pps reduce muscle
fatigue while still providing strong muscle contractions.3
Duty cycle is the ratio of on-time to total cycle time,
expressed as a percentage (Figure 20-7). On-time is the
period of time in which a series of pulses or bursts are
delivered to the patient. Off-time is the time between
on-times. A single on-time duration plus a single off-time
duration constitutes the total cycle time. For example, a
Time
stimulator that causes a muscle to contract for 10 seconds
followed by a 30-second rest would have a 25% duty
Figure 20-6 Amplitude.
cycle, or a 1 : 4 ratio. As on-time increases, muscle fatigue
increases.? Optimal duty cycles vary, depending on the
output that clinical models can produce; however, most
patient. A patient with severe atrophy may require a longer
units sold for electromedical purposes are adequate. Some
 off-time to recover between contractions. Many clinicians
 bargain simulators possess a very low phase charge (<10
start with duty cycle ratios between 1 :2 and 1 :5 and watch
microcoulombs) and cannot create adequate contraction of
 for signs of fatigue, which indicates the need for a longer
large muscle groups.
off-time.
Pulse durations of 150 to 400 microseconds produce
 Ramp is a feature of NMES that helps improve patient
powerful contractions while minimizing the likelihood of
comfort. It involves a gradual increase or decrease in
recruiting many pain fibers.3 Some stimulators that are
current amplitude such that the number of recruited motor
made only for NMES do not allow control of pulse dura-
units gradually increases the force of muscle contraction
tion, but are typically set in this range. As the pulse dura-
or gradually decreases the force of contraction (Figure
tion increases, smaller diameter pain fibers are recruited.
20-8). The ramp time is the period of time over which the
One study has examined pulse durations in dogs and sub-
pulse is increasing or decreasing. No data to date have
sequently recommended pulse durations by individual
identified the optimal ramp time. However, a ramp up time
of 2 to 4 seconds is commonly used to maximize comfort
ences in needed pulse durations between people and dogs.
with a 1- to 2-second ramp down. Suggested current
Although they are similar, dogs in general do not require
 parameters for muscle strengthening are listed in Box 20-2.
 as long a pulse duration as human motor nerves to depolar-
Electrodes
ize. This can potentially increase comfort by using the
shortest recommended pulse duration.
 Many types of surface electrodes are available. The main
 Pulse rate (also called frequency, rate and pulses per
criteria in choosing electrodes are as follows:
second [pps]) is the number of pulses delivered per second
1. Flexible enough to conform to the tissue
and is measured in hertz (Hz). Tetanic muscle contractions
 2. May be trimmed to a specific size
346
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
Table 20-1
Recommended Pulse Durations for 11 Studied Muscles in Dogs
Range of
Range of Recommended   Reported Human 
 Recommended
Pulse Durations for Use
Chronaxy Range
Pulse Durations for
Muscle
Chronaxy Value (μs)
in Dogs* (μs)
(us)
Use in Humans (μs)
Supraspinatus
167 ± 55 (133-200)
150-190
80-160
100-300, 150-250,
250
Infraspinatus
151 ±61 (113-188)
130-170
80-160
100-300, 150-250,
250
Deltoideus
180 ± 60 (138-221)
160-200
80-160
100-300, 150-250,
200
 Triceps brachi
217 ±74 (171-262)
200-240
160-320
100-300, 150-250,
(lateral head)
200
Extensor carpi
190 ± 69 (141-238)
170-210
200-360
300, 150-250,
radialis
200
Gluteus medius
179 ± 69 (136-221)
160-200
80-160
300, 250-400,
400
Biceps femoris
207 ± 63 (167-246)
180-220
440-720
300,250-400.
400
Semitendinosus
166 ± 25 (150-181)
150-190
440-720
300, 250-400,
400
Vastus lateralis
233 ± 73 (181-282)
210-250
80-160
300, 250-400,
400
Tibialis cranialis
238 ± 111 (160-314)
210-250
200-360
300, 250-400,
400
Erector spinae
205 ± 79 (155-255)
180-220
160-320
250, 150-250,
300
*These recommended pulse durations are intervals centered over the mean values calculated in this study with an approximate range of ±10% or ±20 μus. This range
 fa ilitates the selection of a single chronaxy value when stimulating several muscles in 1 region.
From Sawaya SG, Combet D, Chanoit G, Thiebault J, Levine D, Marcellin-Lile DJ: Assessment of impulse duration thresholds for electrical muscle stimulation (chronaxy)
in dogs. Arm J Vet Res 69:1305-1309, 2008.
Box 20-2
Current Parameters for
Strengthening
Ramp
Ramp
up.
On
down
Off
Frequency: Generally between 25 and 50 Hz. (These have been
time
time
shown in humans to produce strong tetanic contractions
de
while minimizing fati gue.) An alternative in dogs that are
not very tolerant of electrical stimulation is to use a low
frequency (<10 Hz). This will provide a twitch contraction
and is better tolerated in some cases.
Waveforms: Many waveforms exist; any waveform capable of
depolarizing the muscle is acceptable.
 Pulse or phase duration: Between 150 and 250 microseconds.
Optimal pulse durations maybe found in Table 20-1.
Ramp up/down (rise and decay time): Adjust between 2 to 4
Time
seconds up to increase comfort, 1 to 2 seconds down.
Figure 20-8 Ramp.
On/off time: A 1 :3 or 1 :4 ratio; 10 seconds on, 30 or 40
seconds off is commonly used. This may be decreased as
muscle strength improves. A 1 : 1 or 1 :2 ratio is usually
used for muscle endurance training.
Chapter 20
Electrical Stimulation
347
3. Have a low resistance
200 μsec or more), on/off times, ramp, and multiple chan-
4. Are highly conductive
nels (at least two to allow co-contraction or altermating
5. May be used many times
contraction of two different muscle groups). Acceptable
6. Are inexpensive
clinical units may cost $300 or more.
Some commercially available electrodes are effective for
only a few uses, and some may be used 100 or more times
Indications and Contraindications for
(e.g., carbon-impregnated silicon rubber electrodes, metal,
Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation
etc.). Conductive performance of any electrode decreases
over time. Electrodes require a medium to transmit current.
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation is commonly used in
 Commonly used media include gels, moistened sponges or
the rehabilitation of human patients who have had ortho-
paper towels; some electrodes have the media already
pedic or neurologic injury. A few examples are patients
applied. Sponges and paper towels tend to dry out, and
recovering from fracture repair, ACL reconstruction, and
rewetting is necessary every 30 minutes. Electrodes should
meniscal debridement or repair. Patients with neurologic
be of the appropriate size to stimulate the desired muscle
conditions, such as cerebrovascular accidents, closed head
without stimulating unwanted muscles in close proximity.
injuries, spinal cord injuries, or other neurologic disease
The smaller the electrode, the higher the current density
involving paralysis or paresis, may also benefit from
that enters the muscle, and the more uncomfortable the
NMES. NMES has been used to increase joint mobility,
stimulus may be.
decrease joint contracture, decrease edema, enhance circu-
An altermative to traditional electrodes is the use of
lation, minimize disuse atrophy, improve muscle strength,
electrodes with multiple fne wires or prongs that make
retard loss of volitional control, improve sensory aware-
contact with the skin (see Fig. 20-13). The advantage of
ness, decrease spasticity, diminish pain, and correct gait
these types of electrodes is that the hair does not need to
abnonmalities.9-12
be clipped. Rather the fine wire prongs are worked down
 In human patients with low thoracic spinal cord injury,
among the hair to contact the skin. Wetting the hair before
functional NMES has been used to produce knee extension
treatment helps with conductivity.
with locking of the knees to allow weight bearing. Within
3 weeks of spinal cord injury, up to 50% of quadriceps
Recruitment
muscle loss may occur. In one study NMES returmed
Neuromuscular electrical stimulators recruit Type II (fast
quadriceps muscle mass to near normal." In a patient
twitch) fibers first, then Type I (slow twitch), which is the
with an incomplete quadriplegic spinal cord injury NMES
reverse of the muscle recruitment pattem in a volitional
was used to strengthen a paretic hand. Two weeks of
 contraction.6& Increasing the pulse duration increases the
NMES produced a 33% increase in muscle force with no
recruitment of smaller diameter motor units at the same
loss of strength 4 weeks after the treatment was discontin-
depth, but increasing the pulse duration too much (800
ued. Children with mild cerebral palsy treated with
μsec) may stimulate undesirable fibers (small-diameter
NMES had statistically significant improvements in gross
pain fibers). Increasing either the amplitude or the pulse
motor, locomotor, and receipt/propulsion skills.'° Neuro-
duration affects the strength of contraction because addi-
muscular electrical stimulation has also been used on the
tional muscle fibers are recruited. Increasing the frequency
tibial muscles of children with Duchenne and Becker mus-
results in the existing motor units firing at a faster rate and
cular  dystrophy.  Neuromuscular  electrical  stimulation
will increase the strength of contraction, but it also causes
resulted in mild, short-term increases in muscle strength,
more rapid fatigue. Application of NMES at an optimal
but it did not alter muscle fatigue. Whether chronic stimu-
frequency results in an optimal physiologic response (the
lation produces beneficial long-term effects has yet to be
 desired contraction) while minimizing fatigue. In a healthy
determined.'2
uninjured individual, a maximal voluntary muscle contrac-
 In addition to the clinical use of NMES in people
tion produces a greater torque (more powerful contraction)
with neurologic and orthopedic disorders, it has been
than occurs in an electrically induced contraction. However,
used in denervated muscle to retard atrophy and improve
ns m   sn rm s
recovery after reinnervation in rats with surgically severed
may be unable or unwilling to produce a maximum volun-
peroneal nerves. The use of NMES in improving reinner-
tary muscle contraction. In these patients NMES may
vation recovery in other species warrants further study
produce a stronger muscle contraction.
because it may be useful to those with denervation
What to Look for When Buying a
injuries.13
 There are a number of circumstances in which electrical
Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulator Unit
stimulation should not be used (contraindications), and
An acceptable NMES unit should allow fexibility in a
other circumstances in which electrical stimulation should
number of parameters, including frequency (adjustable
 be used only with caution (precautions). Box 20-3 outlines
from at least 1 to 50 Hz), adjustable pulse duration (50 to
these contraindications and precautions.
348
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
-yuis ou pamous ge le na sussot-peisrasim Aq yaeasa
Box 20-3
Contraindications and Precautions
cant reduction in the activity of the oxidative and glycolytic
for the Use of Electrical
enzymes citrate synthase and triphosphate dehydrogenase
Stimulation
in NMES patients following knee ligament surgery com-
Contraindications
 pared with untreated control knee ligament surgery patients,
High-intensity stimulation directly over the heart
which had decreased enzyme activity.
 In animals with pacemakers
Effects on Muscle Fibers
In animals with seizure disorders
 Over areas of thrombosis or thrombophlebitis
The muscle fiber atrophy that occurs with disuse following
 Over infected areas or neoplasms
cruciate injury and surgery is significant. Neuromuscular
Over the carotid sinus
electrical stimulation may be more effective than volitional
Any time active motion is contraindicated
exercise in preventing atrophy and overcoming the effects
 Over the trunk during pregnancy
of refex inhibition in the first few days to weeks after
Precautions
surgery. Electrical stimulation also recruits Type II muscle
 In areas with impaired sensation
fibers first, thereby retarding their atrophy to a greater
 In areas of skin irritation or damage
degree than Type I muscle fibers.67 As Type II fiber aug-
Near electronic sensing devices such as ECG monitors
mentation occurs the force of contraction increases, and
(possible interference)
therefore, strength increases. With volitional contraction in
humans a selective or preferential activation of fast-twitch
motor units has not been demonstrated. Slow-twitch motor 
units with Type I skeletal muscle fibers are recruited first,
followed by the fast-twitch motor units with Type II skel-
Effects of Neuromuscular Electrical
 etal muscle fibers being recruited as the demand for force
Stimulation in the Rehabilitation of
increases.
Patients with Reconstructed Anterior
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation of the triceps bra-
Cruciate Ligaments
 chialis muscle in monkeys did not affect the distribution of
muscle fiber types but enhanced oxidative capacity and
The specific physical effects of NMES on muscle enzymes,
aad e sm arau e'azis ray u as ue pasn
fibers, and perfusion has been examined experimentally in
recruitment of large motor axons that innervate fast-twitch
human patients with ACL injuries. The effects of NMES
fbers. However, fast-twitch motor units were not exclu-
 on dogs recovering from CrCL rupture are also beginning
sively activated because there was also activation of slow-
to be investigated.
twitch motor units, but to a lesser extent. Motoneurons and
muscle fibers were recruited primarily in the superficial
Effect on Muscle Enzymes
portion of the muscle. The morphologic and biochemical
In a study regarding the effects of low-frequency electrical
 adaptations that occurred with NMES were similar to those
stimulation on the metabolic profile of skeletal muscle, a
occurring after voluntary heavy-resistance exercises.
portable NMES unit was used to stimulate the knee exten-
Effect on Perfusion
sor muscles of sedentary men and women 6 days a week
for 6 weeks.14 No changes in creatine kinase concentrations
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation also induced capil-
were found in vastus lateralis muscle samples before or
sn on asuosan u s un ud l
after NMES. There was a small decrease in phosphofruc-
muscle blood fow. Because blood flow increased in capil-
tokinase, the rate-limiting enzyme of glycolysis in human
 laries around Type II fibers to a greater degree than around
muscle, which was only statistically significant in men.
Type I fibers, there was a stimulus for proliferation of
Hexokinase, a regulatory enzyme of skeletal muscle
endothelial cells. '7
glucose phosphorylation, was only significantly increased
Transcutaneous electrical stimulation was used on
in the vastus lateralis of women. Krebs' cycle and electron
rat muscle to demonstrate that microvascular perfusion
transfer chain marker enzyme activity of fatty acid oxida-
 depends on evoked muscle contractions. This finding sug-
tion increased significantly in both sexes, with the greatest
gests that NMES should be applied at intensities that
change occurring in women. The authors concluded that
produce muscle contraction so that microvascular perfu-
NMES can significantly increase the skeletal muscle
sion of stimulated skeletal muscle is enhanced.18
aerobic-oxidative potential of sedentary subjects. In a
Overall Effects of Neuromuscular
a postoperative ACL reconstruction-NMES-treated group
Electrical Stimulation
and an isometric exercise group in the activity of the oxida-
The net physical effects of NMES are an increase in muscle
tive enzyme citrate synthase or phosphofructokinase.
Chapter 20
Electrical Stimulation 
349
Another benefit of NMES is the ability to overcome the
Lieber et al.?3 compared maximal voluntary thigh
effects of refex inhibition on the quadriceps muscles, and
 muscle contraction after 4 weeks of treatment in 20 NMES
 the potential enhanced effect of NMES on subsequent vol-
untary use of previously electrically activated motor units.6
undergone ACL reconstruction within 2 to 6 weeks of the
The negative effects of NMES include muscle fatigue and
study. They compared the two groups under conditions in
 possibly increased pain. Muscle fatigue is the decrease in
which the total muscle tension in both groups was matched.
force-generating ability of a muscle because of recent
When exercise intensity was matched between the two
activity. The rate of muscle fatigue during NMES is much
groups, the magnitude and time course of strength gains
 greater than that which occurs during volitional exercises.
were identical. Given the variable intensity of maximal
The reverse recruitment order induced with NMES prob-
voluntary contraction that NMES patients tolerate, vari-
ably contributes to increased fatigue. However, stimulation
ability in outcomes may be expected between NMES
intensity, stimulation frequency, and duty cycle may be
strengthening and voluntary contraction groups. The
altered to reduce muscle fatigue.? Increased current levels
 authors concluded that when strong muscle contractions
 may recruit pain fibers and result in painful muscle con-
can be elicited with NMES, significant strengthening is
tractions. In addition, discomfort is also associated with
possible.
psychological factors in humans. Pain may be controlled
Wigerstad-Lossing et al.16 compared NMES using a
by decreasing the current intensity to a level that elicits
portable unit and voluntary muscle contractions to volun-
comfortable muscle contractions.22
 tary muscle contractions alone in patients immobilized in
a cast following ACL surgery. Thirteen patients were ran-
Efficacy and Clinical Trials of Neuromuscular
 domly assigned to the treatment group and 10 to the control
Electrical Stimulation for the Anterior
group. Electrical stimulation was applied to the quadriceps
Cruciate Ligament Reconstructed Knee
muscles only, through windows in the cast, and was initi
Currier and Kellogg' used NMES to treat seven patients 
ated on the second postoperative day and continued until
after ACL reconstruction. Treatment successfully reduced
the sixth week after surgery. Preoperative data were com-
thigh girth loss compared with three control patients during
pared with data obtained in the sixth postoperative week,
the first 6 weeks.
and the authors concluded that NMES in combination with
Snyder-Mackler et al.6 studied the effects of clinical
simultaneously performed voluntary muscle contractions
sd te u  p as asn  uo s
 can limit muscle weakness, muscle wasting, and reduction
undergoing ACL reconstructive surgery. Patients were ran-
in oxidative and glycolytic muscle enzyme activity during
domly assigned to NMES and volitional exercise or voli-
 immobilization after knee ligament surgery.
tional exercise alone for 4 weeks. Values obtained for
In another study 18 male and 20 female patients under-
cadence, walking velocity, stance time on the affected
going ACL reconstruction were randomly assigned to one
limb, fexion excursion of the knee during stance, thigh
of two groups.'s Individuals in an NMES group received a
circumference, and extension and fexion torques were
cast, isometric muscle training, and NMES with a portable
improved in patients receiving NMES. The knees of the
unit. Individuals in the control group received a cast and
patients receiving NMES were stronger in the eighth post-
isometric training alone. Transcutaneous electrical stimu-
 operative week than reported averages for non-NMES
lation of the quadriceps was initiated during the first post-
patients years after ACL reconstructive surgery. The
operative week and continued for a total of 5.5 weeks.
authors concluded that NMES not only increased muscle
Quadriceps muscle wasting was assessed with computed
strength but also improved functional use of the muscles
tomography (CT) before and 6 weeks after surgery. Percu-
at least in the immediate postoperative period. The
taneous muscle biopsies were obtained from the vastus
increased muscle strength likely results in partial compen-
lateralis muscle before surgery, and 1 and 6 weeks after 
sation for the loss of ACL stability.
surgery. Electrical stimulation significantly reduced the
 DeLitto et al.?° compared clinical NMES and isometric 
amount of vastus medialis muscle wasting in female
contraction with voluntary exercise and isometric contrac-
patients as measured by CT, but there was no significant
tions in patients who had undergone ACL reconstructive
difference in males. Muscle fiber area revealed that cross-
surgery. Each group consisted of 10 patients. Neuromus-
sectional area of individual fibers decreased less in NMES
cular electrical stimulation patients received treatment for
patients than in controls, but the difference was not signif-
 3 weeks during the first 6 postoperative weeks. After their
cant. The authors concluded that transcutaneous electrical
respective treatment period, bilateral maximal isometric
stimulation was effective in significantly reducing vastus
measurements of gravity-corrected knee extension and
medialis atrophy as measured on CT, but had no significant
fexion torque were obtained. Greater extension and fexion
effect on the vastus lateralis.
torque and higher individual thigh-muscle strength gains
The results of clinical trials using NMES for postopera-
were reported when NMES was prescribed early in post-
 tive rehabilitation of the ACL-deficient knee in people gen-
 operative rehabilitation.
erally have demonstrated increased thigh girth, increased
350
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
thigh muscle strength, improved cadence, improved
extracapsular lateral fabella suture technique, which relies
walking velocity and stance time, and increased oxidative
on collagen formation and scar tissue as the primary sta-
and glycolytic muscle enzyme activity.
bilizer of the joints.43 This technique results in immediate
strength following surgery because of the stabilization
Rehabilitation Programs for Treatment of
sutures, and the periarticular structures gain strength as
Anterior Cruciate Ligament Deficiency
tissue healing and collagen maturation occur over time.
In human surgery, rehabilitation of patients after ACL
 Intracapsular techniques typically are not as strong, and the
reconstruction is necessary for an optimal outcome.2427
graft weakens over several weeks before regaining some
 Controversy exists regarding what constitutes the ideal
strength. Therefore rehabilitation protocols for canine
 postoperative rehabilitation program for human patients.
patients must be based on the surgical stabilization tech-
Current trends in volitional exercise regimens are geared
nique used. However, NMES may be useful in the reha-
toward accelerated rehabilitation programs. Typical accel-
bilitation of the stife without compromising the stability
erated programs involve ROM exercises and cryotherapy
 Of the repair.
started immediately postoperatively, and crutch use for 2
The negative effects of quadriceps refex inhibition
to 10 days. Closed kinetic chain exercises in the fonm of
leading to quadriceps atrophy following ACL injury
exercises in which the foot is fixed and motion at the knee
 and the positive protective effects of hamstring muscle
 joint is accompanied by motion at the hip and ankle joint
strengthening to enhance stability and constraint of the
(such as squats) are initiated as early as 7 days postopera-
stifle following CrCL injury have not been adequately
tively. Closed kinetic chain exercises appear to decrease
addressed in veterinary medicine. Clinicians may wish to
knee joint compressive forces, thereby decreasing the
consider adapting ACL-protective rehabilitation proce-
anteroposterior translation of the tibia, as compared with
dures to the dog, to protect the surgical repair. Improved
 open-chain knee extension exercises.?& Neuromuscular
 postoperative functional outcome following ACL recon-
electrical stimulation is commonly used during the first 3
struction in humans is positively correlated with returm of
to 6 weeks of rehabilitation, depending on the ability of
the patient to volitionally contract the quadriceps.
：At
also atrophy following ACL injury and surgery, the atrophy
approximately week 10 light jogging, Stairmaster, and
is generally less than that found in the quadriceps muscles,
agility drills may generally be attempted. From weeks 12
probably because the hamstring muscles cross both the
to 24 strengthening programs, proprioceptive training, and
knee and hip joints, which results in continued function
increased running and agility programs are added as toler-
and muscle contraction, thereby diminishing the degree
ated. Advancement from one level of activity to another is
of atrophy.26
based on physical examination, knee laxity testing, and
isokinetic and functional testing.16.25.28.30
Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation Use
Postoperative rehabilitation and the role of the quadri-
and Clinical Recommendations in the Dog
ceps and hamstring muscles in improving stife function
have been largely ignored in veterinary medicine. Postop-
Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation Use in
erative care of dogs, regardless of the surgical technique
used, traditionally has included several days to weeks of
Veterinary Medicine
extermal support to reduce postoperative swelling and
 In establishing a rehabilitation program, the cost-beneft
 provide joint immobilization. This is done to protect the
ratio must be assessed. For a program to be cost and labor
surgical repair until pericapsular fibrosis occurs in the case
effective there must be earlier or more protected retum to
of extracapsular repair, provide protection of an intracap-
function, increased joint ROM, increased muscle strength,
sular graft while it remodels, protect the site of fixation of
and an overall improved outcome.6 Although cost is a
the graft, and permit healing of the osteotomy and repair
major concerm in veterinary medicine, of equal importance
is how a rehabilitation program is applied to the dog. Obvi-
However, immobilization exacerbates muscle atrophy and
ously the use of crutches or other limb assistive devices
weakness and produces deleterious effects on cartilage,
are not directly applicable to the dog. However, extermal
bone, and ligaments 4.5.62426
coaptation with soft padded bandages and cage rest, when
Veterinary surgeons should not make the error of using
 needed, appear to be practical altermatives. Bicycling.
all aspects of the accelerated volitional rehabilitation pro-
weightlifting, proprioceptive training, and jumping rope,
tocols designed for human patients in their veterinary
which are the mainstays of rehabilitation in people, are
patients post-CrCL stabilization. The majority of human
generally either not possible in dogs, or are performed with
ACL surgical repairs involve using the bone-patellar
modifications. A practical rehabilitation altermative to
tendon-bone technique, which is strongest the day of
enhance operative outcome is needed for dogs. Electrical
surgery and loses strength as tendon remodeling occurs.
stimulation provides a cost- and labor-effective means of
Many canine CrCL-deficient stifles are stabilized using the
establishing early, protected returm to function, as well as
Chapter 20
Electrical Stimulation
351
the possibility of decreased degenerative joint disease
A symmetric biphasic waveform of 35 pulses per second
(DJD) and increased muscle mass 4.4s
was used. Amperage was increased to the tolerance level
Neuromuscular  electrical  stimulation is an  effective
of the animal and was reduced if gross movement was
means of rehabilitation of the ACL-deficient knee in people
noted at the stife joint or the animal displayed any signs
and is considered by some to be more effective than voli-
of distress, including turming its head in recognition of the
tional exercise, especially during the early rehabilitation
stimulus or becoming agitated. Amperage was reduced to
period. Because the CrCL-deficient dog has been used
a level below that which produced these signs. Each treat-
extensively as a model for ACL deficiency in humans, it
ment session lasted 30 minutes once daily, five times per
logically follows that post-ACL reconstruction rehabilita-
week, for 4 weeks. Outcome measures were assessed at
tion methods in humans could be applied to the dog. Reha-
weeks 0, 2, 5, 7, 9, 13, and 19. Outcome measures included
bilitation of the stabilized knee determines the success of
radiographs, force plate analysis, subjective lameness
surgical outcome, especially in the physically active human
scores, drawer sign, thigh circumference, ROM, palpable
 patient. Appropriate rehabilitation seems especially impor-
crepitation during ROM, and postmortem evaluation of
tant to enhancing surgical outcome in large working dogs
stifle joints.
used for hunting, obedience trials, service, tracking, Or
Radiographic results demonstrated that the NMES
police work. Loss of function in the working dog not only
 group had significantly fewer bony changes associated
affects the quality of life of the patient, but may also lead
with osteoarthritis over time. Thigh circumference was sig-
to economic losses associated with an animal's inability to
nificantly greater in the NMES group at weeks 9 and 13,
work. Surgical stabilization of the stifle is the treatment of
B    s s  
time in the NMES group (P < .001). The postmortem
to develop DJD and joint laxity regardless of the surgical
evaluation revealed that the NMES group had less cartilage
intervention.
damage (P < .07), less palpable crepitation during ROM,
To date only a few studies have reported the use of
and less osteophyte formation. Range of motion, force
NMES in the rehabilitation of dogs. In a study by Johnson
plate analysis, and joint laxity were not significantly dif-
-xa u Aasns  mo pasn sm SN t e n
ferent between the groups. Meniscal damage was signifi-
mental dogs, and the portable units used in this study
 cantly greater in the NMES group, however.44
proved quite feasible for use in dogs. The affected thigh
In a study by Millis et al.* a clinical trial was designed
was clipped and scrubbed with isopropyl alcohol. A limb-
to compare the outcomes of postoperative physical reha-
positioning device was constructed to maintain the limb in
bilitation to traditional postoperative care in dogs surgi-
a normal stance position during stimulation. The rationale
cally treated for cranial cruciate rupture. Ten dogs receiving
for maintaining the limb in a normal stance position was
treatment for cranial cruciate rupture were randomly
that stimulating the muscles in this position would be more
assigned to either a treatment group for postoperative phys-
functional. Adhesive tape was used to fix the limb-
ical rehabilitation, or a control group. Lateral fabellar-tibial
 positioning device to the lateral surface of the affected
stabilization was performed in each dog by the same
pelvic limb during the 30-minute treatment session.
surgeon. Dogs in the control group were cage rested and
Carbon electrodes (4.5 x 4.6 cm) were placed over the
walked on a leash for 20 minutes twice daily for 2 weeks.
distal portion of the biceps femoris muscle, and the proxi-
 Dogs in the treatment group received passive ROM exer-
mal portion of the semitendinosus muscle. Additional
cises, NMES, and walking exercises for the same 2-week
carbon electrodes (5.1 x 10.2 cm) were also positioned
period. Thigh girth measurements and maximum angles of
over the distal portion of the vastus medialis muscle and
fexion and extension were taken every other day during
the proximal portion of the vastus lateralis muscle. Water-
the 2-week period and 4, 8, and 12 weeks after surgery.
soluble electrode gel was applied as a coupling agent, and
The infuence of other variables, such as meniscal injury,
the electrodes were fixed in position with paper tape.
 and the degree of preexisting osteoarthritis on outcome
Channel 1 was connected to the hamstring muscle elec-
were also assessed.
trodes, and channel 2 was connected to the quadriceps
By the end of the 2-week period thigh girth was signif-
electrodes. The parameters for the program were as follows:
cantly larger in the rehabilitation group and remained
greater throughout the rest of the study, but the difference
Charnel 1: Ramp up—3 seconds; ON: 12 seconds;
late in the study was not statistically significant. Maximal
ramp down—2 seconds; OFF: 25 seconds
extension of the stife was significantly greater in the reha-
bilitation group beginning halfway through the initial
Charnel 2: Ramp up—2 seconds; ON:12 seconds;
2-week period and remained greater throughout the rest of
ramp down —1 second; OFF: 25 seconds
the study. Maximal fexion was not significantly different
between the two groups. The presence of moderate to
Channel 2 started 3 seconds after channel 1, automatically
eliciting cyclic hamstring and quadriceps co-contraction.
ery in both groups. Interestingly meniscal injury at the time
352
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
of surgery had no effects on any of the measured param-
eters in the short term. In this study, muscle mass and
 maximum range of stife motion were improved with post-
operative physical rehabilitation. The increased muscle
mass in the dogs receiving rehabilitation may have been
due, in part, to NMES.
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation has been used
clinically on dogs for many purposes, including to dimin-
ish joint contractures and decrease muscle atrophy associ-
ated with a variety of disorders such as inherited Labrador
myopathy, postoperative atrophy, and nerve injury. Other
uses have included improving limb function, decreasing
pain, decreasing muscle spasm (commonly associated with 
intervertebral disk disease), and decreasing edema.
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation may be valuable
as part of the treatment for postoperative rehabilitation of
dogs undergoing femoral head and neck excision. It may
also help to improve the outcome of surgically repaired
chronic hip luxations, or any other surgical procedure in
Figure 20-9  Preparing the skin for treatment.
which quick retum of muscle mass is beneficial. Neuro-
muscular electrical stimulation may also be used for the
conservative treatment of shoulder instability* or iliopsoas
muscle trauma.47
Animal Reaction and Safety
Precautions should be taken to avoid injury to the handler
and animal. A muzzle should be applied and the animal
placed in lateral recumbency during the initial treatment.
In some cases, tranquilization may be necessary if the
animal is anxious. We recommend that treatment only be
 given under the supervision of trained personnel.
Preparation and Electrode Placement
The hair over the area to which electrical stimulation
will be applied should be clipped to lower impedance
(Figure 20-9). The skin should be cleaned with alcohol
Figure 20-10  Application of electrical stimulation for contraction
before treatment. It is best to locate the motor point (the 
of the caudal thigh muscles. (Courtesy D. Millis.)
area in which the motor nerve enters the muscle) so that
an adequate contraction is obtained with as low a current
as possible to minimize discomfort to the patient. Usually
the motor point is very predictably found in the middle
 portion of the muscle belly. Electrodes may be placed
solely on one muscle to cause a contraction and motion at
the joint the muscle acts upon (Figure 20-10), or they may
be placed on opposing muscle groups to cause a
co-contraction (Figure 20-1 1) that may simulate an isomet-
ric contraction and result in little or no joint movement, or
altermating stimulation of antagonist muscles to cause con-
tractions of the muscles and movement of the joint.
Motor point location is performed by first applying gel
to the skin, and then placing the electrode over the general
area of the motor point, or the point at which the nerve
enters the muscle (typically in the middle of the muscle
belly). The other electrode is placed further distally over
the muscle. With the unit on, the proximal electrode may
tion of the cranial and caudal thigh muscles. (Courtesy D. Millis.)
Chapter 20
Electrical Stimulation
353
then be moved around until a good contraction is achieved.
(<10 Hz), high pulse duration (>100 μsec) stimulation, and
Setting the frequency at 1 Hz helps in motor point deter-
they produce analgesia when released. Intemeurons are
mination because the twitch contraction is more obvious
 located in the substantia gelatinosa that produce enkepha-
and becomes stronger as the electrode moves closer to the
lins to inhibit the C fiber cells in the region. Collaterals of
motor point. An indelible marking pen may be used to
the A-8 fibers connect with these intermeurons and stimu-
draw a circle around the electrode. This allows the elec.
late them. If A-8 fibers are stimulated by electrical impulses,
trode to be placed in the same area during subsequent
 the C fiber system-type pain is decreased.4 This is also one
treatments, without having to repeat the process of motor
of the suspected mechanisms of action of acupuncture.
point location. Remember to adjust the frequency to the
Therefore, low-frequency, high-intensity TENS might be
desired setting (25-50 Hz) before beginning the actual
sufficient to stimulate the same pain control system
treatment.
that may occur with acupuncture. In an animal model, it
was shown that high-frequency TENS increased the con-
Treatment Time and Frequency of Treatment
centration of y-aminobutyric acid in the spinal cord. This
Although the optimum time and frequency of treatment are
caused a reduction of central sensation and primary
umknown, most clinicians believe that electrical stimula-
hyperalgesia.s3
tion should be applied to the desired area(s) for 15 to 20
Types of Electrical Stimulators
minutes, three to seven times per week. Occasionally a
patient may experience muscle soreness early in the treat-
Many different waveforms, amplitudes, and frequencies
ment program if electrical stimulation is used too fre-
 have been recommended for pain control, and the literature
quently, for treatment periods that are too long, or with
 describes many applications. The high-frequency, short-
 application of current that is too great (muscle contraction
pulse duration (conventional) TENS (50-150 Hz, 2-50 μsec
is too strong). In these cases, skipping treatment for a day
pulse duration, low intensity) is one of the most frequently
or two and resuming treatment with reduced treatment
used current parameters. The intensity is increased until
time, frequency, or strength of contraction is usually ade-
the dog shows some initial response, such as moving the
quate to resolve the problem. Co-contraction of opposing
limb, or tuming the head toward the area, which we assume
muscle groups should be considered if no joint motion is
is a tingling sensation described by people. No muscle
desired.
contraction should occur. As described the treatment is
presumed to stimulate large, low-threshold A-β fibers to
Electrical Stimulation for Pain Control
activate the gate control mechanism.
Acupuncture-like TENS (low-frequency, high-pulse
The use of electrical currents has a long tradition of pain
duration, high-intensity, 1-10 Hz, 100-400 μusec pulse
control in humans and has been commonly used in medical
duration, high-intensity) is another mode of electrical stim-
 practice since the 1970s. There are a variety of commonly
ulation for pain control. Regarding the low frequency
used currents for pain control, but in all of them, surface
stimulation, some authors differentiate between the
electrodes are placed over defined locations and peripheral
acupuncture-like TENS with frequencies between 1 and
nerves are stimulated via the skin.
4 Hz, and frequencies between 5 and 10 Hz. The
acupuncture-like TENS is administered at an intensity that 
 Pain-Relieving Mechanisms of
evokes visible muscle contractions. This stimulates the
Electrical Stimulation
high-threshold A-8 fbers and C fibers that may result in
The pain relief mechanisms of TENS are explained by
the release of endogenous opioids. This form of TENS is
multiple theories. In 1965, Melzack and Wall published
often applied directly to acupuncture points and also to
their gate control theory of pain control. This theory
motor points in the segmentally related myotome.
describes how pain may be relieved by electrical stimula-
Burst mode TENS is a series of pulses at 1 to 4 Hz and
tion. Pain signals are transmitted by small cutaneous A-8
a high intermal or carrier frequency (40 to 150 Hz), 100 to
and C fibers. If a TENS current is applied, the large cutane-
 250 μsec pulse duration and a high intensity. The implied
ous (A-β) fbers are stimulated. The signals from the A-β
benefit is that it combines the benefits of both conventional 
fibers activate inhibitory neurons in the substantia gelati-
and acupuncture-like TENS.
nosa of the spinal cord dorsal horm and block the transmis-
Modulated TENS offers the possibility to vary pulse
sion of pain impulses from the periphery to the brain.4 The
length, frequency, and amplitudes automatically. This
A-β fibers can be stimulated by low current intensities and
cyclic variation is believed to prevent the nervous system
high frequencies; therefore, an electrical current at a high
from becoming adapted or conditioned to the currents.
Interferential (IFC) and premodulated interferential are
 pain control mechanism.4 Further mechanisms involve the
additional currents commonly used for pain control. These
a surdopua asau zsos saeido snouopua jo asean
currents are very comfortable and have been commonly
released from the pituitary in response to low frequency
 e e p a  s a u pn
354
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
effect and acupuncture-like TENS fell just short of signif-
cance.4 Another metaanalysis focused on the treatment
of knee OA using different types of TENS currents.5S
When the combined efficacies of conventional TENS and
acupuncture-like TENS were compared with placebo, pain
improved significantly in the treatment group. In addition,
15 19.07
knee stiffness was improved in the combined treatment
group. The significant pain-relieving effect was also detect-
able if conventional and acupuncture-like TENS were
evaluated separately. Interestingly this metaanalysis found
- sm  -a a t d 
mately two times better than with high-frequency TENS.
 Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation treatment is
also an effective method in cases of postoperative pain. In
humans who underwent lumbar canal stenosis surgery,
pain and the doses of analgesics administered were evalu-
upaut ued paaianai dnon auo 'sdnos omg u pae
and TENS treatment (80 Hz during the first 30 minutes of
the therapy, switching to 5 Hz in the second half), whereas
the other group received the same medication, but no
TENS. In the TENS-treated group, pain and the total doses
D. Millis.)
of analgesic medications were significantly reduced com-
 pared with the control group.60
Research in Veterinary Medicine
carrier frequency (approximately 4000 Hz). The parame-
ters recommended for acute pain are 80 to 150 Hz (fre-
Electrical stimulation for pain control may be used in
quency modulated), and for chronic pain are 1 to 10 Hz
numerous orthopedic and neurologic disorders. Studies in
(frequency modulated). If the frequency modulation is not
humans have shown benefts in acute60 or chronics.54
used, a fixed frequency of 50 to 100 Hz for acute pain and
pain caused by osteoarthritis, spondylarthrosis, and after
2 to 4 for chronic pain is supported by the literature.54
orthopedic and neurologic surgery. Before starting the
When using interferential current, four electrodes from two
treatment, special awareness should be given to the contra-
separate channels are used; the electrodes from one channel
indications and precautions listed in Box 20-3. A few
are crossed at a 90-degree angle to the electrodes from the
studies have been conducted in dogs, including the effects
other channel (Figure 20-12). Premodulated interferential 
 Of TENS on osteoarthritic pain in the stife of dogs.6 Five
uses just 1 channel and 2 electrodes for small areas. While
dogs that had chronic mild OA that was originally induced
it is not true interferential current, it feels almost identical
by CrCL transection and stifle stabilization were treated.
 and is very comfortable.
Pretreatment ground reaction forces were determined
using a force plate before electrical stimulation to assess
Research in Human Medicine
the functional use of the affected limb. Immediately fol-
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation has been the
lowing these measurements, premodulated electrical stim-
topic of numerous clinical trials in human medicine regard-
ulation (70 Hz) was applied to the involved extremity
ing its effectiveness for pain control in various disorders.
around the stife. After treatment ground reaction forces
Unfortunately the results are inconsistent because of a
were determined at 30-minute intervals over a 4-hour
variety of reasons, such as weak study design, missing
period. Each dog was also reevaluated 24 hours after treat-
control/placebo groups, and small numbers of participants.
ment. Significant improvement in ground reaction forces
The use of TENS was evaluated in several systematic
was found 30 minutes after treatment. These differences
metaanalyses and reviews in humans. Again the results
persisted for 210 minutes after TENS application and were
were inconclusive, showing clear benefts of electrical
statistically significant 30, 60, 120, 150, and 180 minutes
stimulation for pain control in some studies,S-57 whereas 
after treatment. The greatest improvement was found
immediately after treatment. Each of the dogs was reevalu-
able evidence in human medicine that TENS is an effective
ated following a 4-day rest period and still exhibited a mild
method for pain relief, especially in cases of chronic
 increase in weight bearing on the affected extremity, but
musculoskeletal pain. In one metaanalysis, the authors
these differences were not significant. In this preliminary
concluded that high frequency TENS, as well as TENS
with frequencies lower than 10 Hz, produced a significant
in dogs with osteoarthritic stifle joints.
Chapter 20
Electrical Stimulation
355
In another study, 29 overweight dogs with lameness
caused by OA of the hip, elbow, stife, or shoulder were
am sop aul zguiaond sson uiam e ui papnu
randomly divided into two groups and the diet was com-
bined with physiotherapy. Owners of dogs in both groups
were instructed to perfonm massage, passive range of
motion, and gradually increase levels of controlled exer-
cise. Group 1 dogs were additionally treated with TENS in
a physiotherapy clinic twice weekly. Body weight, subjec-
tive lameness, and pain scores were evaluated monthly. A
force-plate analysis was performed every second month.
Asymmetric weight distribution between limbs affected
and umaffected by OA was demonstrated using symmetry
indices, calculated using peak vertical force (PFz) and ver-
tical impulse (IFz). During the first 2 months of the study
the animals in both groups lost about the same amount of
Figure 20-13  Application electrodes for chronic pain using flexible
body weight, but at day 90 the TENS-treated group had
E-pads because of elbow dysplasia. (Courtesy B. Bockstaler.)
lost significantly more weight than group 2. This difference
was also noted at the 6-month point. During the course of
the study the lameness scores decreased significantly,
beginning at day 30 in group 1 and at day 60 for group 2.
Pain scores also decreased, with the difference reaching
significance sooner in group 1 (at 60 vs. 90 days). Force
plate analysis showed that symmetry indices for PFz and
IFz in group 1 were significantly improved at each evalu-
ation. In group 2, only the symmetry index for PFz
improved, and only at day 120. At day 60, there was no
difference in body weight between groups, but the sym-
 do u paao is  am s 
 This suggests that TENS could have a significant influence 
on lameness. The authors concluded that a combination of 
dietary management and intensive physiotherapy including
TENS treatments may effectively reduce disability in dogs 
that are overweight and have osteoarthritis. Further study
Figure 20-14  Application of electrodes for lumbar pain utilizing
of TENS application in dogs, including different parame-
flexible E-pads. (Courtesy B. Bockstaler.)
ters and altered physical activity, may reveal additional
benefits.
several locations to achieve the best pain-relieving effect.
 Preparation and Electrode Placement
In a study of human long-term users, most patients applied
The hair (unless very short) should be clipped before the
the electrodes over or directly proximal to the painful
treatment if rubber electrodes or gel pads are used. If elec-
area.64.6s In a dog one example would be placement over
trodes are not coated with gel, suitable contact medium,
the medial and lateral aspects of an arthritic elbow (Figure
such as ultrasound or electrocardiogram gel, should be
20-13) or stife joint, or along the edges of the painful area
applied in an even layer to ensure uniform transmission of 
(e.g., cranial and caudal region of painful back muscles)
the current to the skin. Clipping should be performed care-
(Figure 20-14). This so-called "local placement" is mainly
fully to avoid skin damage. Another possibility is the use
used in chronic conditions.
 of pads with brushlike needle pads. In this case, clipping
In cases of acute disease (e.g., an acute stage of OA) if
the hair is not necessary, but the skin should be wetted with
 placing the electrodes over the area is painful, or aggra-
water or alcohol. For each treatment session the patient
vates the symptoms, segmental stimulation (stimulation
should be placed in a relaxed position (e.g., lateral recum-
within a dermatome) may be applied with the electrodes
bence) on a soft and comfortable surface.63 To achieve a
placed to the left and right of the vertebral column near the
beneficial effect, the electrodes should be placed in the
 nerve origins of the target region.63 To place the electrodes
 proper location. Several possible locations may be chosen,
 correctly an in-depth knowledge of canine neuroanatomy
and the choice should be adapted based on the effective-
is necessary. For example, to treat hip joint pain the pads
ness of the treatment. Sometimes it is necessary to try
could be placed over the L4-S1 nerve roots on the side of
356
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
the painful hip. Other possibilities include placement of
orthopedic conditions between dogs and people, it seems
electrodes over acupuncture or trigger points, or along the
that the indications for electrical stimulation are similar.
 peripheral superficial nerve tracts.
Iontophoresis is another area that should be studied in dogs
to investigate its possible clinical application.
Intensity, Treatment Time, and Frequency
of Treatment
The intensity must always be adapted to the needs of the
REFERENCES
 individual patient and their response to the treatment. To
1. Nelson RM, Currier DP, Hayes KW: Clinical electrotherapy,
evaluate treatment success the pain level of the animal
ed 3, Norwalk, CT, 1999, Appleton & Lange.
should be evaluated initially and during the course of treat-
2. Krauspe R, Schmidt M, Schaible H: Sensory innervation of
ment. This is necessary to monitor the effectiveness of the
selected parameters, such as electrode position, intensity,
of the response properties of single identified mechanorecep-
 and frequency, and the recovery of the animal. The inten-
tors in the cat, J Bone Joint Surg 74A:390-397, 1992.
sity can be chosen according to the subjective evaluation
3. Windsor RE, Lester JP, Herring SA: Electrical stimulation in
of the patient, but it also depends on the desired pain-
clinical practice, Phys Sportsmed 21:85-93, 1993.
4. Hainaut K, Duchateau J: Neuromuscular electrical stimula-
relieving mechanism and the type of TENS.
tion and voluntary exercise, Sports Med 14: 100-113, 1992.
To make the animal comfortable with TENS the treat-
5. Sawaya SG, Combet D, Chanoit G et al: Assessment of
ment is often started with an intensity of the current just
impulse duration thresholds for electrical muscle stimulation
below the sensory response threshold. In dogs this can be
(chronaxy) in dogs, Am J Vet Res 69:1305-1309, 2008.
achieved by carefully increasing the intensity until the
6. Snyder-Mackler L, Ladin Z, Schepsis AA et al: Electrical
animal shows a reaction, such as glancing at the electrodes
stimulation of the thigh muscles after feconstruction of
or tensing the limb muscles. The intensity is then decreased
the anterior cruciate ligament, J Bone Joint Surg 73A:1025-
slightly just to the point that the animal stops reacting.
1036, 1991.
Especially when treating animals it is always mandatory
7. Sinacore DR et al: Type II fiber activation with electrical
to start the treatment carefully and with patience. Each
stimulation: a preliminary report, Phys Ther 70:416-420,
patient should have time to adapt to the treatment and
1990.
relax. With increasing intensity the patient likely will feel
 8. Knaflitz M, Merletti R, DeLuca DJ: Inference of motor unit 
Tecruitment order in voluntary and electrically elicited con-
a tingling sensation. This should be neither painful nor
tractions, J Appl Phys 64:1657-1667, 1990.
should it cause muscle contractions. A higher intensity is
 9. Carroll SG, Bird SF, Brown DJ: Electrical stimulation of the
often not recommended and not tolerated by the animal.
lumbrical muscles in an incomplete quadriplegic patient:
Accordingly a distinction is drawn between intensities
case report, Paraplegia 30:223-226, 1992.
below the motor threshold (no visible muscle contrac-
10. Pape KE et al: Neuromuscular approach to the motor deficits
tions), at motor threshold (visible twitch contraction), and
of cerebral palsy: a pilot study, J Pediatr Orthop 13:628-633,
above it (wavelike muscle movements and contractions).
1993.
There are different recommendations for treatment
11. Taylor PN et al: Limb blood flow, cardiac output and quad-
duration. For example, for treatment of OA using conven-
riceps muscle bulk following spinal cord injury and the effect
tional TENS,treatment times vary between 15-,62 30- 61.667
of training for the Odstock functional electrical stimulation
and up to 60-minute6& sessions. Also, the timing of the
standing system, Paraplegia 31:303-310, 1993.
treatment varies from three sessions daily for 3 weeks,6 to
12. Zupan A et al: Effects of electrical stimulation on muscles of
children with Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy,
twice daily for 6 weeks, to twice weekly for 4 weeks.69
Neuropediatrics 24:189-192, 1993.
In general, the following recommendations may be
13. Kanaya F, Tajima T: Effect of electrostimulation on dener-
applied.° In acute stages, a lower-intensity, short treatment
vated muscle, Clin Orthop 283:296-301, 1992.
duration, and short intervals are suitable. Therefore, in an
14. Gauthier JM et al: Electrical stimulation-induced changes in
acute case, it is possible to treat the animal one to two times
skeletal muscle enzymes of men and women, Med Sci Sports
daily, with a 15-minute treatment duration. In chronic con-
Exer 24:1252-1256, 1992.
ditions, higher intensities with longer treatment durations
15. Arvidsson I et al: Prevention of quadriceps wasting afte 
and intervals between the treatments are recommended; for
immobi lization: an evaluation of the effect of electrical stim-
example, treatment two to three times per week, for 5 to 6
ulation, Electr Stim 9:1519-1528, 1986.
16. Wigerstad-Lossing I et al: Effects of electrical muscle stimu-
weeks, with each session lasting 30 minutes.
lation combined with voluntary contractions after knee liga-
ment surgery, Med Sci Sports Exer 20:93-98, 1988.
Future Areas for Study
17. Bigard A: Effects of surface electrostimulation on the struc-
ture and metabolic properties in monkey skeletal muscle, Med
Continued clinical trials investigating electrical stimulation
Sci Sports Exer 25:355-362, 1993.
protocols for muscle strengthening and pain control need
18. Clemente FR, Batton KW: The infuence of muscle contrac-
to be conducted. Given the similarities in neurologic and
Chapter 20
Electrical Stimulation
357
muscle following transcutaneous neuromuscular electrical
38. Hulse DA et al: Biomechanics of cranial cruciate ligament
stimulation, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 18:488-496, 1993.
reconstruction in the dog. I. In vitro laxity testing, Vet Surg
19. Currier DP, Kellogg R: Effects of electrical and electromag-
12:109-112, 1983.
netic stimulation after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruc-
 39. Paatsama S: Ligament injuries in the canine stife joint a
tion, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 17:177-184, 1993.
clinical and experimental study, J Small Anim Med 1:329-
 20. DeLitto A et al: Electrical stimulation versus yoluntary exer-
359, 1953.
cise in strengthening thigh musculature after anterior cruci ate
40. Le DA, Liu W: The under- and over fascial replacement
ligament surgery, Phys Ther 68:660-663, 1988.
technique for anterior cruciate ligament rupture in dogs: a
21. Binder-Macleod SA, Snyder-Mackler L: Muscle fatigue:
retrospective study, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:69-77, 1984.
clinical implications for fatigue assessment and neuromus-
41. Smith GK, Torg JS: Fibular head transposition for repair of
cular electrical stimulation, Phys Ther 73:902-910, 1993.
cruciate-deficient stifle in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:
22.1
 DeLitto A et al: A study of discomfort with electrical stimu-
375-382, 1985.
lation, Phys Ther 72:410-421, 1992.
 42. Tomlinson J, Constantinescu GM: Two methods for repairing 
23. Lieber RL, Silva PD, Daniel DM: Electrical and voluntary
ruptures of the cranial cruciate ligament in dogs, Vet Med
activation are equally effective in strengthening quadriceps
89:32-41, 1994
muscles. In 1992 Orthopaedic Research Society Proceed-
43. Korvick D, Johnson AL, Schaffer D: The surgeons choice in
ings, Washington, DC, February 17-20, 1992.
treating CrCL ruptures in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 25:1318-
24. Anderson AF, Lipscomb AB: Analy sis of rehabilitation tech-
1324, 1994.
niques after anterior cruciate reconstruction, Am J Sports
44. Johnson JM, Johnson AL, Pijanowski GJ: Rehabilitation of
Med 17:154-160, 1989.
dogs with surgically treated cranial cruciate ligament def-
25. DeCarlo MS: Traditional versus accelerated rehabilitation
cient stifes by use of electrical stimulation of muscles, Am
following ACL reconstruction: a one-year  follow-up,
J Vet Res 58:1473-1478, 1997.
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 15:309-316, 1992.
45. Millis DL, Levine D, Weigel JP: A preliminary study of early
 26. O'Meara PM: Rehabilitation following reconstruction of the
physical therapy following surgery for cranial cruciate liga-
anterior cruciate ligament, Orthopedics 16:301-306, 1993.
ment rupture in dogs, Vet Surg 26:254, 1997.
27.B
 Paulos L et al: Knee rehabilitation after anterior cruciate
46. Bardet JF: Diagnosis of shoulder instability in dogs and cats:
ligament reconstruction and repair, Am J Sports Med 9:140-
a retrospective study, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:42-54, 1998.
149, 1981.
 47. Breur G, Bkvins W: Traumatic injury of the canine iliopsoas
 28. Lutz GE, Stuart MJ, Sim FH: Rehabilitative techniques for
muscle in three dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1631-1634,
athletes: NMES after reconstruction of the anterior cruciate
1997.
ligament, Mayo Clin Proc 65:1322-1329, 1990.
48. Melzack R, Wall PD: Pain mechanisms: a new theory,
29. Fu FH, Woo SL, Irrgang JJ: Current concepts for rehabilita-
Science 150:971-979, 1965.
tion following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction,
49. Low J, Reed A: Electrotherapy exptained. Principles and
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 15:270-278, 1992.
 practice, ed 3, Oxford, MA, 2000, Butterworth-Heinemann.
 30. Shelbourne KD, Nitz P: Accelerated rehabilitation after ante-
 50. Han JS, Chen XH, Sun SL: Effect of low- and high-frequency
rior cruciate ligament reconstruction, J Orthop Sports Phys
TENS on Met-enkephalin-Arg-Phe and dynorphin A immu-
Ther 15:256-264, 1992.
noreactivity in human lumbar CSF, Pain 47:295-298, 1991.
31. Arnoczky SP et al: The over-the-top procedure: a technique
 51. Hughes GS, Lichstein PR, Whithlock D et al: Response of
for anterior cruciate ligament substitution in the dog, J Am
 plasma beta endorphins to transcutaneous electrical stimula-
Anim Hosp Assoc 15:283-290, 1979.
tion in healthy subjects, Phys Ther 64:1062-1066, 1984.
32. Bennett D, May C: An over-the top with tibial tunnel tech-
 52. Kalra A, Urban MO, Sluka KA: Blockade of opioid receptors
nique for repair of cranial cruciate ligament rupture in the
 in rostral ventral medulla prevents antihyperal gesia produced
dog, J Small Anim Pract 32:103-110, 1991.
by transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS), J Pharma-
33. Denny HR, Barr RS: An evaluation of two over the top tech-
col Exp Ther 298:257-263, 2001.
niques for anterior cruciate ligament replacement in the dog.
53. Picaza JA, Cannon BW, Hunter SE: Pain suppression by
J Small Anim Pract 25:759-769, 1984.
 peripheral nerve stimulation. Part 1. Observations with trans-
 34. Dickinson CR, Nunamaker DM: Repair of ruptured anterior
cutaneous stimuli, Surg Neurol 4:105-114, 1975.
cruciate ligament in the dog: experience of 101 cases, using
 54. Johnson M, Martinson M: Effcacy of electrical nerve stimu--
a modified fascia strip technique, J Am Vet Med Assoc
lation for chronic musculoskeletal pain: a meta-analysis of
170:827-830, 1977.
randomized controlled trials, Pain 130:157-165, 2007.
 35. Dupuis J, Harari J: Cruciate ligament and meniscal injuries
55. Osiri M, Welch V, Brosseau L et al: Transcutaneous electrical
in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 15:215-233,
nerve stimulation for knee osetoarthritis (review), Cochrane
1993.
database of systematic reviews (Online) (4):CD002823,
36. Elkins AD et al: A retrospective study evaluating the degree
2010.
of degenerative joint disease in the stife joint of dogs fol-
 56. Brosseau L, Yonge KA, Wetch V et al: Transcutaneous elec-
lowing surgical repair of anterior cruciate ligament rupture,
trical nerve stimulation (TENS) for the treatment of rheuma-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:533-540, 1991.
toid arthritis in the hand, Cochrane database of systematic
37. Flo GL: Modification of the lateral retinacular imbrication
reviews (Online) (3):CD004377, 2010.
technique for stabilizing cruciate ligament injuries, J Am
 57. Albright J, Allmann R, Bonfiglio RP et al: Philadelphia
Anim Hosp Assoc 11:570-576, 1975.
 panel evidence-based clinical practice guidelines on selected
358
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
rehabilitation interventions for knee pain, Phys Ther 81:1675-
 64. Johnson MI, Ashton CH, Thompson JW: The consistency of
1700, 2001.
 pulse frequencies and pulse patterns of transcutaneous elec-
58. Albright J, Allmann R, Bonfiglio RP et al: Philadelphia panel
trical nerve stimulation (TENS) used by chronic pain patients, 
evidence-based clinical practice guidelines on selected reha-
Pain 44(3):231-234, 1991.
bilitation interventions for low back pain, Phys Ther 81:1641-
 65. Johnson MI, Ashton CH, Bousfield DR et al: The consistency
1674, 2001
of pulse frequencies and pulse patterns of transcutaneous
 59. Khadi kar A, Milne S, Brosseau L et al: Transcutaneous elec-
electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) used by chronic pain
trical nerve stimulation for the treatment of chronic low back
patients, Pain 44(3):231-234, 1991.
pain: a systematic review, Spine 30:2657-2666, 2005.
66. Fargas-Babjak A, Rooney P, Gerecz E: Randomized trial of
60. Rainoy NG, Heidecke V, Albertz C et al: Transcutaneous
codetron for pain control in osteoarthritis of the hip/knee,
electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) for acute postoperative
Clin J Pain 5(2):137-141, 1989.
pain after spinal surgery, Eur J Pain 15:44-49, 1994.
67. Grimmer K: A controlled double blind study comparing the
 61. Levine D et al: The effect of TENS on osteoarthritic pain in
effects of strong burst mode TENS and High Rate TENS on
the stifle of dogs. In Proceedings of the 2nd Internationat
painful osteoarthritic knees, Aust J Physiother 38(1):49-56,
Symposium on Rehabilitative Physical Therapy Veterinary
1992.
Medicine, Knox ville, TN, 2002.
 68. Lewis B, Lewis D, Cumming G: The comparative analgesic
62. Mlacnik E, Bockstahler B, Miller M et al: Caloric restriction 
 efficacy of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation and a
with moderate or intense physiotherapy program affect joint 
 non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug for painful osteoarthri-
function in aged overweight dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
tis, Br J Rheumatol 33(5):455-460, 1994.
229(11):1756-1760, 2006.
69. Smith CR, Lewith GT, Machin D: TNS and osteo-arthritic
63. Bockstahler B, Levine D, Millis D: Essential facts of
 pain. Preliminary study to establish a controlled method of 
physiotherapy in dogs and cats. Rehabilitation and pain
assessing transcutaneous nerve stimulation as a treatment for
management, ed 1, Babenhausen, Germany, 2004, BE Vet
the pain caused by osteo-arthritis of the knee, Physiotherapy
verlag.
69(8):266-268, 1983.
Laser Therapy in Canine
Rehabilitation
Darryl L.Millis and Debbie Gross Saunders
ealing properties have been attributed to light for
 On tissue is still not completely understood, low-energy
thousands of years. Light provides electromag-
lasers have been reported to modulate various biologic
netic radiation in the form of photons. A number
processes, such as mitochondrial respiration and adeno-
 of forms of light have been used for therapeutic purposes,
sine triphosphate (ATP) synthesis, to accelerate wound
including sunlight, incandescent light, infrared light, ultra-
and joint healing, and to promote muscle regeneration.2.3
violet light, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), and, recently,
In addition, acute and chronic pain control has been
therapeutic lasers. This chapter focuses on therapeutic
reported using this type of low-energy photon therapy.4
lasers rather than surgical lasers. Laser therapy has been
Treatment of chronic and acute edema, neurologic condi-
increasingly incorporated into rehabilitation programs for
tions, and postoperative care are some other popular con-
a variety of conditions, including skin wounds; muscle,
ditions treated with laser therapy.
tendon, and ligament injuries; neurologic conditions;
arthritis; and pain. Many studies have indicated encourag-
Properties of Lasers
ing results with laser therapy. The principles of lasers,
research pertaining to the use of laser therapies in rehabili-
Basic light sources emit electromagnetic radiation that is
tation, and the basics of laser therapy are addressed.
visible to the normal eye. Although natural light sources,
such as sunlight, are forms of electromagnetic radiation,
Laser Therapy
lasers are artificial sources that emit radiation in the
form of a fow of photons (Figure 21-1). The process of
The tenm laser is an acronym for light amplification by
light emission begins with activation of electrons in the
stimulated emission of radiation. The concept of the use
laser unit, generally either helium-neon (HeNe), gallium-
of light for therapeutic purposes, called phototherapy.
arsenide (GaAs), or gallium-aluminum-arsenide (GaAlAs)
originated from the belief that sun and other sources of
to an excited state. When the electrons drop from their
light, such as infrared and ultraviolet light, have therapeu-
excited state to their ground state, photons are emitted.
tic benefit. Many different types of lasers are available for
Although some photons are absorbed by the laser chamber
 medical and industrial purposes. Low-power laser devices,
wall, others stimulate the emission of other photons, and
a form of artificial light, were frst used as a form of
together they travel in the chamber, amplifying this stimu-
therapy more than 30 years ago. Today, a variety of lasers 
lated emission, which results in a chain reaction. Some of
are in use for various purposes.
these photons are released through a semirefective mirror
The initial types of lasers used for rehabilitation pur-
to form a beam of light.
poses, commonly known as low-level laser therapy (LLLT),
The major difference between laser light and light gen-
are also called cold lasers. In contrast, surgical lasers are
erated by normal sources is that laser light is monochro-
high power and capable of thermal destruction of cells and
matic, coherent, and collimated. Monochromatic means
tissues. Recently another form of laser, known as a thera-
that all light produced by the laser is of one wavelength,
peutic laser, has been introduced for rehabilitation pur-
 and therefore a single color. Sunlight, or white light, may
poses and delivers more power than low-level lasers, but
be broken into several different colors of different wave-
less power than surgical lasers. Therapeutic lasers have
lengths by a prism (Figure 21-2). Laser light has electro-
al pue [s yoq u renndod Aisussou ao
magnetic radiation of only one wavelength. Commercial
animal rehabilitation for a variety of conditions.
lasers occasionally have two or more different wavelengths
The lasers used in rehabilitation help to modulate
within a single unit to achieve different effects, but each
cellular functions. This process is known as photobio-
component within the unit has a single wavelength and is
stimulation and is defined as nonthermal interaction of
monochromatic. The coherent properties of light mean that
monochromatic radiation with a target site. Although the
the photons travel in the same phase and direction (Figure
21-3). Laser light is also collimated, which means that
359
360
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
ELECTROMAGNETICSPECTRUM
M07
EI
VIOL
ORAN
GAMMARAYS
X-RAYS
ULTRAVIOLET
INFRARED
RADIO
WAVELENGTHS
0.01nm
0.1nm
1nm
10nm
100nm
1μm
10um
100μm
1mm
1cm
10cm
1m
10-11m
10-10m
10-9m
10-m
10-7m
10-6m
10-m
10-m
10-m
10-2m
10-m
1m
IONISINGRADIATION
NON-IONISING RADIATION
Figure 21-1  Electromagnetic spectrum. Laser light typically falls within the infrared or near red portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. (Photo
 Courtesy Companion Laser, LiteCure LLC, Newark, Delaware.)
C
Figure 21-2 A, Sunlight, or white light, may be broken into several component colors with different wavelengths. B, Laser light is monochro-
 matic and is produced by a single wavelength.
Figure 21-3  Laser light is coherent, with the photons traveling in
the same phase and direction, whereas normal light is noncoherent.
Figure 21-4  Laser light is collimated, which means that there is
minimal divergence in the laser beam over a distance. Normal light 
is not collimated, and the beam diverges over a distance.
there is minimal divergence in the laser beam over a dis
surface of the skin with no heating effect, no damage to
tance (Figure 21-4). Using a monochromatic light source
 the skin, and few or no side effects when properly used.
allows the absorption of the light to be targeted to specific
Laser light interacts with tissues in various ways. Light
wavelength-dependent chromophores, or photon accep-
may be refected, scattered, transmitted, or absorbed.
tors.? The properties of coherence and collimation allow
 Reflected photons have no clinical effect and may be dan-
the light to be focused precisely on small areas of the body.
gerous to tissues that encounter reflected photons, such as
These properties allow low-level laser light to penetrate the 
the eyes. In addition to surfaces such as watches, tables,
Chapter 21
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
361
cr
Therapeutic
window
=
a
10
10
一
0.1
0.3
10
Wavelength 入 [μm]
Figure 21-5 The wavelength of the photons is important in laser therapy. Various substances preferentially absorb laser light at different
wavelengths. (Photo Courtesy Companion Laser, LiteCure LLC, Newark, Delaware.)
 and instruments, the epidermis is responsible for refecting
have tissue penetration with less scattering and surface
most of the photons from the skin. To reduce reflection of
absorption is likely to be in the 600-1200 mm range.
photons, the laser beam should be directed as nearly to 90
In addition to wavelength, the power of the laser is also
degrees as possible to the skin surface. As photons pass
a characteristic that is important. Power is a unit of time
through the tissues, some are scattered. Each photon that
and is expressed in watts (W) or milliwatts (mW).
is scattered when striking an object reduces the amount of
1 watt = 1 joule/second
energy that can be directed at the target tissue. Scattering
decreases as the wavelength increases because longer
The spot size of the unit indicates the surface area the
wavelengths penetrate deeper into tissues. Transmitted
laser covers while held in a stationary position. This is also
photons pass completely through the tissue without being
known as the power density, or intensity, and indicates the
absorbed. This is rarely a problem in rehabilitation because
 power per surface area unit. It is usually indicated by watts/
the tissues are generally thick enough to prevent complete
cm?. Larger spot areas result in a more homogeneous
transmission. Finally, photons may be absorbed. Photons
 passage of laser light through tissues with less photon scat-
are absorbed by chromophores (molecules that absorb
tering and light dispersion.
certain wavelengths of light) and it is in this manner that
The energy is the power emitted over time, and is
laser may affect tissues. The most common chromophores
usually measured in joules. This is also frequently used to
are water, hemoglobin, melanin, cytochrome C system in
report the dosage of laser light.
mitochondria, proteins, and amino acids.6 The relative
1 joule =1 watt x1 second
amounts of chromophores vary among tissues, and the
absorption of photons by chromophores varies, in part, on
 For example, a 50-mW laser delivers 1 Jof energy in 20
the wavelength.
seconds of treatment time. A 500 mW laser takes 2 seconds
 The wavelength of the photons is important in laser
of treatment time to deliver 1 J of energy. A 1-W laser takes
therapy. Wavelengths are measured in nanometers (mm)
only 1 second, and a 10-W laser takes Xo of a second.
and determine, in part, the biologic effect on tissues. For
From a treatment standpoint, a higher watt laser delivers
example, ultraviolet light (100-400 nm) is absorbed pri-
 the treatment in a shorter time. If an arthritic stife is being
marily by melanin, proteins, and nucleic acid; visible light
treated, it may require a total dose of 100 to 500 J depend-
(400-760 mm) is scattered and absorbed, with the absorp-
ing on the size of the dog and treatment area. So the treat-
tion primarily by melanin, hemoglobin, and myoglobin;
 ment time may vary greatly depending on the unit used.
with near infrared light (760-1400 mm), photons are mainly
The energy density, or radiant exposure, is the energy
scattered, but a variety of chromophores absorb these
 per surface unit and is typically indicated by joules per cm?.
photons, although somewhat weakly; in the far infrared
or J/cm?. This term is also clinically called the dose of laser
zone (1400-10,000 nm), absorption is almost entirely by
energy and is important in determining and describing
water (Figure 21-5).6 Therefore the optimal window to
 treatment protocols. To date, only the dose of laser energy
362
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
Box 21-1
Biologic Effects of Laser Therapy
CW
Activation of respiratory chain enzymes, especially cytochrome
0.8
Pulse duration
C oxidase
150 ms, 4 Hz
 Oxygen production
 Formation of proton gradients across cell and mitochondrial
0.6
Pulse duration
 membranes
76 ms, 4 Hz
Adenosine triphosphate production
 DNA production
ve
 Cell proliferation
Pulse duration
 Reduced cyclooxygenase and prostaglandin Ez production
0.2
37 ms, 4 Hz
16
0
200
400
600
800
1000 msec
14 
Figure 21-7
 Diagram of laser light delivered as continuous wave
13.41 J/cm
9.24 J/cm2
or pulsed laser light of various pulse durations. (Based on a diagram
12 -
4.75 J/cm²
from Hashmi JT et al: Effect of pulsing in low-level light therapy.
10-
Lasers Surg Med 42:450-466, 2010.)
(uo,
8
 The sweeping motion also allows the clinician to cover
6
 Other surrounding areas that may be causing secondary or 
tertiary pain. For example, when treating canine hip dyspla-
4
sia to address pain and inflammation, the coxofemoral joint
 should be treated from all areas—medial, lateral, caudal,
 and cranial. With the sweeping motions covering the four
areas, the laser may affect the surrounding soft tissues that
-101234567891011121314
 are often painful in clinical canine hip dysplasia.
Skin thickness (mm)
Lasers can emit photons continuously or in a pulsed
Figure 21-6
 Three different doses of laser light and penetration
fashion (Figure 21-7). With continuous wave laser, radia-
 through skin. Greater doses of laser energy penetrate deeper into
tion is emitted at a constant power over the entire treatment
tissues. (From Topping A, Gault D, Grobbelaar A et al: Does Low
time. With pulsed wave laser treatment, impulses may be
Penetration of Human Skin by the Normal Mode Ruby Laser Account
emitted at varied rates, with an on time when energy is
for Poor Permanent Depilatory Success Rates? Lasers Med Sci 16:224-
emitted (pulse width or pulse duration [PD]) and an off
229, 2001.)
time when there is no energy emitted. The duty cycle (DC)
 is the percentage of time that radiation is emitted in relation 
has been shown to have biologic effects as compared with
to the total on-off time. The pulse rate, or frequency (F),
the rate of administering laser energy, or the power of the
is measured in Hertz (Hz). The relationships between these
laser (Box 21-1). Greater doses of laser energy penetrate 
measures may be expressed as:
deeper into tissues (Figure 21-6). The Lambert-Beer law
DC = FxPD
indicates that for homogenous tissues with a constant coef-
ficient of absorption, more photons will reach a given tissue
One report reviewed the literature regarding pulsed
depth with a greater dosage, and the intensity of light
versus continuous laser application.? Although the authors
passing through tissues decreases exponentially  with
concluded that there is some evidence that pulsed laser has
increasing tissue depth. There is a great deal of difference
different effects than continuous laser, further work is nec-
among lasers related to the power, with those delivering
essary to define optimal treatments for various conditions,
energy at a greater rate generally costing more. Although
and to determine the optimal pulse structures. One theory
 there is not thought to be an advantage in efficacy regarding
behind the use of pulsed laser is that with relatively short
low- versus high-power lasers, the dosage (total joules) can
 pulses, the laser could be excited to higher levels as com-
be administered in a much shorter time with a high-power
pared with continuous wave laser, in which thermal damage
laser, therefore reducing labor costs. In addition, high-
to the tissues might limit the maximum amount of energy
power lasers are generally administered in a sweeping
that can be applied. With short pulses, the thermal effects
fashion, whereas lower power lasers are usually held in
On tissues might be reduced, limiting tissue damage. Pulsed
place until the administration of the dose for a particular
GaAs and indium-gallium-arsenide (InGaAs) lasers may
spot treatment is complete. The sweeping motion may
allow for deeper tissue penetration without thermal damage,
result in more thorough coverage of the treatment area as
as well as allowing for shorter treatment times. In addition
compared with the spot treatment of lower power lasers.
to decreasing the thermal effects on tissues, pulsing of the
Chapter 21
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
363
laser may also have some resonance with certain functions,
such as brain waves and opening of cellular ion channels.
 Pulsing may also have effects on photodissociation of sub-
stances, such as nitric oxide (NO) from protein binding
sites, allowing multiple episodes of dissociation. Although
the actual depth of penetration is probably not that different
in pulsed versus continuous wave lasers, for many condi-
tions, depth of penetration is a less important issue, such as
with treatment of elbow or stife arthritis. One author con-
cluded that pulsed lasers (904 nm) were not significantly
CTL-10
more effective than continuous-wave lasers (810-830 nm)
 s  gaad  aa sn g  
equally effective, but half the energy was needed with
 pulsed lasers. However, a review of literature comparing
continuous wave laser with pulsed laser identified six of
nine studies that found pulsed wave to be more effective.? A
clinical study of wound healing and experimental studies of 
en pasasns aay Araaorai aans pue quaa ud
pulsed laser has better results than continuous laser.
Another study comparing continuous and pulsed laser
found both to be equally effective. Only two of the nine
studies reported better results with continuous than pulsed
Figure 21-8  Class IV laser.
laser, although both treatment methods achieved better 
results than placebo treatments. Some limitations of the
divergent beams and cannot achieve the power to cause
studies in this review were that the same parameters of laser
damage unless the laser is focused with a lens. The power
wavelength were not used in some instances, making direct
is less than that of a Class 3B laser, but cannot damage the
comparisons difficult. One study found a combination of
retina unless the light is focused. Class 2 lasers are in the
 pulsed and continuous laser to be more effective than either
visible-light spectrum (400-700 nm) and include items such
alone for stimulating nerve regeneration in a median nerve
as laser pointers, and occasionally therapy lasers. Because
transection and repair study, whereas most studies have
these lasers are visible light, the blink refex generally limits
shown continuous laser to be more effective than pulsed
exposure to less than 0.25 seconds. Class 2 lasers are limited
to 1 mW continuous wave, or more if the emission time is
paring various rates of pulsed laser treatment show no
less than 0.25 seconds or if the light is not spatially coherent.
consistent results, with some demonstrating better results
Class 2M lasers, similar to Class 1M lasers, have a large-
with lower frequencies and some with higher frequencies.?
diameter light beam or the beam is divergent and is safe
umless the light is viewed through an optical instrument.
Cassification of Lasers
Class 3B lasers are either continuous light in the 315 nm
to far infrared ranges limited to 500 mW, or pulsed lasers 
The American National Standards Institute in the United
400-700 nm wavelength limited to 30 mW. When using
States and the Intemational Electrotechnical Commission
Class 3B lasers, protective eyewear is required if direct
have defined classes of lasers based on their ability to
viewing of the light may occur. Class 3R lasers are con-
 damage tissues. In general it is the thermal damage that
 sidered to be safe with restricted exposure and are visible-
injures tissues, especially the eyes, and in some cases, skin.
light continuous lasers with power limited to 5 mW.
Even small amounts of laser light can cause permanent
Class 4 lasers have the greatest potential to cause tissue
damage to the retina.0
 damage and include all lasers with power greater than that
Current classifications of lasers are related to the wave-
 of Class 3B lasers (Figure 21-8). Surgical, industrial cutting
 length and the maximum output power (in wats) or energy
lasers, and some therapeutic lasers are Class 4 lasers. Sur-
(in joules). These classifications allow the placement of
gical lasers typically have power between 30 to 100 W,
various lasers into categories based on their ability to cause
whereas therapeutic lasers may be 1 to 15 W. Class 4 lasers
tissue damage, especially to the eyes. For example, Class 1
may bum the skin or cause permanent eye damage as a
lasers are very mild are safe under all conditions of normal
result of direct, diffuse, or indirect beam viewing, such as
use, and include supermarket scanners and post office
might occur with refection of the beam, even from matte
readers. Class 1M lasers are safe for all uses except when
 surfaces. Therefore, the therapist must use great care to
passed through a lens, such as a microscope or telescope.
control the beam path and protective eyewear must be worm
These types of lasers have large-diameter beams or
by all in the immediate area. The U.S. Food and Drug
364
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
Administration (FDA) requires all Class 3B and Class 4
on human skin samples. Readers should use caution in
lasers in the United States to have safety features, including
interpreting the results of these studies and extrapolating
a key switch, a safety interlock dongle, a power indicator,
them to dogs because of inherent differences in skin thick-
an aperture shutter, and an emission delay (normally 2-3
ness, skin composition, cutaneous blood supply, skin color,
seconds). In addition, the U.S. Occupational Safety and
and thicker hair coats. Lasers with shorter wavelengths are
Health Administration requires the use of adequate eye
most effective for surface-level conditions because they do
protection when eye exposure may occur while operating
not penetrate to deep tissues or large joint capsules. Wound
lasers in these classes.
care and wound healing should benefit from lasers with
shorter wavelengths. Light that is not absorbed by water,
Lasers Used in Physical Rehabilitation
hemoglobin, or melanin is gradually attenuated as it passes
through tissues. The level of scattering and absorption is
Most lasers used in physical rehabilitation are Class 3 or
such that HeNe (632.8 nm) laser light loses approximately
4 lasers and have a finite lifespan that generally varies fonm
one third of its intensity during the first 0.5-1 mm of tissue
5000 to 20,000 hours. LLLT devices are typically Class 3
 depth.!l The depth (in centimeters) at which the energy Of
lasers and are low power, often less than 100 mW, and
a laser beam is 36% of its original values is termed the first
   g   'sss  no o 
depth of penetration.12 This attenuation of energy is derived 
significant. If heat is generated by a Class 3 laser, the
by dividing the original value by a constant, 2.78. Subse-
unit may not be functioning properly or the device may
quent depths of penetration may be determined by dividing
be improperly used. LLLT devices typically have small
by 2.78 again, so that the level of energy at the second
treatment beam diameters, up to l cm. The basic types
depth of penetration is 13%. However, because biologic
of lasers used for LLLT are gaseous HeNe and GaAs
effects may be noted with relatively low energy (0.01
or GaAlAs semiconductor or diode lasers. HeNe lasers
J/cm?), lasers that typically deliver I to 4 J/cm? may pen-
have a visible red light with a wavelength of 632.8 nm,
 etrate up to 0.5 to 2 cm before the energy level is so low
whereas GaAs and GaAlAs have invisible light near the
that they have no effect. These factors apply to human skin,
infrared band with a wavelength of 820-904 nm.
and, although there are many similarities between human
The wavelength of the laser is important because it
and animal skin, there are significant differences caused by
determines, in part, the laser's effect. Longer wavelengths
hair, pigmentation, and tissues.
are more resistant to scattering than shorter ones. There-
One study evaluated the penetration of ruby laser light
fore, GaAs and GaAlAs lasers penetrate more effectively
(694 nm) in human white skin. Doses of4.75 J/cm?, 9.24 J/
(direct effect up to 2 cm, indirect effect up to 5 cm) than
cm?, and 13.41 J/cm? were administered to the skin.'3 (see
HeNe lasers (direct effect up to 0.5 cm, indirect effect up
Figure 21-6). The most likely explanation for the tremen-
to l cm) because there is less absorption or scattering in
dous drop in energy in the first mm is scattering of laser
the epidermis and dermis. Light waves in the near infrared
light, which supports the hypothesis that the greatest hin-
 ranges penetrate the deepest of all light waves in the visible
drance to a photon energy beam traversing the skin is from
spectrum (Table 21-1). Although this spectrum of light is
the stratum spinosum of the epidermis, collagen in the
not visible, commercial lasers should have an LED that
dermis, or both. Beyond the depth of the dermis and at the
allows the therapist to see where the laser light is aimed.
levels of the subcutaneous fat, the energy drop per distance
Lasers can only have an effect if they stimulate cells,
traveled was not as great. The mean maximum depth of
and the depth of laser penetration is important to determine
penetration was 14.8 mm which appeared to be a function
if cells at a particular depth may be stimulated. Very few
of wavelength and not dosage. The natural chromophore
studies have measured the depth of laser penetration
for this wavelength of laser is melanin. Therefore the depth
through skin, and these studies have been done primarily
of penetration might be expected to be less in dark-skinned
dogs. After passing through the skin, penetration through
the muscle becomes easier because muscle has a smaller
Table 21-1
Wavelengths of Various
Components of the
between 600 and 800 nm is approximately fourfold greater
Electromagnetic Spectrum
 in skeletal muscle than skin.is
Another study with laser of similar wavelengths had
AM Radio
10,000 cm
similar results. An HeNe laser (632.8 mm, 50 mW power)
TV and FM
100 cm
and a semiconductor laser (675 nm, 21 mW power) were
Microwave
10 cm
used to measure transmission in human skin and skin with
Infrared
700 mm
granulation tissue from leg wounds with ulcers.16 In the
Ultraviolet
10 mm
thickest sample (epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous
X-rays
1 mm
tissue, 2 cm thickness), approximately 0.3% of HeNe laser
 and 2.1% of semiconductor laser light penetrated through
Chapter 21
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
365
all layers. Penetration of laser light was greatly attenuated
changes in ATP may, through its effects as a neurotransmit-
at 1 to 3 mm of tissue depth. Transmission in granulation
ter, explain some of the effects of laser therapy on pain
    s  e se s
 modulation and the effect of acupuncture.
normal skin.
The effect of laser treatment on various cells in vitro
In another study of depth of penetration, a GaAlAr laser
has been evaluated in several studies.?′ HeNe laser (632 nm)
(wavelength 850 mm, 100 mW power) was applied to
with a power of 10 mW and a dose of 0.43 J/cm? resulted
human abdominal skin samples.17 The intensity of laser
 in greater proliferation and differentiation of human osteo-
radiation was reduced by 66% after being transmitted
 blasts in vitro.22
through a 0.784 mm sample of human abdominal tissue.
 DNA production may also be stimulated. Photons also
In this study, most laser radiation was absorbed within the
appear to affect tissues by activating enzymes, which
first 1 mm of skin. Additional research is needed in small
 trigger biochemical reactions in the body. Because cellular
animals to determine the depth of penetration with differ-
metabolism and growth are stimulated, lasers have the
ent hair coats and skin color.
potential to accelerate tissue repair and cell growth of struc-
tures, such as tendons, ligaments, and muscles. Although
Biologic Effects of Laser Therapy
lower dosages of laser energy appear to stimulate tissues,
 Most studies of laser use in rehabilitation have centered on
higher dosages may actually inhibit responses such as tissue
 wound healing and pain management. However, information
healing. The enzyme kinetics may differ between high
 enzyme/substrate, and low enzyme/substrate conditions.?3
A great deal remains unknown regarding the mecha-
 in the United States regarding their use in treating people,
nisms of laser light in biologic systems. For example, NO
and a natural extension has been an interest in treating
and carbon monoxide inhibit cytochrome C oxidase. The
animals. In evaluating the potential usefulness of laser
effects of near infrared laser radiation in conjunction with
therapy in rehabilitation, the reader is encouraged to be criti-
NO on cytochrome C oxidase are unknown.?4 Further work
cal of studies that have been performed, and to evaluate
is also needed regarding the effects of temperature, pH,
 these studies in light of recent advances in laser technology
exposure times, and frequency of photobiomodulation
and the application of new information. Until recently, low-
treatment on cytochrome C oxidase.
energy and therapeutic lasers were not approved for medical
Laser therapy may also stimulate stem cell prolifera-
treatment in this country. However, as more evidence
tion.'* In addition to the direct effects of laser at a particular
becomes available, they will likely be increasingly used.
depth of tissue, indirect effects may also be seen. These
Most of the potential responses of cells and tissues to
cellular and tissue effects are decreased in the deeper
laser energy have been studied in in vitro models. Photons
tissues, and are catalyzed by the energy absorption in the
delivered to the cells and tissues trigger biologic changes
more superficial tissues.
within the body. Photons are absorbed by chromophores
 Laser therapy may also have antinfammatory effects,
 and respiratory chain enzymes (especially cytochrome C
similar to nonsteroidal antinfammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and
oxidase, the terminal enzyme of the mitochondrial respira-
steroids. Studies of laser therapy in cell culture have indicated
tory chain) within the mitochondria and at the cell mem-
that inflammation can be reduced by a decrease in prostaglan-
brane. Copper components of cytochrome C oxidase are
din Ez (PGE) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) concentra-
photoacceptors.1 Cellular sigmaling causes a cascade of
 tions.25.26 This effect has also been demonstrated in an animal
-iossip on se yons susun u sunnsai suogonai einn
model,7 as well as people with Achilles tendinitis?8 Fre-
tion from cytochrome C oxidase.19 This, in tum, results in
 quently, owmers seek altermatives to NSAIDs for their animals.
further changes down the respiratory chain. Oxygen pro-
 amd laser therapy may offer altermative care. Animals that are
duction and the formation of proton gradients across the
umable to consume NSAIDs may also benefit from laser
cell and mitochondrial membranes may also occur. The
 therapy as an altermative for inflammation.
enzyme favomononucleotide is activated and initiates
the production of ATP. Even small changes in ATP levels
Research Regarding Laser Therapy
can change cell metabolism. The role of ATP in cellular
energetics is well known, but ATP may also act as a signal-
Wound Healing
ing molecule to enhance cell to cell communication.'9 ATP
may bind with the cell receptor P2X, which opens a channel
Laser light stimulates fibroblast development and may affect
to allow sodium and calcium to enter cells, resulting in a
ose Arut ual raset sanssn edai on uonnoud ueo
cascade of intracellular interactions. Increased intracellular
accelerate angiogenesis and increase the formation of new
calcium positively affects mitochondrial function. ATP
capillaries in damaged tissues, possibly improving the rate
 may act as a neurotransmitter when released by nerve cells,
 of wound healing (Box 21-2). Therefore laser therapy may
but may also have other effects when released by other
 aid healing of open wounds and burms. There is am increased
cells, such as bone production and cell proliferation.? The
 growth factor response within cells and tissues, which may
366
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
 and viability of injured fibroblasts. Higher doses (10 and
Box 21-2
Laser Therapy Research
16 J/cm?) had reduced cell proliferation and viability, with
Wound Healing
 damage to the cell membrane and DNA. The results of this 
·Fibroblast stimulation
 in vitro study do not necessarily imply that similar findings
·
 Capillary formation and angiogenesis
would be present in vivo, but do suggest that there may not 
Collagen formati on
be a linear dose-response effect.
 Enhanced adenosine triphosphate, protein, and growth factor
A review of experimental studies related to laser treat-
production
ment of wounds in 8 mouse and 39 rat model studies has
Vasodilation
sa siapout suapoi u sueau punom os paodan uaag
Lymphatic drainage
from wound healing in people because of the loosely
· Potential inhibition of wound healing at high doses 
 attached skin in rodents as compared with people, making
Bone and Cartilage
wound contraction a signific ant factor in healing in rodents.
 Enhanced early bone repair
The loosely attached skin of rodents may be similar to
·
 Increased collagen deposition and bone trabeculae
dogs and cats, and therefore mice and rats may be a useful
Adjunct to treatment of osteomyelitis
model of wound healing to evaluate treatments for dogs
Fibrous healing of cartilaginous defects
and cats. Many studies continue to inadequately report
· Improved maintenance of cartilage in immobilized joints
laser parameters used in treatment protocols. In spite of
Arthritis
 these shortcomings, the results of these studies suggest that
 Inhibition of infammation
laser or monochromatic light is effective as a treatment for 
suue aeisid pue suu z-susxoooro yo uo
wounds when applied at appropriate doses. Coherence of
Reduced pain
light may not be an important factor when treating surface
 Possible reduction of morning stiffness in rheumatoid
wounds. LEDs with monochromatic light appear to have
arthritis
effects on topical wounds, similar to those obtained with
Ligament and Tendon Conditions
laser light. Wavelengths in both the visible red (630-
Pain reduction in acute tendonitis
685 nm) and infrared (700-1000 nm) typically stimulated
· Improvement with lateral epicondylitis
wound healing in a variety of models. Some studies sug-
 Reduced pain and inflammation in Achilles tendonitis
gested that the best results were obtained when using
 Improved collagen organization
660-mm laser light in the early stages of wound healing.
· Improved biomechanical properties
whereas 780 nm produced positive results throughout all
Analgesia
 stages of wound healing.31.3 In general, there was no clear 
· Reduced pain in postoperative incisions
association between outcomes and power levels used in
Inhibits Nociceptors
the studies evaluated in this review.3° However, lack of
·Potential reduction in transmission of pain signals to pain
standard experimental design, including total dose admin-
centers in the brain
istered, made it difficult to draw conclusions. In those
 Increased release of endorphins and enkephalins
studies that reported energy density or when calculation
Stimulation of trigger points and acupuncture points
was possible, there appeared to be a dose-response rela-
 Slowing of nerve conduction velocity
tionship.30 However, there may be a biphasic response,
 Reduced action potential
with positive effects seen with lower dosages, and inhibi-
 Suppressed substance P
p g e m go ssp r ne sa  
· Disruption of axonal fow
of 20 J/cm? divided between 638 and 830 mm light pro-
 Peripheral Nerves and Spinal Cord
duced better outcomes than using either wavelength alone,
·Promotion of nerve recovery after injury
 Increased axonal sprouting and growth
treatments.33 However, two studies with infrared laser
 Increased myelinization
treatment using higher dosages had reduced stimulation34
 Reduced degeneration of neurons
or inhibitory effects.3 In one study of rats with circular
 Increased growth-associated protein-43 and calcitonin
 gene-related peptide
wounds receiving a single 830-nm laser treatment with
 1.3 J/cm?, more rapid epithelialization and wound contrac-
tion resulted compared with 3 J/cm?, although both treat-
ments resulted in stimulation of healing compared with
be related to increased ATP and protein synthesis. Laser
controls, and there was no difference between the treated
light therapy causes vasodilation and also may improve lym-
groups by day 14.34 In a mouse wound model, 18 J/cm? of
phatic drainage. This may result in decreased edema and
980-nm laser treatment had a beneficial effect on wound
swelling caused by bruising or infammation.
 healing, whereas 36 J/cm? was too aggressive and resulted
In cell culture, doses of 0.5 to 16 J/cm? were evaluated
in decreased healing.35
 in vitro as a single exposure on two consecutive days.?9 A
Laser therapy may also be beneficial for difficult
single dose of 5 J/cm? resulted in increased proliferation
wounds in metabolically compromised patients. Laser
Chapter 21
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
367
photostimulation accelerated wound healing in diabetic
that LLLT was beneficial for the treatment of wound
rats in one study.' Diabetes was induced in male rats
healing.41
by streptozotocin injection and two 6-mm diameter circu-
lar wounds were created on either side of the spine. The
Bone and Cartilage Effects
left wound of each animal was treated with a 632.8 mm
HeNe laser at a dose of 1 J/cm? 5 days per week until
Bone and cartilage may also be affected by laser treatment.
the wounds closed (3 weeks). There was a marginal
In one study of bone healing, rats received a defect in a
increase of biomechanical properties of the laser-treated
femur.4? Rats were treated for either 12 sessions (4.8 J/cm?
wounds, including an increase in maximum load (16%),
per session, 28-day follow up) or three sessions (4.8 J/cm?
stress (16%), strain (27%), energy absorption (47%),
per session, 7-day follow up) with 40 mW 830 nm laser
and toughness (84%) compared with control wounds. The
light. Treatments were applied three times per week, and
amount of total collagen was significantly increased in
two other groups served as untreated controls. Rats were
laser-treated wounds. It was concluded that laser photo-
sacrificed on either day 7 or 28 after surgery. Although there
stimulation promoted tissue repair by accelerating collagen
were significant differences between treated and control
production and promoting overall connective tissue stabil-
animals regarding the area of mineralized bone at 7 days,
ity in healing wounds of diabetic rats. HeNe lasers also
there were no differences at 28 days. The authors suggested
improved wound healing by increasing collagen synthesis 
that LLLT may have some effect on early bone repair.
when corticosteroids  or nonsteroidal  antinfammatory
Another study of bone healing in rats compared ultra-
agents were administered to rats with surgical abdominal
sound with laser.43 A GaAlAs laser (780 mm) was applied
wounds .36 Laser treatment significantly increased collagen
using 30-mW power and a dose of 112.5 J/cm?. The ultra-
synthesis.
sound group was treated with 1.5 MHz, at 30 mW/cm?.
One study reported 100 clinical cases with healing
 Both groups received 12 total treatments, with 5 treatments 
wounds treated with LLLT.37 There was a marked increase
administered per week. Bones were harvested on day 20.
in collagen formation, increased vasodilation, and acceler-
 Maximum load at failure was greatest in the laser-treated
ated DNA synthesis. This researcher recommended 1 J/
group. Ultrasound resulted in promotion of bone resorption
cm? of laser treatment.
at the osteotomy site, whereas laser caused bone formation
A statistical metaanalysis was performed to determine
in comparison with control osteotomies.
the overall treatment effects of laser phototherapy on
The use of GaAlAs laser was compared with bone mor-
tissue repair."8 After performing a literature search, the
phogenetic protein (BMP) and bovine organic bone graft
effectiveness of laser treatment was calculated from each
 in a rat femoral bone healing model.4 Rats were assigned
study using standard procedures. Thirty-four peer-reviewed
 to four groups: control; laser treatment; BMPs plus organic
 papers met the inclusion criteria for tissue repair. There was
bovine bone graft; and BMPs plus organic bovine bone
a positive effect of laser phototherapy on tissue repair. Col-
graft plus laser treatment. The laser-iradiated groups
lagen formation, rate of healing, tensile stress and strength,
received treatments every 48 hours for seven treatments,
time needed for wound closure, number and rate of degran-
beginning immediately after the surgical procedure. The
ulation of mast cells, and fap survival were improved
laser therapy (830 nm, 40 mW) consisted of 16 J/cm? per
 e e m  si  rs 
session divided equally over four points (4 J/cm? each)
632.8 mm had the greatest effect, and 780 nm had the least.
around the defect. The subjects were sacrificed after 15,
This metaanalysis concluded that laser therapy was an
21, and 30 days. There was increased deposition of colla-
effective treatment for tissue repair.
 gen at 15 and 21 days, as well as increased bone trabeculae
Another study reviewed the literature regarding the in
at the end of the experimental period in the irradiated
vitro and in vivo effects of low-intensity laser therapy on
animals versus the nonirradiated controls. The greatest
 the wound healing process, especially in diabetic patients.38
 healing was seen in the group treated with organic bovine 
Although many of the in vivo studies lacked specifc infor-
bone graft, BMP, and laser treatment.
mation on dosimetric data and appropriate controls, the
LLLT has also been investigated as an adjunctive treatment 
data from appropriately designed studies indicated that
for infections of the musculoskeletal system. In one study, the
LLLT should be considered as an adjunctive adjuvant
effect of various doses of 808 nm (100 mW continuous laser,
therapy for refractory wound-healing disorders, including
at doses of 7.64 J/cm?, 15.29 J/cm?, and 22.93 J/cm?) laser
those experienced by diabetic patients.
 therapy was evaluated in induced chronic osteomyelitis of rat
However, results from other controlled and blinded
tibias, created with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
studies have been less clear regarding the efficacy of
dureus.4 Rats had either surgical debridement, surgical
LLLT for the treatment of wounds." Studies in laboratory
 debridement plus laser therapy, or no treatment. Infection
levels decreased by 37%, 67%, 81%, and 93% in groups
during the early stages of wound healing, but the effect
treated by debridement only, or debridement plus laser at
may not result in improved total healing time3940 Another
7.64 J/cm?, 15.29 J/cm?, or 22.93 J/cm?, respectively, com-
large review paper did not find unequivocal evidence
pared with the nontreated conrol group. The authors
368
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
concluded that laser therapy may be an adjunctive treatment
intermediate between a nonimmobilized control group and
for the mamagement of osteomyelitis. Laser has also been
the sham-treated group. The authors of this study con-
used to create a laser shockwave to clear biofilm from medical
cluded that low-power HeNe laser irradiation reduced the
devices in vitro.* Bacteria surrounding medical devices, such
adverse effects on the articular cartilage of rabbits immo-
as stents and orthopedic implants, may make a biofilm coating
bilized for 13 weeks. Another study evaluated the use of
that prevents peneration of antibiotics. In this study, the
 810 mm laser therapy on bone and cartilage during joint
biofilm was disrupted by a pulsed Nd:YAG laser that pro-
immobilization of rat knees.$? Three groups of rats received
duced laser-generated shockwaves, making the bacteria sus-
either 3.9 W/cm?, 5.8 W/cm?, or sham treatment. After 6
ceptible to conventional treatment.
treatments over a 2-week period, tissues were harvested for 
A more complete review of the effects of laser therapy
testing. Results indicated that cartilage stiffness, assessed
for bone repair has been published.47 Most of the research
by indentation testing, was preserved in both laser groups.
regarding bone healing has been performed in cell culture
or in rodent models. However, the authors acknowledge that
Treatment of Arthritis with Low-Level
Laser Therapy
more study on the laser properties, wavelength, and energy
dosage is needed, along with improved study design.
There is much interest in treating various forms of arthritis
  sia u  s o s 
with laser therapy, including osteoarthritis (OA) and
lasel ou raua pey si sunok st'sii ui panaa uaa
various forms of infammatory arthritis, such as rheuma-
irradiation, 5 J/cm?, or 15 J/cm? of 830 nm GaAlAs laser
toid arthritis. Models of various forms of arthritis have also
application to the proximal tibial  epiphyseal  cartilage
been studied in animal models. Zymosan was injected into
every other day for a total of 10 sessions. Laser irradiation
knee joints of rats to create infammatory arthritis in one
increased epiphyseal cartilage thickness and the number of
study."3 LLLT (830 and 635 nm, 20 mW) or LED (628 nm)
chondrocytes, but these effects were not great enough to
was applied to animals immediately and 1 and 2 hours after
 increase bone length.
injection, using the same dose of 2.5 J/cm?. A positive
Another study evaluated osteochondral lesions of the
-au aosauxap e um peaaid sim dno gou
knee treated intraoperatively with laser therapy in rabbits.49
tion into the knee 1 hour before zymosan injection. Laser
Bilateral osteochondral lesions were created in the femoral
treatment significantly reduced edema by 23%, vascular
medial condyles. All of the left lesions underwent immedi-
permeability by 24%, and pain by 59%, whereas LED
ate stimulation using a GaAlAs laser (780 nm), and the
treatment had no effect on any of the outcome parameters.
right knees were left untreated as a control group. After 24
Laser treatment may inhibit inflammation by reducing
weeks, the condyles were examined histomorphometri-
PGE, levels by inhibiting the COX-2 enzyme. Another
cally. The condyle treated with laser had better cell mor-
inflammatory joint model also suggested that laser treat-
phologic findings and repair of osteocartilaginous tissue.
The effect of laser therapy on cartilage was further inves-
and calcium pyrophosphate crystals injected into rat knee
tigated in another study that evaluated whether intraopera-
joints resulted in infammatory changes in the non-laser-
tive laser biostimulation can enhance healing of cartilaginous
treated control animals, but HeNe laser (633 nm, 5 mW,
lesions of the knee in rabbits.5° Bilateral chondral lesions
8 J/cm? daily for 5 days) reduced the intensity of the
were created in the medial femoral condyles. The lesion in
inflammatory changes.
the left knee of each animal was treated intraoperatively
Laser therapy has been used for the treatment of OA in
using a diode GaAlAs 780-nm laser (300 J/cm?, 1 W,
people. The effect of laser therapy in OA of the knee was
300 Hz, 10 minutes), and the right knee was left untreated.
investigated in one double-blind study.$s One treated group
 Cartilage was then examined 2, 6, or 12 weeks after surgery.
that received infrared laser (GaAlAs) and the other that
The rabbits receiving laser therapy had progressive flling
received HeNe laser treatment were compared with a group
with fbrous tissue of the cartilaginous lesion, whereas no
that received placebo treatment. Patients were treated for
changes were apparent in the untreated group.
15 minutes twice daily for 10 days. Total dose for each
Although laser therapy may have some benefit to treat
session was 10.3 J for HeNe and 11.1 J for GaAlAs. The
cartilage injury, it may also have benefit to help maintain
laser-treated groups were significantly less painful com-
the health of cartilage during periods of disuse and immo-
pared with the placebo groups, but there was no difference
bilization. The infuence of laser therapy (632.8 nm, HeNe,
between the HeNe and the GaAlAs groups. The Disability
13 J/cm², three times a week) on the articular cartilage of
Index Questionnaire also revealed an improvement in the
rabbit stifes immobilized for 13 weeks was examined in
laser groups. Patients receiving laser treatment had less
one study.5l The number of chondrocytes and depth of
pain for 2 months to 1 year after treatment.
articular cartilage of the treated rabbits were significantly
Laser treatment was also perfonmed on 20 human
higher than those of the sham-treated group. The cartilage
patients with OA of the knee, ranging from 42 to 60 years
surface of the sham-treated group was rough and fibril-
of age.? All patients had previously received conservative
lated, whereas the surface of the experimental group was
treatment with poor results. The laser device used for this
Chapter 21
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
369
treatment was a pulsed infrared diode laser, 810 nm wave-
were found to be as effective as higher dosages for reduc-
length, once per day for 5 consecutive days, followed by a
ing pain and improving knee ROM. The authors concluded
 2-day rest interval. The total number of applications was
that for OA, the results are conficting in different studies
12 sessions. Laser treatment was performed on five periar-
and may depend on the method of application and other
ticular tender points, for 2 minutes each. Pain relief and
features of laser application, including wavelength, treat-
functional ability were assessed using a numerical rating
ment duration, dosage, and site of application over nerves
scale, self-assessment by the patient, index of severity for
instead of joints.
OA of the knee, and analgesic requirements for comfort.
The efficacy of laser therapy for the treatment of rheu-
There was significant improvement in pain relief and
 matoid arthritis in people has also been reviewed.60 Five
quality of life in 70% of patients, compared with their
placebo-controlled trials evaluating 222 patients met inclu-
 previous status, but there was no significant changes in
sion criteria of the review. Treatments were typically admin-
range of motion (ROM) of the knee. Although the authors
istered two to three times per week for 4 weeks. Compared
of this study indicated that laser treatment was beneficial,
there was not an untreated control group. Therefore the
 points on a 10-point visual analogue scale (VAS) relative to
results should be interpreted with caution.
placebo, reduced morming stiffness duration by 27.5
A double-blind randomized study was conducted in 90
minutes, and increased tip to palm fexibility by 1.3 cm.
 patients with OA of the knee to evaluate a GaAs laser in
Other outcomes such as functional assessment, ROM, and
combination with 30 minutes of exercise.%6 One group
 local swelling did not differ between groups. There were no
received 5 minutes of laser therapy, with 3 J delivered.
 differences based on laser therapy dosage, wavelength, site
Another group was treated for 3 minutes and received 2 J,
of application or treatment length. The authors concluded
and a third group received placebo laser and exercise.
that laser therapy could be considered for short-term treat-
Patients received a total of 10 treatments and were studied
ment for relief of pain and morming stiffness for patients
for 14 weeks. Patients receiving laser treatment had sig-
with rheumatoid arthritis. Further evaluation of wavelength,
nificantly improved pain, function, and quality of life mea-
treatment duration, dosage, and site of application over
sures after treatment and had improved scores as compared
nerves instead of joints is needed. A recent study, however,
with the placebo laser group.
generally showed no effect of laser therapy (GaAlAr laser,
The analgesic and microcirculatory effects of LLLT
785 nm, 3 J/cm?, and mean power of 70 mW) on the hands
were evaluated in a recent study of people with knee OA.57
Of patients with rheumatoid arthritis.61
Laser therapy (830 nm, continuous wave, 50 mW, 6 W per 
Treatment of Tendon and Ligament
treatment site) or placebo treatments were administered
Conditions with Laser Therapy
twice weekly for 4 weeks. Pain, circumference, pressure
sensitivity, and flexion were all improved in the laser treat-
Low-level and therapeutic laser has been recommended for
ment group, whereas the placebo group had no improve-
the treatment of various tendon and ligament conditions, but 
ment in fexion or pain. Thermographic measurements
the clinical efficacy of this treatment remains controversial.
showed a 0.5°C increase in temperature in the laser group,
Laser therapy has been used in people for tendinopathies of
suggesting an increase in circulation.
the Achilles tendon, patella tendon, medial and lateral elbow
A similar randomized, placebo-controlled study of 60
tendons, and shoulder rotator cuff tendons.
patients with knee OA indicated no significant improve-
The effect of GaAs laser therapy (904 nm, 4000 Hz, 0.5
ment with 50 mW 830 nm GaAlAs LLLT at 3 weeks or
 to 1 J/cm?) for tendinitis was evaluated in 74 treated people
6 months.5 In this study, patients received 3 or 1.5 J per
and 68 people receiving placebo treatment in a random-
painful joint, or placebo laser treatment, five times per
 ized, blinded fashion.62 All patients received six treatments
week, with 10 total treatments.
during a period of 3-4 weeks. Pain was estimated objec-
Finally, a metaanalysis review was conducted on the
tively using a pain threshold meter, and subjectively with
efficacy of laser therapy on OA in people.s9 Seven trials
a VAS before treatment, at the end of treatment, and 4
were included, with 184 patients randomized to laser, and
weeks after the end of treatment. Laser therapy generally
161 patients to placebo groups, using a variety of lasers
had a significant, positive effect compared with placebo
and treatment protocols. Treatment duration ranged from
measured from the first assessment to 4 weeks after the
4 to 12 weeks. Pain was assessed in four trials. The pooled
end of treatment. Laser treatment appeared to be most
estimate of three trials showed no effect on pain measured
effective for acute tendinitis.
using a scale, and two demonstrated very beneficial effects
Another study evaluated the effect of laser therapy in
with laser. In another trial, with no scale-based pain
seven people with bilateral Achilles tendinitis to see if laser
 outcome, significantly more patients reported pain relief
treatment has an antinfammatory effect.63 Laser therapy
(yes/no) with laser. One study found knee ROM was sig-
(904 nm, 5.4 J per point, 20 mW/cm²) or placebo was
nificantly increased. Other outcomes of joint tendermess
applied to either Achilles tendon in random fashion. PGE2
and strength were not significant. Lower dosages of laser
was reduced 75 to 105 minutes after laser therapy, and pain
370
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
pressure threshold values increased after laser therapy. The
surgery. The ultimate tensile strength and stiffness of laser
authors concluded that laser therapy reduces pain and
and sham groups were larger than controls. The laser and
 inflammation in people with acute Achilles tendinitis.
sham groups had improved stiffness from 3 to 6 weeks. It
A rat model of partial calcaneal tendon lesions also
was concluded that a single dose of laser therapy improved
evaluated the effects of laser therapy.64 Sixty rats were
 the biomechanical properties of healing medial collateral
assigned to five groups: standard control (no lesion induced
ligaments 3 and 6 weeks after injury. However, a random-
and no laser therapy); control (lesion induced, but no laser
ized clinical trial of laser therapy for the treatment of ankle
therapy); and groups 3, 4, and 5, which suffered the lesion
sprains in people indicated that laser treatment was not
and underwent laser therapy for 3, 5, and 7 days, respec-
effective.68
tively. Laser therapy was delivered with a GaAsAl laser
(830 nm), power of 40 mW, power density of 1.4 W/cm2
with continuous waveform, with a dose of 4 J/cm?, and
Analgesia and Pain Management
total energy of 0.12 J every day during treatment, always
in the same period, for 3, 5, or 7 days starting on the
Interest in the use of laser therapy to treat acute and chronic
day the lesion was produced. Control lesions had signifi-
pain has increased in recent years. In fact, the World Health
cantly less collagen fiber organization compared with
Organization's Committee of the Decade of the Bone and
the standard controls. There were no differences in colla-
 Joint has recently incorporated laser therapy into guidelines
gen organization between group 4 and standard control.
for the treatment of neck pain in people.69 Knowledge of
Groups 3 and 5 were similar to each other and had greater
the effects of laser irradiation on pain has increased in
collagen fiber organization than the animals with control
recent years.69 Nociceptors, which are A8 and C peripheral
lesions. Laser therapy was effective in the improvement of
nerve fibers, lie just beneath the surface of the skin. Because
collagen fibers organization of the calcaneal tendon after
these nerve fibers are relatively superficial, they are within
undergoing a partial lesion in this study, and early treat-
the depths of laser stimulation. In addition, neurons that
ment for 5 days appeared to give the optimal response in
supply blood vessels and contribute to vasoconstriction and
this study.
vasodilatation associated with inflammation are also within
 Lateral epicondylitis can be a challenging condition to
the depth of laser penetration. Therefore laser has the poten-
treat in people. A GaAs laser (904 nm, 12 mW, 70 Hz,
tial to infuence pain perception by direct or indirect actions
0.36 J/point with four or five points treated over the most
on nociceptors, as well as modulation of infammation,
painful area, two to three treatments per week for a total of
which may contribute to pain. In fact, one study showed a
 10 treatments) or placebo treatment was applied to people
reduction in postoperative pain and drug intake in people
-s u psi n ase sg sia e rm
after immediate postoperative laser treatment to a surgical
nificant improvement in some objective parameters, but not
 incision.70 Laser therapy may suppress central sensitization
subjective parameters, perhaps because the subjective scales
 and result in long-term depression of persistent pain with
were not sensitive enough to detect small differences
repeated application. The exact mechanisms by which laser 
One recent review and metaanalysis evaluated the use
therapy results in analgesia are unknown, but are the focus
 of low-level laser for tendinopathies in people.6 The results
of active research. Although both nociceptors and motor
of 25 studies were conflicting, with roughly half showing
 nerves may be affected by laser irradiation, sensory nerves
a positive effect and half being inconclusive or showing no
appear to be preferentially affected. It is likely that applica
effect. Positive results from studies of lateral epicondylitis
tion of laser results in mainly inhibitory effects on aspects
of nerve function, especially pain receptors.
dosage of laser applied. Studies suggesting efficacy of laser
The results of studies regarding pain management with
treatment used doses similar to those recommended by the
the use of laser have been somewhat controversial. How-
World Association of Laser Therapy, which suggests doses
ever, studies performed have resulted in the approval by
of 1-8 J and power less than 100 mW/cm? for superficial
the FDA of 635 nm low-level lasers for the management
tendons. For deeper tendons, such as the rotator cuff,
of chronic, minor pain, such as OA and muscle spasms.
power up to 600 mW/cm? and total dosages of 3-9 J have
 Laser therapy may have some analgesic effects by blocking
been recommended.
pain transmission to the brain. Some studies have shown
 Laser therapy may also be useful for other forms of
changes in the conduction latencies of the radial and
soft-tissue injury, such as ligament healing. In one study,
ums a s ng zet ras re aiau ue
[   in sn  a s t
no effect.73 Laser treatment may also increase the release
 collateral ligament and eight received sham operation.67
of endorphins and enkephalins, which may further provide
After surgery, 16 received a single dose of GaAlAs laser
analgesic benefits. Laser therapy has been used to stimulate
to their transected ligament for 7.5 minutes or 15 minutes,
muscle trigger points and acupuncture points, which may
and eight served as control with placebo laser, whereas the
 provide pain relief.74
sham group did not receive any treatment. The ligaments
 Although the precise mechanism by which laser therapy
were biomechanically tested either 3 or 6 weeks following
may provide analgesia is unknown, several studies have
Chapter 21
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
371
investigated other possible mechanisms. One study evalu-
reatment, although the power used in those studies was
ated the effects of diode laser irradiation of peripheral
generally very low. The results of many studies of laser
nerves.7 The response was evaluated by monitoring neu-
acupuncture in people are hampered by inappropriate or
ronal discharges from the L5 dorsal nerve roots elicited by
poor description of laser application. Many of these studies
application of various stimuli to the hindpaw of rats,
have shown no positive benefits, but they used very low
including brush, pinch, cold, heat stimulation, and chemi-
power. One study of laser-mediated acupuncture anesthesia
cal stimulation by injection of turpentine. Diode laser irra-
(2.8-6 mW, 632.8 nm) for tooth extraction or minor facial
diation (830 nm, 40 mW, 3 min, continuous wave) of the
surgery reported a 95% success rate. However, the charac-
saphenous nerve significantly inhibited neuronal dis-
teristics determining the success rate were not defined.
charges elicited by pinch, cold, heat, and chemical stimula-
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
tion, but not discharges induced by brush stimulation.
of laser therapy in 90 subjects with chronic neck pain was
These data suggest that laser irradiation may selectively
conducted to determine the efficacy of 300 mW, 830 nm
 inhibit nociceptive neuronal activities
laser.4 Subjects were randomized to receive 14 treatments
Another study evaluated the effect of laser therapy on
over 7 weeks with either active or sham laser to painful
the head of rats.76 Rats received various combinations of
regions of the neck. Assessments were made at baseline,
laser (0, 6.4, and 12 J/cm²) and naloxone (0, 5, and 10 mg/
week 7, and week 12. Mean VAS pain scores improved by
kg) prior to a hot plate test. Laser therapy (820 nm, pulsing)
2.7 in the treated group and worsened by 0.3 in the control
was applied to the rats' skulls. Hindpaw lick latencies (in
group. However, the treated group began the study with
seconds) in response to the hot plate test were recorded
higher mean VAS scores, despite randomization. Signif-
immediately, 30 minutes, and 24 hours after the adminis-
cant improvements were also seen in the laser therapy
tration of treatment. When animals were tested immedi-
group compared with placebo for other total outcome mea-
ately following laser irradiation at 12 J/cm?, significant
sures, but some component portions of assessments did not
analgesia resulted. Treatment with naloxone at either dose 
 differ significantly between the two groups. Laser therapy.
antagonized this effect, but naloxone produced no signifi-
at the parameters used in this study, was efficacious in
cant hyperalgesia when given alone. This suggests that
providing pain relief for patients with chronic neck pain
opioid peptide mechanisms may mediate the analgesic
 over a period of 3 months.
action of laser therapy of the cranium.
The results of laser therapy on acute and chronic back
Recently, the effects of laser irradiation on peripheral
pain may differ from those obtained from treatment of
nerves and their potential effects on analgesia have been
neck pain. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
reviewed.77 A total of 44 studies were included in this
study compared the effectiveness of laser therapy on pain
review. In 13 of 18 human studies, pulsed- or continuous-
and functional capacity in people with acute and chronic
wave visible and continuous-wave infrared laser irradiation
low back pain caused by lumbar disk hermiation (LDH).78
slowed nerve conduction velocity and reduced the ampli-
 Patients were randomly allocated into four groups. Group
tude of compound action potentials. In 26 animal studies,
1 (acute LDH, n = 20) received hot pack plus laser therapy;
infrared laser irradiation suppressed evoked action poten-
group 2 (chronic LDH, n = 20) received hot pack plus laser
tials, pain-related neurotransmitters, such as substance P,
therapy; group 3 (acute LDH, n = 20) received hot pack plus
and proinflammatory mediators, such as bradykinin. Dis-
 placebo laser therapy, and group 4 (chronic LDH, n = 20)
ruption of axonal fow and microtubule arrays may be
received hot pack plus placebo laser therapy, for 15 sessions
responsible for neural inhibition. The varicosities that form
over 3 weeks. Pain, ROM, and disability were evaluated
as a result of laser therapy inhibit axonal fow and block the
using standard techniques, such as VAS and global assess-
transport of ATP, which is necessary to generate action
ment scores, before and after 3 weeks of treatment. After
potentials. The authors concluded that a range of inhibitory
treatment, there were significant improvements in pain
effects on peripheral nerves has been demonstrated, which
severity, patients' and physicians' global assessment, ROM,
and disability scores in all groups. However, no significant
tors. In chronic pain, spinal cord changes induced by laser
differences were detected between the four treatment
inradiation may result in depression of pain. Laser therapy
groups with respect to all outcome parameters. There were
seems to be most effective in reducing nerve conduction
no differences between laser and placebo laser treatments
velocity when it is applied to several points over the nerve,
on pain severity and functional capacity in patients with
causing an additive effect as compared with irradiation of a
acute and chronic low back pain caused by LDH.
single point. In addition, continuous-wave laser therapy
A randomized, double-blind study of 100 patients with
appears to be more effective than pulsed-wave application.
neck and shoulder pain indicated that 90% of the patients
 Laser acupuncture is another potential method of achiev-
au u guauraaoudu %oe e isea[ e pey dno.s paan ay u!
degree of pain relief, as compared with only 14% of the
acupuncture is the stimulation of traditional acupuncture
patients in the placebo group.′* Most patients had reduction
points with low-level laser. Most animal models of laser
of their pain immediately after treatment, and the improve-
acupuncture studies have shown no benefit over placebo
ment was typically maintained for 24 hours. A follow-up
372
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
study of another 100 patients indicated that 65% of the
 Additional studies on laser therapy applied to surgically
treated patients had improvement in their pain, but only
repaired peripheral nerves have also shown promise in
12% of untreated patients improved.79
studies of rats.87-39
 A metaanalysis evaluated the effect of laser therapy on
Laser therapy appears to enhance axonal sprouting.
d     n sd n a  d
resulting in accelerated healing. Laser therapy applied to
control. The overall treatment effect for pain control was
the corresponding segments of the spinal cord also helps
positive. Another review of laser therapy with location-
to reduce the degenerative changes in the neurons and
specifc doses for pain from chronic joint disorders sug-
helps induce proliferation of astrocytes and oligodendro-
gested that some benefit may be derived from the use of
cytes, which may result in an increased ability to produce
lasers.° A literature search identified 88 randomized, con-
-Oid ayn aouequa Xeu Adeau rase uonipe ul s'uau
trolled trials, of which 20 trials included patients with
duction of proteins and growth factors associated with
chronic joint disease. Laser therapy was applied within the
axonal sprouting, such as growth-associated protein-43
suggested dose-range to the knee or temporomandibular
and calcitonin gene-related peptide, and may stimulate the
joint capsule to reduce pain in chronic joint disorders. The
 proliferation of Schwann cells.
results showed a mean difference in change of pain using
In an initial study, laminectomy and transection of the
a VAS by 45.6% in favor of laser therapy. Global status
spinal cord at T12-L1 were performed in 17 dogs. An
was also improved 33.4% more in patients in the laser
autograft of the sciatic nerve was implanted in the injured
anpai on paeadde Aderayn rasei yanoury dnoa Aderau
area. Ten dogs received laser therapy for 20 days, and the
pain in patients with chronic joint diseases, the heterogene-
 Others did not. The 7 that did not receive laser therapy were
ity in patient samples, treatment procedures, and trial
 paralyzed, whereas the 10 treated dogs stood between 7
 design calls for cautious interpretation of the results.
and 9 weeks, and walked between 9 and 12 weeks. Treated
dogs did not have prominent scar tissue, and there were
Peripheral Nerves and Spinal Cord
 new axons and blood vessels originating in the spinal tissue
 Peripheral nerve and spinal cord injuries can be devastating
and extending into the graft. However, the study did not
to patients of all species. Studies have been recently con-
report the results of neurologic testing to know whether or
ducted which, along with the few known side effects of
 not the dogs were spinal walking or had functional walking
laser therapy, make this an exciting potential treatment for
ability.
nerve and spinal cord injuries.
More recently, a prospective study was performed to
 Initial studies evaluated the use of laser therapy on
determine if low-level laser therapy and surgery would
peripheral nerve regeneration in a crushed sciatic nerve
result in earlier ambulation than surgery alone for inter-
model in rats. Most of the studies indicated that laser
vertebral disk hermiation.9 Thirty-six dogs with acute
paralysis or nonambulatory paraparesis were randomly
Laser therapy was applied directly to the nerve or transcu-
assigned to a surgery or surgery plus laser group. A 5 ×
taneously. With direct stimulation, wavelengths of 540,
200-mW 810-nm cluster array laser was used to deliver
633, and 780 mm were found to be effective. Subsequent
25 W/cm? to the skin over the spinal segment associated
studies indicated that laser therapy applied to the nerve
with the hemilaminectomy and the two adjacent ones
injury and the corresponding segments of the spinal cord
(one cranial and one caudal). However, the dose in joules
with 633 nm laser at a dose of 10 J/cm? seems to improve
per cm? was not clear. The laser array was applied to
the outcome. Although it appears that laser therapy is most 
each area for 5 days or until dogs became ambulatory
effective when applied during the early posttraumatic
with paraparesis or ataxia. The time to achieve this level
 period,4 laser therapy may also be beneficial for chronic
of recovery was significantly lower in the low-level laser
nerve conditions. A study of human patients with incom-
therapy group (median 3-5 days) than the control group
plete peripheral nerve or brachial plexus injuries present
(median 14 days). The authors concluded that low-level
for 6 months to several years indicated that laser therapy
laser therapy in combination with surgery decreases the
time to ambulation in dogs with T3-L3 myelopathy sec-
function.&5
ondary to intervertebral disk hermiation.
Studies of rat sciatic nerve injuries indicated that there
The use of transcranial laser or LED therapy has
was increased functional activity, decreased scar tissue
recently been reviewed for the treatment of stroke, trau-
formation, decreased degeneration of motor neurons, and
matic brain injury, and neurodegenerative diseases in
increased axonal growth and myelinization with laser
people.? There is some apparent transmission of near
therapy applied to the spinal cord immediately after wound.
infrared light through the scalp and skull to stimulate the
ing, and for 30 minutes daily for 21 days using 16mW
cortical surface of the brain. Because cortical neurons are
632nm HeNe laser.86 This study suggested that laser
rich in mitochondria, these cells may be responsive to light
therapy applied directly to the spinal cord may improve
therapy. There may be upregulation of cytoprotective anti-
the recovery of corresponding peripheral nerve injuries.
oxidant enzymes, heat shock proteins, and antiapoptotic
Chapter 21
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
373
s   s r   s
understand what the particular laser unit possesses with
neurons afficted with hypoxic or traumatic events.91 In
regard to power and wavelengths, and the dose, in J/cm?,
addition, light therapy may increase neurogenesis, which
a condition requires. From there, it should be easy to deter-
has been demonstrated in rat models of stroke.92.93 In par-
mine how much time is needed for laser application. Some
ticular, there may be newly formed neuronal cells in the
laser umits compute this with preprogrammed software,
area ipsilateral to the lesion; however, there may be no new
whereas others require the therapist to calculate how many
 cells in the area of the lesion. Transcranial laser therapy
joules are needed and how many joules are emitted per
may increase ATP in cortical neurons.?" In human stroke
second. Some units may take 1 second or less to deliver
patients, transcranial laser therapy may improve outcome
1 J, whereas other units may take up to 20 seconds to
when applied approximately 18 hours after moderate
deliver 1 J.
stroke over the entire head.9 Transcranial laser treatment
The greater the power density and longer the wave-
has also been investigated in mild traumatic brain injury
length, the deeper the penetration is through tissues.
in mice and has beneficial effects. There are also cases of
Unfortunately, the optimal wavelengths, intensities, and
treatment of people with reduced cognitive function after
dosages have not been adequately studied in dogs, and
brain injury in which cognition was improved after laser
information in people is difficult to interpret because of
treatment.9"]
different conditions and treatment regimens. More laser
 dosage is not necessarily better, because overdosing may
 retard the desired effect. A common mistake in using laser
 Application of Laser Therapy to Dogs
therapy, especially in wound healing, is to experience
a positive result and automatically assume more will be
Before applying laser therapy to a patient, there are two
 better. The healing process can only progress at a certain
fundamental attributes that must be established. First, the
rate.
type of laser must be known, as well as the wavelength.
Laser therapy is generally administered with a hand-
The wavelengths of most lasers used for laser treatment are
held probe, with a small beam area that is useful to treat
typically in the infrared or near-infrared range of 600-
small surfaces; other lasers have several beam areas in the
1000 mm. Wavelengths of low-power lasers commonly
 same unit to treat larger areas (Figure 21-9). Laser energy
used are 632.8 mm (HeNe, gas) in the visible light range,
may be applied with the laser probe in contact with the
810 nm (GaAlAs, diode), and 904 nm (GaAs, diode) in the
skin, which eliminates reflection from the skin and mini-
infrared region of the light spectrum. The wavelength is
mizes beam divergence, or with the probe not held in
 the prime determinant of tissue penetration. Lasers that do
contact. With the noncontact method, it is necessary to
 as a  ot  oe) a se d o
hold the probe perpendicular to the treatment area to min-
acupuncture point stimulation and wound healing but have
imize wave refection and beam divergence. Noncontact
not proved their clinical effectiveness with deep-seated
 application is recommended for wound treatment. The
musculoskeletal conditions. Infrared lasers (750
to
Aq saie raiel o padde aq Aeu aesop aendoidde
1500 nm) penetrate more deeply and are used to treat
administering the calculated dose to each individual site
trigger points, ligaments, joint capsules, and intraarticular
in a grid fashion, or by slowly moving the probe over the
structures. The output power (watts or milliwatts) must
 entire surface, being certain to evenly distribute the energy
also be known. Based on this, and the condition to be
to each site. In any case, the probe should be held perpen-
treated, the dose of laser light (J/cm?) is determined. For
 dicular to the skin. A coupling medium is not necessary,
most conditions, a dose of 1 to 8 J/cm? is typically applied.
as in ultrasound, because the laser beam is not attenuated
The time the laser must be applied to an area to deliver the
by air.
dose must be calculated. For example, if a 904-nm laser
To maximize laser application, the hair should be
m h! 'pasn s! Mu osz jo iamod gndno unuxeut e yim
clipped because 50% to 99% of the light may be absorbed
take 4 seconds to deliver 1 J.
by hair. Little is known about the transmission of laser
light to deeper tissues in darker dogs, but HeNe laser
0.250 W =1 J/X seconds
energy is likely to be absorbed because of the pigment.
It has been recommended that the dose be increased by
(0.250 W)(X seconds) = 1 J
25% in treatment areas with dark pigmentation. Any
X seconds = 1 J/0.250 W
jodine or povidone iodine should be washed off the
area. Any topical medications, especially corticosteroids
X = 4 seconds
and other photosensitizing agents, should be removed.
The therapist should wear protective eye wear, because
With this particular laser, it will be necessary to hold
damage may occur to the retina if the laser shines
the laser on one point for 4 seconds to deliver I J of energy.
into the eyes, and the patient's eyes should also be pro-
With a 1-W laser, this takes 1 second. It is crucial to always
tected (Box 21-3).
374
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
using a point-to-point application of a dose per unit area.
 One can imagine the area covered by a grid with square
 centimeters, and the laser treatment is given in the squares.
The following doses have been suggested for treating
various conditions. However, there is currently little or no
research available regarding dose or frequency of treatment
in dogs for different conditions; the information is extrapo-
lated from research in other species and anecdotal informa-
tion and should be used with caution (Box 21-4).
Open Wounds
Clinically, laser therapy has been applied to both traumatic
and surgical wounds, lick granulomas, abrasions, and
skin conditions associated with allergies. The causes and
sources of lick granulomas should be treated appropriately
to complement the laser treatments. Laser therapy assists
with the reduction of infammation and wound healing.
as indicated previously. Pain should also be considered
 in wound management as well, and laser therapy may be
helpful to provide some pain control. Traumatic wounds
also need to be treated appropriately with regard to infec-
tions, wound dressings, and other related issues. Debriding
Figure 21-9  Laser therapy is generally administered with a hand-
 and cleaning should be performed before laser therapy is
held probe, with a small beam area that is useful to treat small
performed. When treating wounds, it is beneficial to docu-
surfaces.
ment the size of the wound with photographs and measure-
ments. The wound should be measured at each treatment
 session to document progress or lack of progress. Corre-
Box 21-3
Key Points for Laser Usage
sponding medications and bandage changes should be
in Dogs
documented as well.
Traumatic wounds, such as degloving injuries, are
1. Clip hair.
understandably very painful and the animal may not toler-
 2. Measure area to be treated (a playing card is 57 cm’).
ate direct contact. The laser head should be held above the
3.
 Determine treatment dose.
wound to avoid contamination of the wound. The head
4. Increase dose for dogs with dark skin by 25%.
should be cleaned thoroughly with rubbing alcohol prior
5. Determine the number of J/cm?, total joules, and the length
of treatment time for laser application. If treating an area
to and after treatment. Most laser heads have a small lip or
the size of a playing card with 10 J/cm?, the total treatment
surface on them, preventing direct contact with the lens
is 600 J. If using a 10-W laser, the treatment time is 60
 and the wound. Laser treatment is applied directly to the
seconds.
wound at a treatment dosage of 2 to 8 J/cm?. Acute wounds
6. Place safety goggles on all in the immediate area.
may be treated with a lower dosage daily for the first 7 to
 7. Hold laser perpendicular to the skin (direct contact
 10 days. The entire wound area should be treated, includ-
minimizes laser light reflection; noncontact application is
ing the periphery of the wound.
recommended for wounds).
8. Apply laser treatment using an overlapping grid technique
Postsurgical Wounds
to be certain that the treatment is applied equally to all
areas.
Postsurgical wounds may be treated immediately after
the surgical procedure to assist with healing. The postsur-
gical wounds appropriate for laser are not limited to ortho-
Application for Various Conditions in Dogs
pedic and neurologic cases. General postsurgical wounds,
including spays, other abdominal surgeries, dewclaw
Laser therapy has been used for the treatment of wounds;
removals, benign soft tissue removals, and other soft tissue
pain; inflammation; OA; and muscle, ligament, and tendon
surgeries, may respond to laser therapy. Laser treatments
injuries. In general, Class IV laser energy is applied in an 
assist with cell proliferation, antiinfammation, and DNA
Overlapping grid or fanning fashion, always moving the
synthesis. Because of this, surgical wounds following
laser to avoid heating the area. Other lasers may be applied
removal of neoplasia should not be treated with laser.
Chapter 21
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
375
Box 21-4
 Dose Guidelines for Various Uses in Dogs
Analgesic Effect
Stifle: Start at the patella. The joint line may then be
Muscle pain: For acute pain apply 2 to 4 J/cm?; for chronic
followed either medially or laterally to complete the full
pain, apply 4 to 8 J/cm?.
circumference.
 Joint pain: Apply 4 to 6 J/cm? for acute pain, and 4 to 8 J/
Hock and digits: Start below the point of the hock and
cm² for chronic pain.
circle around the hock while applying treatment. It is
important that the anatomy of the tarsus be considered, with
Antinflammatory Effect
its distal extent at the tarsometatarsal junction, to be certain
Acute and subacute: Apply 1 to 6 J/cm2.
that the appropriate areas are treated. The calcaneal tendon
Chronic: Apply 4 to 8 J/cm?.
may also be treated. Individual toes may be treated but it is
recommended that a small laser apparatus be used.
Open Wounds
 Shoulder: Start at the greater tubercle, continuing
Acute wounds: Apply 2-6 J/cm? sid for 7-10 days.
circumferentially around the joint. Because of the tissue
·Chronic wounds: Apply 2-8 J/cm² sid.
depth in this area, a longer wavelength laser source is
· Laser head should not be applied directly to the wound.
necessary. If the biceps tendon or other tendons are invol ved,
·
Clean laser head before and after treatment.
the treatment should include the length of the tendon.
· Do not apply laser to wounds following removal of
 Elbow: Start below the olecranon process and continue
neopl asia.
around the entire joint in a circumferential manner. Treating
Postsurgical Wounds
distally and proximally from the elbow also benefits the
surrounding soft tissue.
A daily dose of 1-3 J/cm? is recommended for the first 7 to
 Carpus and digits: Start at the accessory carpal pad and then
10 days if possible, followed by a 1- to 2-day break,
treat in a circumferential manner. Sweeping motions may be
continued until the wound is healed. If daily treatment is not
performed distally and proximally to cover the distal and
   d s    r
proximal aspects of the joint as well as the surrounding soft
 performed.
tissue. The digits may be approached the same way, although
Lick Granulomas
it is sometimes difficult to move in a circumferential manner.
·Administer 1-3 J/cm?, directly over the entire granuloma
The dorsal and palmar aspects of the digits may be treated.
and at least 1 cm from the periphery. Depending on the size
 Cervical spine: Treat the entire cervical spine from the
of the granuloma, the wound should be treated as frequently
suboccipital area down to the upper thoracic region. The
as possible; daily to a few times a week is beneficial. The
laser may be applied directly over the dorsal cervical spine,
granuloma should be treated until the wound is healed and
and then moved over the epaxial musculature on both sides.
hair growth has resumed.
Do not apply the laser for a prolonged period over the
carotid arteries.
Osteoarthritis
·
Thoracic and lumbar spine: Treat directly over the area as
Administer 8- 10 J/cm?.
well as the epaxial and surrounding musculature.
Treat along the joint lines and surrounding area.
 Tendon conditions (biceps tenosynovitis, supraspinatus 
· Hip: Start treatment at the greater trochanter, then direct
tendonitis, patellar tendonitis, and other tendon infammatory
around the cranial, medial, and caudal surfaces of the hip in
 conditions): The length of the superficial aspect of the tendon
a circumferential pattern.
should be treated along with the surrounding soft tissues.
sid, Once daily.
The laser apparatus should be held directly over the
Lick Granulomas
wound and either moved in a sweeping fashion or held
directly over the wound. The recommended treatment
Lick granulomas are a common problem seen in small
schedule is 1-3 J/cm? daily for the first 7-10 days, with a
 animal practice and may be treated with laser therapy. The
1- to 2-day break, then continuing laser treatment until the
source of the lick granuloma must be initially identified
wound is healed. Realistically, if the animal is not in the
and treated appropriately, and then the wound may be
hospital, it may be difficult to laser the wound daily. There-
addressed. There are often underlying causes of the lick
fore as frequent treatments as possible should be pursued,
granuloma. The lick granuloma should be treated with
with a minimum of three times per week. Laser therapy
1-3 J/cm?, directly over the granuloma and at least 1 cm
should continue a few times per week until the wound has
from the periphery. Laser treatment contributes to wound
closed and healthy tissue has formed. Clinically, steps
healing, decreases inflammation, and also contributes anti-
should be taken to avoid self-mutilation by the dog, such
 histamine effects. Depending on the size of the granuloma,
as application of an Elizabethan collar.
the wound should be treated frequently. Daily to a few
376
Section IV
Therapeutic Modalities
times a week is beneficial. The granuloma should be treated
secondary pain should also be addressed. The lumbosacral
until the wound is healed and hair growth has resumed.
area and the musculature of the hip are often painful
However, the underlying cause must be determined and
because of compensations and may also be treated.
treated, whether it is anxiety, neurologic, orthopedic, or the
result of other causes.
Stifle
Arthritic stifes are easily treated with therapeutic laser. A
Osteoarthritis
nice starting point is the patella. The joint line may then
be followed either medially or laterally to complete the full
As in human medicine, OA is very common in dogs. The
circumference. The patella ligament may be treated proxi-
 initial step when addressing the arthritic patient is a thor-
mally and distally. Cranial cruciate repairs or deficient
ough assessment of ROM, weight-bearing status, girth
stifles often have soreness in the distal hamstring muscles
 measurements, palpation, overall function and owner per-
and patients may benefit from treating this area as well.
ception of problems with home activities. A pain scale may
be used to determine the level of pain. Weight-bearing
Hock and Digits
status may be determined through dynamic or static force-
Hock and digit joints are often difficult to treat with modal-
plates, or scales. The overall function and goals of the
ities such as cryotherapy or moist heat because of their size
 Owner should be determined in the evaluation, and progress 
and irregular contour. Laser therapy is an easy treatment
using the various assessment tools should be monitored.
for these areas. Arthritic conditions of the hock may be
After the problem list and the goals have been deter-
treated by beginning below the point of the hock and cir-
 mined, treatment with laser therapy may be implemented
cling around the hock while applying treatment. It is
as part of a multimodal treatment program. The specific
important that the anatomy of the tarsus be considered,
 goals of laser therapy often include decreased pain, inflam-
with its distal extent at the tarsometatarsal junction, to be
 mation, and improved circulation. Arthritic joints should
certain that the appropriate areas are treated. The calcaneal
be thoroughly treated along the joint lines and surrounding
tendon may also be treated. Individual toes may be treated,
area (Figure 21 -10). Recommendations for arthritic joints
pan aq smeedde iase lus e peun papuauosai si l in
have ranged from 4 J/cm? up to 30 J/cm?, but more appro-
If only a large unit is available, it may be used in a sweep-
priate doses may be 8-10 J/cm?. The apparatus may either
 ing motion over the affected digits.
be held directly over the area for the designated number of
joules, or used in a sweeping fashion depending on the 
Shoulder
unit.
The shoulder and affected areas are easily treated. A good
starting point is the greater tubercle, with the laser continu-
Hip
ing circumferentially around the joint. Because of the
Canine hip dysplasia and resultant OA are very common.
tissue depth in this area, a longer wavelength laser source
The coxofemoral joint should be completely treated. A
is necessary. If the biceps tendon or other tendons are
good landmark to start treatment is the greater trochanter.
involved, the treatment should include the length of the
The treatment should then be directed around the cranial,
tendon. The cervical region and the cervical strap muscles
medial, and caudal surfaces of the hip. The treatment is
may benefit from treatment because of possible secondary
directed in a circumferential pattem. Referred pain or
compensations that may occur from shoulder issues and
lameness.
Elbow
 The elbow is a very common area for arthritic changes and
may benefit from laser therapy. The laser should be directed
around the entire joint in a circumferential manner. A good
starting point is below the olecranon process; treatment
should then proceed around the area. Treating distally
and proximally from the elbow also benefits the surround-
ing soft tissue, in particular the triceps muscles. Secondary
and tertiary soreness and pain may be noted in the shoulder
and the carpal region, and they may benefit from laser
 treatment.
Carpus and Digits
Figure 21-10  Treatment of an arthritic joint with a therapeutic
The carpal joint usually responds well to laser therapy to
laser.
help reduce the infammation and pain associated with
Chapter 21
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation
377
arthritic changes. Arthritic digits may also be aided by
therapeutic effects of laser, in addition to sesamoiditis. The
carpal joint should be treated in a circumferential manner.
The accessory carpal pad is a good starting point; the laser
should then be directed around the joint. S weeping motions
may be performed distally and proximally to cover the
distal and proximal aspects of the joint as well as the sur-
rounding soft tissue. The digits may be approached in the
same way, although it is sometimes difficult to move in a
circumferential manner. The dorsal and palmar aspects of
the digits may be treated, however.
Cervical Spine
The entire cervical spine should be treated from the suboc-
cipital area down to the upper thoracic region. The laser
Figure 21-11 Protective eyewear should always be used when
using a laser therapy.
may be applied directly over the dorsal cervical spine, and
then moved over the epaxial musculature on both sides.
Caution should be exercised to be certain that the laser is
Box 21-5
 Precautions Regarding Laser
not applied for a prolonged period over the carotid arteries.
Therapy
The cervical musculature is thick and arthritic conditions
of the cervical spine may benefit from the effects of laser.
Use protective eye weal.
Do not direct laser treatment to the eye.
Thoracic Spine
Use caution with laser beam refection from metal surfaces.
The lower thoracic spine is especially affected with arthritic
Use caution with treatment in the presence of the following
changes and compensations. Treating directly over the area
conditi ons:
as well as the epaxial and surrounding musculature may
·Pregnancy
·
 Open fontanels
be very beneficial.
·
Growth plates of immature animals
Lumbar Spine
·
Malignancies
Photosensitive areas of the skin
The lumbar spine, surrounding areas, and musculature may
 Dark colored skin, tattoos, and hair can absorb laser light
 be treated the same as the thoracic spine.
and undergo excessive heating, resulting in discomfort.
Tendon Conditions
damage. Infrared laser light is not visible, and therefore a
Biceps tenosynovitis, supraspinatus tendonitis, patellar
blink refex does not occur as with bright visible light. A
tendonitis, and other infammatory conditions involving
person exposed to laser light in an eye may not experience
tendons may be treated with laser therapy. The length of
any pain or discomfort until a pop is heard as a result of
the superficial aspect of the tendon should be treated along
explosive boiling and damage to the retina.'0 Caution must
with the surrounding soft tissues. The biceps tendon com-
be used to select appropriate eyewear to be certain that the
municates with the shoulder joint capsule; therefore the
 particular wavelength will be blocked and that an appropri-
shoulder joint capsule should be treated as well.
ate optical density is used to attenuate the beam power
(Figure 21-11).
Precautions Regarding the Use of
 Other contraindications and precautions to laser therapy
Laser Therapy
include pregnancy, treatment over open fontanels or growth
plates of immature animals, over malignancies, and over
 In general, the thermal effects of laser may injure tissues,
photosensitive areas of the skin. Dark-colored skin,
especially the eyes, and in some cases, skin. Even small
tattoos, and hair can absorb laser light and undergo exces-
amounts of laser light can cause permanent damage to the
sive heating when a Class IV laser is applied, resulting in
retina.'° Because lasers have coherent light, even a small
discomfort (Box 21-5).
amount of laser light may be focused on the retina through
the eye, and as little as 10° C increase in temperature may
Summary of Laser Therapy
cause permanent damage to the retinal photoreceptor cells.
The visible and near-infrared regions of the electromag-
Lasers are a potentially useful tool in veterinary rehabilita-
netic spectrum may penetrate into the eye, but because
tion. Although their use remains controversial, several
there is visible light, the blink reflex helps protect against
studies have demonstrated benefit to using laser therapy.
378
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
Especially promising for their use in veterinary rehabilita-
15. Wilson BC, Jeeves WP, Lowe DM: In vivo and post mortem
tion are studies showing preservation of cartilage proper-
measurement of the attenuation spectra of light in mamma-
ties with treatment, improvement in peripheral nerve
lian tissues, Photochem Photobiot 42:153-162, 1985.
 injuries, and as a possible adjunct to managing pain, such
16. Kolarova H, Ditrichova D, Wagner J: Penetration of the laser
light into the skin in vitro, Lasers Surg Med 24:231-235,
au on seadde os Adeaun rasel 'vo uim suned un se
benefit in early wound healing. Laser therapy is noninva-
1999.
17. Esnouf A, Wright PA, Moore JC et al: Depth of penetration
sive and there are no reported side effects when used
of an 850 nm wavelength low level laser in human skin,
properly.
Acupunct Electrother Res 32:81-86, 2007.
18. Enwemeka CS, Parker JC, Dowdy DS et al: The effcacy of
REFERENCES
low-power lasers in tissue repair and pain control: a meta-
1. Reddy GK, Stehno-Bittel L, Enwemeka CS: Laser photo-
analysis study, Photomed Laser Surg 22(4):323-329, 2004.
stimulation accelerates wound healing in diabetic rats, Wound
19. Karu T: Mitochondrial mechanisms of photobiomodulation
Repair Regen 9(3):248-255, 2001.
in context of new data about multiple roles of ATP, Photomed
2. Stelian J, Gil I, Habot B et al: Laser therapy is effective for
Laser Surg 28:159-160, 2010.
degenerative osteoarthritis. Improvement of pain and dis-
20. Khakh BS, Burnstock G: The double life of ATP, Sci Am
ability in elderly patients with degenerative osteoarthritis of
12:84-92, 2009
 the knee treated with narrow-band light therapy, JAm Geriatr
 21. Da Salva JP, da Salva MA, Almeida APF et al: Laser therapy
Soc 40:23-26, 1992.
in the tissue repair process: a literature review, Photomed
3. Djavid GE, Mortazavi SMJ, Basirnia A et al: Low level laser
Laser Surg 28:17-21, 2010.
therapy in musculoskeletal pain syndromes pain relief and 
 22. Stein A, Benayahu D, Malts L et al: Low-level laser iradia-
disability reduction, Lasers Surg Med 152(Supp1 15):43,
tion promotes proliferation and differentiation of human
2003.
osteoblasts in vitro, Photomed Laser Surg 23:161-166, 2005.
4. Chow RT, Heller GZ, Barnsley L: The effect of 300 m W,
 23. Patore D, Greco M, Passarella S: Specific helium-neon laser
830 nm laser on chronic neck pain: a double-blind, random-
sensitivity of the purified cytochrome C oxidase, Int J Radiat
ized, placebo-controlled study, Pain 124:201-210, 2006.
Biol 76:863-870, 2000.
5. Belanger A-Y: Laser. In Belanger A-Y, editor: Evidence-
 24. Quirk BJ, Whelan HT: Near-infrared irradiation photobio-
based guide to therapeutic physical agents, Philadelphia,
 modulation: the need for basic science, Photomed Laser Surg
2002, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
29:143-144, 2011.
6. Zati A, Valent A: Laser light. In Laser Therapy in Medicine,
 25. Honmura A, Lshi A, Yanase M et al: Analgesic effect of
Torino, Italy, 2008, Edizioni Minerva Medica.
GaAlAs diode laser irradiation on hyperal gesiaincatrageenin-
7. Hashmi JT, Huang YY, Sharma SK et al: Effect of pulsing
induced inflammation, Lasers Surg Med 13:463-469, 1993.
in low-level light therapy, Lasers Surg Med 42:450-466,
 26. Sakurai Y, Yamaguchi M, Abiko Y: Inhibitory effect of low.
2010.
level laser irradiation on LPS-stimulated prostaglandin E2
 8. Bjordal JM, Lopes-Martins RA, Joensen J et al: A systematic
 productions and cyclooxygenase-2 in human gingival fibro-
Teview with procedural assessments and meta-analysis of low
blasts, Eur J Oral Sci 108:29-34, 2000.
 27. Medrado AR, Pugliese LS, Reis SR et al: Influence of 1ow
elbow), BMC Musculoskelet Disord 9:75, 2008.
level laser therapy on wound healing and its biological action
9. Gigo-Benato D, Geuna S, de Castro Rodrigues A et al: Low-
upon myofbroblasts, Lasers Surg Med 32:239-244, 2003.
power laser biostimulation enhances nerve repair after end-
 28. Bjordal JM, Lopes-Martins RAB, Iversen VV: A random-
to-side neurorrhaphy : a double-blind randomized study in the
ized, placebo controlled trial of low level laser therapy for
rat median nerve model, Laser Med Sci 19:57-65, 2004.
 activated Achilles tendinitis with microdialy sis measurement
10. Chuang LH, Lai CC, Yang KJ et al: A traumatic macular hole
of peritendinous prostaglandin E concentrations, Br J Sports
secondary to a high-energy Nd:YAG laser, Ophthaimic Surg
Med 40:76-80, 2006.
Lasers 32(1):73, 2001.
 29. Hawkins D, Abrahamse H: Effect of multiple exposures of
11. Ramey DW, Rollin BE: Scientific aspects of CAVM. In
low-level laser therapy on the cellular responses of wounded
Ramey DW, Rollin BE, editors: Complementary and alterna-
human skin fibroblasts, Photomed Laser Surg 24:705-714,
tive veterinary medicine considered, Ames, Iowa, 2004, Iowa
2006.
State Press.
30. Peplow PV, Chung TY, Baxter GD: Laser photobiomodula-
12. Baxter GD, Walsh DM, Allen JM et al: Effects of low-
tion of wound healing: a review of experimental studies in
intensity infrared laser irradiation upon conduction in the
mouse and rat animal models, Photomed Laser Surg 28:291-
human median nerve in vivo, Exp Physiot 79:227-234, 1994.
325, 2010.
13. Topping A, Gault D, Grobbelaar A et al: Does low penetra-
 31. Meirelles GC, Santos JN, Chagas PO et al: A comparative
tion of human skin by the normal mode ruby laser account
study of the effects of laser photobiomodulation on the
for poor permanent depilatory success rates? Lasers Med Sci
healing of third-degree burns: a histological study in rats,
16:224-229, 2001.
Photomed Laser Surg 26:159-166, 2008.
14. Simpson CR, Kohl M, Essenpreis M et al: Near-infrared
32. Meirelles GC, Santos JN, Chagas PO et al: Effectiveness of
optical properties of ex vivo human skin and subcutaneous
laser photobiomodulation at 660 or 780 nanometers on the
tissues measured using the Monte Carlo inversion technique,
repair of third-degree burns in diabetic rats, Photomed Laser
Phys Med Biol 43:2465-2478, 1998.
Surg 26:47-54, 2008.
Chapter 21
Laser Therapy in Canine Rehabilitation 
379
33. Mendez TM, Pinheiro AL, Pacheco MT et al: Dose and
vivo" experimental study, Artif Cells Blood Substit Immobil
wavelength of laser light have infuence on the repair
Biotechnot 28(5) :441-449, 2000.
of cutaneous wounds, J Clin Laser Med Surg 22:19-25,
51. Bayat M, Ansari A, Hekmat H: Effect of low-power helium-
2004.
neon laser iradiation on 13-week immobilized articular car-
34. Rezende SB, Ribeiro MS, Nunez SC et al: Effects of a single
tilage of rabbits, Indian J Exp Biot 42(9):866-870, 2004.
near-infrared laser treatment on cutaneous wound healing:
 52. Akai M, Usuba M, Maeshima T et al: Laser's effect on bone
biometrical and histological study in rats, J Photochem Pho-
and cartilage change induced by joint immobilization: an
tobiol B, Biot 87:145-153, 2007.
experiment with animal model, Laser Surg Med 21(5):480-
35. Kawalec JS, Hetherington VJ, Pfennigwerth TC et al: Effect
484, 1997.
of a diode laser on wound healing by using diabetic and
53. de Morais NCR, Barbosa AM, Vale ML et al: Anti-
nondiabetic mice, J Foot Ankle Surg 43:214-220, 2004.
inflammatory effect of low-level laser and light-emitting
36. Concalves WLS, Souza FM, Conti CL: Influence of He-Ne
 diode in zymosan-induced arthritis, Photomed Laser Surg
laser therapy on the dynamics of wound healing in mice
28:227-232, 2010.
treated with anti-inflammatory drugs, Braz J Med Biot Res
 54. Rubio CR, Cremonezzi D, Moya M et al: Helium-neon laser
40:877-884, 2007.
reduces the infammatory process of arthritis, Photomed 
37. Mester E, Spiry T, Szende B et al: Effect of laser rays on
Laser Surg 28:125-129, 2010.
wound healing, Am J Surg 122:532-538, 1971.
55. Stelian J, Gil I, Habot B et al: Laser therapy is effective for
38. Schindl A, Schindl M, Pernerstorfer-Schoen H et al: Low
degenerative osteoarthritis. Improvement of pain and dis-
intensity laser therapy in wound healing: a review with
ability in elderly patients with degenerative osteoarthritis of
special respect to diabetic angiopathies, Acta Chirurgica
the knee treated with nalrow-band light therapy, J Am Geriatr
Austriaca 33(3):132-137, 2001.
Soc 40:23-26, 1992.
39. Surinchak JS, Alago ML, Mellamy RF et al: Effects of low-
 56. Gur A, Cosut A, Sarac AJ et al: Efficacy of different therapy
level energy lasers on the healing of full-thickness skin
regimes of low-power laser in painful osteoarthritis of the
defects, Lasers Surg Med 2(3):267-274, 1983.
 knee: a double-blind and randomized-controlled trial, Lasers
40.1
 Braverman B, McCarthy RJ, Ivankovich AD et al: Effect of
Surg Med 33:330-338, 2003.
 helium-neon and infrared laser iradiation on wound healing
 57. Hegedis B, Viharos L, Gervain M et al: The effect of low-
in rabbits, Lasers Surg Med 9(1):50-58, 1989.
level laser in knee osteoarthritis: a double-blind, randomized,
41. Lucas C, Criens-Poublon LJ, Cockrell CT et al: Wound
placebo-controlled trial, Photomed Laser Surg 27:577-584,
healing in cell studies and animal model experiments by low
2009.
level laser therapy: were clinical studies justified? A system-
 58. Tascioglu F, Armagan O, Tabak Y et al: Low power laser
atic review, Lasers Med Sci 17(2):110-134, 2002.
treatment in patients with knee osteoarthritis, Swiss Med
 42. Pinheiro ALB, Oliveira MG, Martins PPM et al: Biomodula-
Wkly 134(17-18):254-258, 2004.
tory effects of LLLT on bone regeneration, Laser Ther 13:73-
59. Brosseau L, Robinson V, Wells G et al: Low level laser 
79, 2001.
therapy (Classes I, II and IIl) for treating osteoarthritis,
43. Lirani-Galvao AP, Jorgetti V, da Silva OL: Comparative
Cochrane Database Syst Rev Issue 3. Art. No.: CD002046.
study of how low-level laser therapy and low-intensity pulsed
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD002046.pub2, 2004.
ultrasound affect bone repair in rats, Photomed Laser Surg
 60. Brosseau L, welch v, Wells GA et al: Low level laser therapy
24(6):735-740, 2006.
(Classes I, II and Ill) for treating rheumatoid arthritis,
44. Gerbi ME, Marques AM, Ramalho LM et al: Infrared laser
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews Issue 4. Art. No.:
light further improves bone healing when associated with
CD002049. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD002049.pub2, 2005.
bone morphogenic proteins: an in vivo study in a rodent
61. Meireles SM, Jones A, Jennings F et al: Assessiment of
model, Photomed Laser Surg 26(1):55-60, 2008.
the effectiveness of low-level laser therapy on the hands of
45. Kaya GS, Kaya M, Girsan N et al: Use of 808-nm light
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized double-
therapy to treat experimental chronic osteomyelitis induced 
blind controlled trial, Clin Rheymatol 29:501-509, 2010.
in fats by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus,
62. Logdberg-Andersson M, Mitzel S, Hazel A: Low level laser
Photmed Laser Surg 29:405-412, 2011.
therapy (LLLT) of tendinitis and myofascial pains—a ran-
46. Kizhner V, Krespi Y, Hall-Stoodley L et al: Laser-generated 
domized, double-blind, controlled study, Laser Therapy
shockwave for clearing medical device bioflms, Photomed
9:79-86, 1997.
Laser Surg 29:277-282, 2011.
63. Bjordal JM, Lopes-Martins RAB, Iversen VV: A random-
 47. Barber A, Luger JE, Karpf A et al: Advances in laser therapy
ized, placebo controlled trial of low leyel laser therapy for
for bone repair, Laser Ther 13:80-85, 2001.
activated Achilles tendinitis with microdialysis measurement
48. Cressoni MDC, Giusti HHKD, Piao AC et al: Effect of
of peritendinous prostaglandin E2 concentrations, Br J
GaAlAs laser irradiation on the epiphyseal cartilage of rats,
Sports Med 40:76-80, 2006.
Photmed Laser Surg 28:527-532, 2010.
64. Oliveira FS, Pinfldi CE, Parizoto NA et al: Effect of low
49. Guzzardella GA, Tigani D, Torricelli P et al: Low-power
level laser therapy (830 nm) with different therapy regimes
 diode laser stimulation of surgical osteochondral defects:
on the process of tissue repair in partial lesion calcaneous
Tesults after 24 weeks, Artif Cells Blood Substit Immobil
tendon, Lasers Surg Med 41:271-276, 2009.
Biotechnol 29(3):235-244, 2001.
65. Haker E, Lundeberg T: Is low-energy laser treatment effec-
50. Guzzardella GA, Mofrone G, Torricelli P et al: Assessment
tive in lateral epicondylalgia? J Pain Symptom Management
of low-power laser biostimulation on chondral lesions: an "in
6:241-246, 1991.
380
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
66. Tumilty S, Munn J, McDonough S et al: Low level laser
 81. Rochkind S, Nissan M, Razon N et al: Electrophysiological
treatment of tendinopathy: a systematic review with meta-
effect of HeNe laser on normal and injured sciatic nerve in
analysis, Photomed Laser Surg 28:3-16, 2010.
the rat, Acta Neurochir 83:125-130, 1986.
 67. Fung DT, Ng GY, Leung MC et al: Therapeutic low energy
 82. Rochkind S, Balt-Nea L, Razon N et al: Stimulatory effect
laser improves the mechanical strength of repairing medial
of He-Ne low dose laser on injured sciatic nerves of rats,
collateral ligament, Lasers Surg Med 31:91-96, 2002.
Neurosurgery 20:843-847, 1987.
68. De Bie RA, de Vet HC, Lenssen TF et al: Low-level laser
83. Rochkind S, Nissan M, Lubart R et al: The in-vivo nerve
therapy in ankle sprains: a randomized clinical trial, Arch.
response to direct low-energy-laser irradiation, Acta Neuro-
Phys Med Rehabil 79(11):1415-1420, 1998.
chir 94:74-77, 1988.
69. Chow R: Phototherapy and the peripheral nervous system,
84. Shin DH, Lee E, Hyun JK et al: Growth-associated protein-
Photomed Laser Surg 29:591-592, 2011.
43 is elevated in the injured rat sciatic nerve after low power
70. Moore KC, Naru H, Broome IJ: The effect of infra-red diode
laser irradiation, Neurosci Lett 344:71-74, 2003.
laser itradiation on the duration and severity of postoperative
85. Rochkind S: The role of laser phototherapy in nerve tissue
pain: a double blind trial, Laser Therapy 4:145-149, 1993.
regeneration and repair: research development with perspec-
71.
Snyder-Mackler L, Bork CE: Effect of helium-neon laser
tive for clinical application. In Proceedings of the World
iradiation on peripheral sensory nerve latency, Phys Ther
Association of Laser Therapy, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2004, pp
68:223-225, 1988.
94-95.
72. Lowe AS, Baster GD, Walsh DM et al: The effect of low-
 86. Rochkind S, Nissan M, Alon M et al: Effects of laser inradia-
aneiedua uys uodn uogeent (uu oee) isei Aisuu
tion on the spinal cord for the regeneration of crushed periph-
and antidromic conduction latencies in the human median
eral nerve in rats, Lasers Surg Med 28(3):216-219, 2001.
nerve: relevance of radiant exposure, Lasers Surg Med 14:40-
 87. Shamir MH, Rochkind S, Sandbank J et al: Double-blind
46, 1994.
randomized study evaluating regeneration of the rat tran-
 73. Basford JR, Daube JR, Hallman HO et al: Does low-intensity
sected sciatic nerve after suturing and postoperative low-
helium-neon laser inradiation alter sensory nerve action
power laser treatment, J Reconstr Microsurg 17:133-137,
potentials 0r distal latencies? Lasers Surg Med 10:35-39,
2001.
1990.
88. Miloro M, Halkias LE, Mallery S et al: Low-level laser
74. Whittaker P: Laser acupuncture: past, present, and future,
effect on neural regeneration in Gore-Tex tubes, Orat
Lasers Med Sci 19:69-80, 2004
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiot Endod 93:27-34,
75. Tsuchiya K, Kawatani M, Takeshige C et al: Laser ifradia-
2002.
tion abates neuronal responses to nociceptive stimulation of
 89. Gigo-Benato D, Geuna S, Rochkind S: Phototherapy for
rat-paw skin, Brain Res Bull 34(4):369-374, 1994.
enhancing peripheral nerve repair: a review of the literature,
76. Wedlock PM, Shephard RA: Cranial itradiation with GaAlAs
Muscle Nerve 31:694-701, 2005.
laser leads to naloxone reversible analgesia in rats, Psychot
 90. Draper WE, Schubert TA, Clemmons RM et al: Low-level
Rep 78(3):727-731, 1996.
laser therapy reduces time to ambulation in dogs after hemi-
77.0
Chow R, Armati P, Laakso E-L et al: Inhibitory effects of
laminectomy: a preliminary study, J Smalt Anim Pract
laser irradiation on peripheral mammalian nerves and rele-
53:465-469, 2012
vance to analgesic effects: a systematic review, Photo Med
 91. Naeser MA, Hamblin MR: Potential for transcranial laser of
Laser Surg 29:365-381, 2011.
LED therapy to treat stroke, traumatic brain injury, and neu-
78. Ay S, Dogan SK, Evcik D: Is low-level laser therapy effective
Todegenerative disease, Photomed Laser Surg 29:443-446,
in acute or chronic low back pain? Clin Rheumatol 29:905-
2011.
910, 2010.
 92. Oron A: Low-level laser therapy applied transcranially to rats
79. Kleinkort JA: Low-level laser therapy: new possibilities in
 after induction of stroke significantly reduces long-term neu-
pain management and rehab, Orthopaedic Prac 17(1):48-51,
Tological deficits, Stroke 37:2620-2624, 2006.
2005.
 93. Zhang L, Chopp M, Zhang ZG: A rat model of focal embolic
80. Bjordal JM, Couppe C, Chow R et al: A systematic review
cerebral ischemia, Brain Res 766:83-92, 1997.
 of low level laser therapy with location-specific doses for
 94. Zivin JA, Albers Gw, Bornstrin N et al: Effectiveness and
pain from chronic joint disorders, Austr J Physiother49:107-
safety of transcranial laser therapy for acute ischemic stroke,
116, 2003.
Stroke 40:1359- 1364, 2009.
Applications of Extracorporeal
Shockwave in Small
Animal Rehabilitation
April Durant and Darryl Millis
xtracorporeal shockwave therapy (ESwT) has been
 Focused generators produce pressure waves in a fuid
 in use since the 1970s, when its original application
medium when electrical energy is converted to mechanical
was to provide a noninvasive means to fragment
energy. These waves may be focused by refection of the
uroliths, allowing for subsequent passage of the small frag-
 pressure waves within the generator to the focal point,
ments through the urinary tract.l-3 Extracorporeal shock-
which is at the treatment site (Figure 22-3).6.13 The focused
waves have also been applied to the fragmentation of
waves behave as sound waves in the tissues, releasing
sialoliths, choledocholiths, and pancreatoliths. Applica-
energy when tissue density changes are encountered (i.e.,
tions to enhance bone healing began after observations of 
ligament to bone interface).36 At the interface of density
the effects of shockwaves on the pelvis during animal
change, part of the wave is transmitted while the other part
lithotripsy studies.$-7 These studies showed that a signif-
is refected.? The greater the change in tissue density, the
cant osteogenic response, specifically callous formation
 greater the energy released.
and bony remodeling, was elicited after exposure to extra-
Three types of focused shockwave generators exist:
corporeal shockwaves.
electrohydraulic, electromagnetic, and piezoelectric. Piezo-
The use of EswT has also been investigated for the
electric generators use crystals that expand and deform
treatment of human musculoskeletal diseases such as pain
when stimulated by high-voltage electricity, initiating a
associated with plantar fascitis, lateral epicondylitis, cal-
cifying tendinitis, and femoral head necrosis, as well as for 
 coils arranged in such a way as to generate opposite mag-
the treatment of delayed union and nonunion fractures.1.39
netic fields when high voltage electricity is applied.2.7 When
Integration into treatment of soft tissue disorders, such as
a high current pulse is released through the coil, a strong
treatment of pain and erectile dysfunction associated with
magnetic field is generated, creating a high current in the
Peyronie's disease or hypertonia secondary to stroke, has
opposing metal membrane. The membranes are forced
also gained favor.10.1
away from each other as a result of the opposing currents,
The use of ESWT in equine musculoskeletal disorders
causing compression of the surrounding fuid medium,
includes insertion desmopathies, bone spavin, tendon and
resulting in a shockwave.27.13 Electrohydraulic generators
ligamentous calcification, navicular disease, exostoses,
use a high-voltage spark gap, causing plasma bubble gen-
fractures and microfractures, back pain, and osteoarthritis
eration. Expansion of the bubble results in sonic pulse
(OA) of tarsometatarsal and distal intertarsal joints. Extra-
 propagation and subsequent collapse results in a reverse
corporeal shockwaves have been used in dogs as a part of
the treatment regimen for hypertrophic nonunions, tendo-
nitis, spondylosis, and OA46.12 (Figure 22-1).
Delivery of Energy
How Shockwaves Are Generated
 Delivery of energy to tissue requires the use of coupling gel
 in conjunction with a percussive handheld applicator.
Extracorporeal shockwaves are acoustic waves of high
 Energy can be focused via spherical arrangement of crys-
pressure and velocity produced outside of the body. These
 tals, spherical generator, or acoustic lenses. Focusing energy
waves are characterized by high-amplitude acoustic pres-
results in greater tissue depth penetration, up to 110 cm,
sures (20-100 megapascals [MPa]) with a short build-up
with a rapid decline of energy at the periphery, allowing an
time of approximately 5-10 nanoseconds, an exponential
intense amount of energy delivery to a relatively small
decay to baseline to a negative defection of approximately
area.6.13 Eighty percent of the maximum shockwave pres-
10 MPa, and a wave cycle time of 300 nanoseconds (Figure
sure resides in the focal area. Hence, its max imum value is
22-2)26.13.14 These pressure waves differ from ultrasound
 in the focus with a decrease in pressure at the periphery of
waves because of their lower frequency, minimal tissue
the focal area. Piezoelectric generators have a small focal
absorption, and lack of a thermal effect.
volume with high-energy fux values and low overall energy
381
382
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
focal volume
focal point
primary wave
focused waves
Figure 22-1  A focused extracorporeal shockwave unit.
ellipsoid -
electrode
Pressure in bar
1 μs
500
p+: 510 bar
Figure 22-4  A spark gap focused shockwave generator. The shape
pulse width (-6db):
of the parabola determines the depth of penetration of focused 
extracorporeal shockwaves. (Courtesy of Pulsevet, Inc.)
290 ns
An altermative to focused extracorporeal shockwaves
p-: -90 bar
exists as a radial extracorporeal shockwave device, or a
ballistic generator. Shockwaves from this device are gener-
 ated pneumatically (mechanical concussion) and are prop-
agated through tissues in a radial patterm. Radial pressure
waves have lower energies, characterized by a slower rise
 time, and a negative component that is the same magnitude
rise time: 33 ns
 as the positive component.!s The energy applied by this
Figure 22-2 Pressure profile of an extracorporeal shock wave.
device is greatest at the applicator-skin interface and
Note the rapid increase to a relatively high pressure, followed by a
 decreases proportionally to the square of the distance from
rapid decline. (Courtesy of Pulsevet, Inc.)
the applicator head, applying energy to a wider circumfer-
release of energy occurs over a relatively wide area with a
rapid decrease in energy delivered to deeper tissues.56.12
Research Regarding Extracorporeal
Shockwave Therapy
General Biologic Effects
The primary effects of shockwaves are produced by the
generation of mechanical forces. Secondary effects occur
by indirect generation of mechanical forces through cavita-
tion. Compression and tension generation occurs as the
Figure 22-3  A trode used to apply extracorporeal shockwaves to
shockwave travels through the tissue. Varying amounts of
a focused tissue depth. (Courtesy of Pulsevet, Inc.)
refection and transmission of energy occur at varying
interfaces. In bone, for example, the amount of energy
transfer. Electromagnetic generators also have a small focal
attenuation depends on the amount of cancellous bone,
volume and high-energy fux, but tend to be less concen-
because attenuation of the shockwave increases exponen-
trated than the piezoelectric system. Electrohydraulic gen-
tially with increased bone thickness. This is largely due to
 erators produce the largest focal volumes with lower energy
the various tissue interfaces; hence most of the energy from
flux density and overall high energy transfer.13
the shockwave is deposited in cancellous bone.26
Chapter 22
Applications of Extracorporeal Shockwave in Small Animal Rehabilitation 
383
 Cavitation bubbles are made during the tensile phase of
Decreases in calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) in
the shockwave, and as size increases, a large amount of
free nerve endings and dorsal root ganglia (DRG) of rats
energy is delivered to the bubble. Cavitation bubbles
after application of EswT to the plantar skin of the
formed secondary to shockwave-generated compression
hindlimb support the theory that altered nerve function of
and tension forces have the potential for deposition of large
the locally treated area may be the source of analgesic
amounts of energy after subsequent collapse, releasing
effects 29.30 Substance P gained interest as a mode of anal-
cs uononpoid ameiaduaj-uau pue saf am Asiua-aay
gesia, as an increase in basal concentration was noted 24
Cavitation at the surface interface is the mechanism by
hours after ESwT application to the femur of a rabbit,
which fragmentation of uroliths occurs.? Cavitation also
followed by a gradual decrease in basal secretion over 6
leads to the production and release of free radicals, ulti-
weeks. This decrease was attributed to a potential degenera-
mately creating chemical reactions within the tissue.
tion of nerve endings in the treated area.3' Later studies by
ESWT may also increase cell membrane permeability. The
Haake and colleagues,32-34 did not find evidence of ESWT
 growth and collapse of cavitation bubbles, which may lead
infuence on spinal antinociceptive opioid mechanisms or
to surface deformation and damage is one potential mecha-
on nonopioid mechanisms (substance P or CGRP). ESWT
nism of action for increasing membrane permeability.1 &
did not appear to activate peripheral nerves to induce anal.
A dose-dependent cytotoxicity or decrease in cell via-
gesia, as evidenced by a lack of increase in c-Fos protein
bility is present with increased numbers of waves and
 Or its gene expression.32 Local desensitization and subse-
energy density. Different cell populations differ in their
 quent reinnervation has been theorized by Murata and col-
sensitivity to shockwave energy. Bone marrow, for example,
leagues,33 in which an increase in activating transcription
has a decreased sensitivity compared with malignant cell 
factor 3 and growth-associated phosphoprotein 43 was
lines.'9 Human fibroblasts have an increased sensitivity to
measured in rat DRG neurons after treatment with ESWT.
higher numbers of shockwaves rather than the higher
Although a definitive mechanism of action and therefore
 energy of shockwaves, decreasing the growth potential of
treatment protocol for analgesia still remains to be eluci-
fibroblasts while in suspension.?0 The reepithelialization
dated, Takahashi and colleagues36 described a cumulative
rate of skin wounds in pigs is also affected by EswT, and
effect of shockwaves on nerve fibers on the skin of rats,
the effects depend on the energy level used.21
suggesting that multiple applications of low-energy shock-
waves may provide longer-lasting antinociceptive effects.
Analgesia
McClure and colleagues?s and Abed and colleagues37
The mechanism of action for induction of analgesia and
investigated analgesia induced by focused or radial shock-
tissue healing is poorly understood. Human patients tend to
waves. Twenty-four horse limbs were assigned to receive
exhibit a bimodal analgesic effect, in which an initial
control (sham treatment), ESWT, or radial pressure wave
decrease in pain 3-4 days after initial treatment has been
treatment (RPWT). Analysis of cutaneous analgesia
atributed to the direct effects of shockwaves on nociceptors
revealed a substantial increase in cutaneous threshold to
and impaired synthesis of substance P.?? After the initial
electrical stimuli for ESWT and RPWT at day 3. Analysis
analgesic effects, a gradual recurrence of pain is noted with
of neuropeptide concentrations, substance P, and CGRP
a subsequent gradual resolution of pain noted over 3-4
did not reveal a significant difference between the
weeks that is attributed to angiogenesis and tissue matrix
to be statistically lower in nonfocused radial pressure
consistent in chronically affected patients rather than acutely
affected patients.?* Horses have also exhibited bimodal anal-
tion. Disruption of the myelin sheath in medium- to large-
 gesia; however, the mechanism remains unknown.13
diameter axons was noted under transmission electron
It has been hypothesized that analgesia is induced by hyper-
microscopy, potentially creating a prolonged conduction
 stimulation of nociceptors resulting in an intense sensory input
velocity in radial pressure wave-treated nerves.'5
 to the periaqueductal gray area of the midbrain. This sensory
There appear to be a number of potential mechanisms
input promotes descending inhibition and modulation of
whereby ESwT exerts analgesic effects. The method of
sensory stimulus transmission through the dorsal horms of the
application, area of application, energy level, and fre-
V setou lo a,  se umo po s
quency of application may have a role in determining
second theory is that induction of cell damage from shockwave
whether the effect is directly related to pain pathway modi-
application prevents appropriate membrane potentials required 
fication or stimulation of tissue healing.
for transmission of signals.'s It has been shown that shock-
Cartilage and Chondrocytes
waves induce production of cytokines and growth factors,
There is tremendous interest in evaluating ESwT as a
treatment for joint conditions, such as OA. Mueller and
of cytokine and growth factor release, a decline in infamma-
colleagues? reported on the analgesic benefit of radial
tion and swelling, with short-tenm analgesia, is noted.
ESWT for hip OA in dogs, characterized by improved
384
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
ground reaction force difference between limbs 4 weeks
but very subtle changes were noticed in the control non-
following shockwave therapy and a potential long-term
transected knees and the ACL-transected plus ESWT
benefit of at least 3 months following treatment. Results
groups (single treatment with 800 shocks, 0.18 mJ/mm?).
of analgesia were similar to a study of canine stife OA,
The articular cartilage of ACL-transected rats showed sig-
in which three shockwave treatments (200 shockwaves
nificant increases in cartilage degradation and chondrocyte
were applied to each of four sites using a 20-mm focused
apoptosis and significant decreases in subchondral bone
depth applicator, followed by 175 shocks to each of the
remodeling compared with the control and ACL-transected
same four sites using a 5-mm focused depth applicator, at
plus ESWT rats. In addition, the ACL-transected plus
an energy fux density of 0.14 mJ/mm², for a total of 1500
ESWT rats had significantly decreased cartilage degrada-
shocks) were administered 3 weeks apart. An improvement
tion and increased chondrocyte activity comparable to non-
in peak vertical force and vertical impulse was evident at
transected controls. The authors concluded that ESWT
21 days and continued to improve to the end of the study,
may have chondroprotective effects and improved sub-
 at 98 days. Despite these improvements, the changes were
chondral bone remodeling in this rat OA knee model. In
not statistically significant from control groups perhaps
fact, EswT of the subchondral bone may result in greatly
because of small numbers of animals in each group.' In
reduced progression of OA.43 Another study by the same
contrast, Francis and colleagues?α reported significant
group also showed that ESWT reduced cartilage changes
improvement in ground reaction forces of dogs with elbow
in a rat OA model, with the most beneficial effects seen 4
 or hip OA when compared with control groups. A follow-up
weeks after ESWT. The group receiving ESWT had sig-
study of another group of dogs with elbow OA confirmed
nificantly lower histologic changes, increased collagen
-aaodlu jo qunoue aun ju pasaaans pue saupuy asan
type II in the articular cartilage, and increased vascular
ment with ESwT is similar to what would be expected
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), BMP-2, and osteocal-
when treating with an average nonsteroidal antiinfamma.
cin in the subchondral bone compared with the untreated
tory drug (NSAID), despite the fact that the dogs were
rats.*4 Studies in a horse OA model, however, indicated no
already receiving treatment for their arthritis, including
effect on subchondral bone, although increases in the
NSAIDs.39
serum biochemical markers osteocalcin and C-terminal
Several studies have investigated how ESWT may affect
telopeptide indicated bone remodeling.45
the processes involved in OA. One study evaluated the
Clinical function and the pain of OA may also be modu-
effects of ESWT on the metabolism of human OA chon-
lated by ESwT. In a rat OA model, walking duration on a
drocytes in vitro, especially the expression of β, integrin,
treadmill was significantly extended 4, 7, and 14 days after
interleukin (IL)-10, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-
ESWT in rats with knee OA, but began decreasing by day
21.46 Although OA resulted in increased expression of
with knee OA undergoing total joint replacement. After
 CGRP in DRG neurons innervating the knee as compared
isolation, chondrocytes underwent ESwT with different
with normal rats, ESWT reduced CGRP-positive DRG
parameters of impulses, energy levels, and energy fux
neurons, suggesting that ESWT is a useful treatment for
density. Chondrocyte intracellular IL-10 and TNF-α levels
knee OA.
were evaluated. At baseline, osteoarthritic chondrocytes
Effects of EswT on articular cartilage are of some
expressed significantly higher levels and IL-10 and TNF-C.
concerm, however, because if disruption of the structure of
levels. Following ESWT, there was a significant decrease
cartilage occurs secondary to ESWT application, joint
of IL-10 and TNF-α intracellular levels. IL-10 levels
 health may be compromised. Gross disruption of cartilage
 decreased with any number of impulses and energy levels,
integrity was absent after radial shockwave application to
whereas TNF-o decreased at middle energies. ESWT sig-
equine third metacarpal or metatarsal bone.?6 A dose-
nificantly reduced the nitric oxide level in the synovial
 dependent increase in lactate dehydrogenase after radial
cavity of knee joints in a rabbit anterior cruciate ligament 
 shockwave application supported the thought of increased
(ACL) transection model as compared with untreated
chondrocyte membrane permeability.'6 Focused shock-
rabbits with cruciate ligament transection.41 Chondrocyte
wave effects on articular cartilage have also been investi-
apoptosis and the severity of cartilage lesions were also
 gated and these studies indicated a lack of radiographic,
less in rabbits with OA treated with ESWT. The authors
histologic, and macroscopic changes within joint cartilage
concluded that ESwT may be a useful treatment for knee
of growing rabbits.7 In vitro investigation of effects of
OA because of the reduced progression of OA in rabbits.
focused shockwaves on articular chondrocytes revealed
Although promising, further studies are necessary to deter-
a dose-dependent increase in cytotoxicity, as well as
mine if ESwT may modulate the changes seen with OA.
 decreased proliferative potential at higher energy doses.43
Another study evaluated the effects of ESwT on
Another study evaluated a single bout of ESwT (1500
the development of OA in a rat ACL transection OA
shockwaves of 0.5 mJ/mm?) on the structural integrity of
 model.42 OA of the knee was detected radiographically 12
articular cartilage of rat femoral heads in vivo.4 Although
weeks after study initiation in the ACL-transected group,
there were no changes in histologic scores after EsWT,
Chapter 22
Applications of Extracorporeal Shockwave in Small Animal Rehabilitation
385
positive immunostaining for tenascin-C and chitinase 3-
mechanical strength, making these structures susceptible
like protein 1 was found up to 10 weeks after ESwT in
to tearing.$ The amount of energy and number of pulses
treated cartilage and collagen type II mRNA was increased
delivered should be taken into consideration, because
 1 and 4 weeks after ESWT. Other changes included expan-
tendons and ligaments appear to be more susceptible to
sion of the rough-surfaced endoplasmic reticulum, detach-
ment of the cell membrane, and necrotic chondrocytes.
Radial pressure wave application has been investigated
Because all of these changes have been associated with
for the treatment of various tendinopathies, including inser-
early OA, there is some concem that high-energy ESWT
tional tendinopathies, with treatment successes reported
directly applied to cartilage might cause degenerative
Supenpeaa Apmgs e uI ogs suaped paean jo %0g oy dn u!
 changes in hyaline cartilage.
shockwave therapy for the treatment of supraspinatus cal-
cifying tendinopathy, one dog exhibited subjective and
Tendon and Ligaments
objective improvement in lameness 21 days after shock-
 In collagenase-induced models of suspensory ligament
wave therapy.6' Another dog in the same study was bilater-
desmitis, destruction of abnormal metaplastic tissue and
ally affected and improvement was noted at 28 and 49 days
increased numbers of collagen fibrils was noted on histo-
after treatment in the right limb but not in the left limb. In
logic examination, suggesting possible promotion
1of
both cases, disruption of the calcifed material was not
healing of desmitis with ESWT.25° Evaluation of the bone-
apparent after treatment.
tendon interface in dogs and rabbits has revealed increased
ESWT has also been evaluated for the treatment of
neovascularization after treatment, as indicated by an
patellar ligament desmitis in dogs after undergoing tibial
increase in neovessels and angiogenic markers, such as
 plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO).62 Dogs that had TPLO
vascular endothelial growth factor, eNOS, and proliferat-
ing cell nuclear antigen expression 51.52 In a collagenase-
preoperatively and 4, 6, and 8 weeks after TPLO. At 4 and 
 induced patellar tendinopathy model in rabbits, increased
6 weeks, treated dogs received 600 shocks with an energy
tensile strength, hydroxyproline concentration, and teno-
level of 0.15 mJ/mm?, with a focused depth of application
cyte numbers, in addition to increased neovascularization,
of 5 mm on the patellar ligament. There was a significant
were reported.33
difference in distal patellar ligament thickness between
In a rat model of collagenase-induced Achilles tendo-
 groups at 6 and 8 weeks postoperatively. No significant
nitis, low-energy ESWT induced repair coinciding with an
ultrasonographic differences were found.
increase in transforming growth factor beta, (TGF-β,) and 
 Soft Tissue and Wound Healing
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) concentrations with
tenocyte proliferation, neovascularization and progressive
Soft tissue healing may be promoted as a result of neovas-
tissue regeneration, whereas higher energies impaired
cularization and an increase in vascularity of the area.
DNA, extracellular matrix synthesis, and biomechanical
 Neovascularization enhances healing and decreases pain
characteristics of tendons.?6 Increases in TGF-β, expres-
associated with injury and can be seen as early as 4 weeks
sion were noted in early tendon repair stages and IGF-I
 after treatment.54 In a dorsal skin random fap model of
expression was increased throughout the healing process,
rodents, there was a significant reduction in the distal
indicating that TGF-β, and IGF-I are important mediators
necrotic area of faps and a significant increase in tissue
in ESWT-stimulated cell proliferation and tissue regenera-
perfusion with a single treatment of ESWT when compared
tion within a healing tendon.2650 An increase in metachro-
with control skin faps. These findings indicate that a single
masia was also noted and may be an indication of increased
  S      a
extracellular matrix production by cell 50.54 Increases in
flap tissue perfusion. Increased expression of VEGF and
glycosaminoglycan and protein synthesis have been seen
proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression within the
as early as 3 hours after ESwT application, with an overall
fap ischemic area indicated induction of neovasculariza-
tendency toward anabolic metabolism. Acceleration of
tion and cellular proliferation, a proposed mechanism for
healing may therefore be attributed to an initiation of
enhanced fap survival. A reduction in leukocyte infltration
ESWT-induced stimulation to the tissue with a subsequent
and suppressed TNF-c suggested reduction of the inflam-
 decrease in cellular metabolism over 6 weeks.55
matory response; altermatively, it may result from the
Increased edema and inflammatory cells in the
 decrease in necrotic tissue within the ischemic zone.63
paratenon of rabbits has been described and could indicate
 Schaden and colleagues4 studied the effects of radial
that although ESwT has the potential to treat various
shockwaves for the treatment of soft tissue wounds in
tendinopathies via induction of tissue regeneration, there
humans. Response to treatment, defined as 100% wound
is also the potential for harm of tendinous tissue with
epithelialization, was seen in 75% of wounds, in which
causal factors or site specificity of the wound did not infu-
ence success of treatment. Acute wounds were more likely
or higher energy fux densities, and may decrease the
to heal completely than chronic wounds and large chronic
386
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
wounds demonstrated suboptimal healing. Overall, the use
in racehorses in an ex vivo model. More specifically.
of unfocused, low-energy ESwT on patients with acute
focused shockwaves were associated with an increase in
and chronic soft tissue wounds was associated with com-
microcrack density and radial shockwaves were associated
plete closure of 75% of wounds.
with an increase in microcrack length.7s In a study evaluat-
 Haupt and colleagues? described the effects of EsWT
ing the acute effects of ESWT on the third metacarpal and
on partial thickness wound healing in piglets. Wounds
metatarsal bone, however, McClure and colleagues? dis-
treated with low doses of shockwaves had significantly
covered that evidence of cortical microfractures and soft
enhanced rates of epithelialization. On histopathologic
tissue damage was absent. Scintigraphic, thermographic,
examination, wounds treated with low-dose shockwaves
and histologic assessment of ESWT effects on the fourth
had a larger number of dilated vessels and macrophages in
metatarsal bone in normal horses did not reveal evidence
the perivascular space. The newly formed epithelial layer
was twice the thickness as that of control wounds and
tures is not an indication of nonmal mechanical properties,
wounds treated with high-dose shockwaves. In irradiated
 as accumulation of microscopic damage was not detected
wounds, the rate of healing was increased by 50% when
 in canine femurs until 15% of the modulus of elasticity was
low-dose shockwave treatment was used.
 lost, indicating that accumulation is threshold dependent.12
The reepithelialization rate is inhibited with high-dose
 McClure and colleagues? postulated that the mechanisms 
for stimulation of osteogenesis included bone marrow
reepithelialization. Low energies appear to have a stimula-
hypoxia, subperiosteal hemorrhage, increased regional
tory effect on reepithelialization rate.4
blood flow and activation of osteogenic factors rather than
a result of cortical microfractures.? Evaluation of osteons
Bone Healing
 in this study revealed the potential of ESWT to provide full
Bone healing is thought to be enhanced by extracorporeal
cortical thickness stimulation of osteonal remodeling.
shockwaves,65-67 possibly as a result of induction of micro-
 In humans, treatment of nonunion fractures with nonin-
fractures within the trabecular bone, resulting in release of
vasive EswT resulted in a 76% success rate, compared
osteoinductive growth factors and the formation of a frac-
with a 79% success rate with surgical therapy. The success
ture hematoma. Bone marrow stromal growth and differ-
 rate improved when there was greater biologic activity in
entiation of osteoprogenitor cells have been correlated
the nonunion, with a success rate of 100% for hypertrophic
with induction of TGF-β, and VEGF, indicating that
nonunions and 36.4% success rate in atrophic nonunion
recruitment  of  bone-marrow  mesenchymal  cells  may
fractures. Current theories for enhancement of fracture
tagada auoq paod Lmsa u alon Areud e au
healing include increases in bone metabolism secondary to
Increases in BMP-2, BMP-3, BMP-4, and BMP-7 were
increases in bone growth factors such as TGF-β, basic
documented as early as 4 weeks following EswT treat-
fibroblast growth factor, VEGF, and osteocalcin measured
ment in a segmental defect model in rats, suggesting a vital
 in a rabbit atrophic nonunion model.?α In a radial nonunion
role of BMP in ESWT-induced cell proliferation and bone
model performed in dogs, 80% of the dogs exhibited a
bridging callous 6 weeks after shockwave treatment; by 9
physical stimulus of ESWT into an intracellular mitogenic
weeks there was narrowing of the fracture gap and an
response suggests that ESWT induces mitogen-activated
 increase in the bridging callous, and finally complete bony
protein kinases, extracellular signal-regulated kinase, and
union at 12 weeks following treatment. Persistent radio-
p38 kinase, contributing to bone regeneration in a rat
 graphic nonunion was present in four of five of the control
segmental bone defect.7? Growth factors in tum induce
dogs and an incomplete bone union was evident in the last
neovascularization, and recruit inducible osteoprogenitor
control dog. Wang and colleagues? described the effects
cells, resulting in osteoblast proliferation and bone forma-
of EswT on an acute fracture model on 16 tibiae of
tion.24.70 Endothelial NO synthase and an increase in BMP
eight laboratory dogs. In this study, radiographic callous
expression have been associated with osteosymthesis in
fonmation was not significantly increased from control
treated areas. In a rabbit model, treated femurs were char-
specimens until 12 weeks following treatment, although
acterized by increases in periosteal bone formation second-
measurements were consistently greater in the treated
 ary to an earlier increase in periosteal and trabecular bone
group by 4 weeks. Cortical bone at 12 weeks was histologi-
disruption.27
cally more dense, thicker, and heavier than control callous,
Energy levels that are too great may have deleterious
signifying the potential advantage of treating acute frac-
effects on bone, however. Studies conducted on rabbits
tures that have the potential of becoming nonunions. In
reported soft tissue and medullary edema, decreased blood
addition, fractured bone treated with high-energy ESWT
fow and bone metabolism, periosteal detachment, and
 has increased bone mineral density, higher ash and calcium
even fracture of cortical bone, with an increase in fre-
content, and higher peak load, peak stress, and elastic
Other findings of microdamage of cortical bone were noted
can be assumed that ESWT treatment improves the quality
Chapter 22
Applications of Extracorporeal Shockwave in Small Animal Rehabilitation
387
and mechanical qualities of bone during fracture repair.
was associated with improved left ventricular function.
 Shockwave therapy is associated with decreased incidence
ESWT may theoretically be extended for use in vascular
 of disturbed fracture healing, and may be indicated for use
complications, such as venous and arterial thrombi dissolu-
 in patients with multiple fractures, open fractures, animals
tion or modification of arterial plaques, as visible histo-
with a concurrent systemic disease, or geriatric animals.24
morphologic changes were documented when used on
ESWT also appears to be an effective treatment for
normal human aortic specimens in vitro.? Facilitation of
human patients with osteonecrosis of the femoral head.
endothelial progenitor cells secondary to ESwT has been
Wang and colleagues?1 compared use of ESWT treatment
associated with increased relative blood fow recovery in
versus core decompression and bone grafting. Patients
chronic ischemia of the myocardium, as well as in the
treated with ESwT had significantly improved pain and
hindimb.2s.36.s9 Neovascularization occurred via upregula-
Harris hip scores at each follow up. Overall, 79% of
tion of VEGF as well as stromal cell-derived factor 1, a
 patients showed improvement after treatment with ESWT
chemoattractant that plays an important role in hematopoi
and a trend toward a decrease in size of the lesion at each
 etic stem cell homing and function.
follow-up interval. In the rabbit model of avascular necro-
sis of the femoral head, an increase in VEGF mRNA
Application of Extracorporeal
expression was noted as early as 1 week after shockwave
Shockwave Treatment
treatment and was maintained for 8 weeks after treatment;
VEGF protein expression peaked at 4 weeks and was main-
Light anesthesia or heavy sedation of the veterinary patient
tained for 12 weeks.?2 Increased neovascularization was 
is generally administered before applying focused shock-
 noted within regions of new bone formation 12 weeks after
wave treatment to improve patient comfort. In a study
initial ESWT treatment in these rabbits, leading to the
investigating the effects of radial shockwaves on the treat-
conclusion that EsWT therapy may promote repair of sub-
ment of hip OA, 18 dogs were treated without the use of
chondral bone in avascular necrosis of the femoral head in
sedation or anesthesia without evidence of adverse effects
rabbits.
related to pain.? A study in human patients compared
ESWT may also be useful in treating osteomyelitis.
effects of ESWT application in the absence of local anes-
Chronic osteomyelitis was induced in rabbits by injecting
thetics for the treatment of chronic plantar fasciitis and
Staphylococcus aureus into the proximal tibia in one
found that the pain score was significantly less in patients
study.83 Focused ESWT was applied twice to the infected
without local anesthetic.90 The hair should be clipped over
limbs 4 and 5 weeks after inoculation. Signs of bacterial
the site of application because air attenuates the sound
spread were not detectable after ESWT. Systemic indica-
waves, making the treatment less efficacious (Figure 22-5).
tors of infection were also unchanged. However, histologic
The use of ultrasound gel between the skin and applicator
scores of osteomyelitis were significantly decreased in the
is also necessary to eliminate air. A thorough understand-
 ESWT group compared with the untreated control, although
ing of the anatomy of the area where shockwaves are to be
S. aureus was still detectable. This study suggests that
 applied is necessary. Application of ESWT to a joint should
ESWT may be beneficial as an adjunct treatment of chronic
bone infections.
Cardiovascular
Recent investigation of the effects of ESWT for the treat-
ment of cardiovascular diseases has yielded promising
results. Low-energy ESWT effectively induced angiogen-
esis and improved myocardial perfusion and cardiac func-
perfusion and cardiac function was also investigated in
tory angina pectoris without adverse effects.86.87 Uwatoku
and colleagues*4 recently investigated the effects of ESWT
treatment on left ventricular remodeling secondary to acute
myocardial infarction. Acute myocardial infarction was
induced in a porcine model and then treated with ESwT 3
days or 4 weeks after myocardial insult. Results indicated
that treatment with ESWT in the acute phase resulted in
improved left ventricular remodeling and increased capil-
Figure 22-5  Application of extracorporeal shock wave treatment
lary density in the infarcted myocardial border zone.
to an elbow joint of a dog. Note that the hair has been clipped and
ultr asound gel has been applied.
388
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
be directed at the insertion of the joint capsule rather than
cavitation induction with ESWT. As a result, major arteries
the articular cartilage of the joint. Treatment of the entire
and nerves should be excluded from the focal zone.2.9
joint capsule insertion regions may be more efficacious.
 However, nerves and vessels appear to be less sensitive to
When applying ESWT, the applicator should be gently
the effects of ESwT as compared with other tissues.
moved along the joint capsule insertion sites and mildly
rotated to be certain that all areas are treated. When treating
Indications for Use
ligamentous or tendinous injuries, direction of the wave
should be in a proximal to distal direction. The optimal
ESWT may be beneficial as an ancillary treatment for OA
energy density, number of shock waves applied, and number
as part of the multimodal approach to therapy of this condi-
of sites per application has yet to be elucidated and guide-
tion. Improved weight bearing and passive range of motion
lines for application are generally provided by the manu-
are similar to results expected with NSAID use. In patients
facturer.4 In general, 500-1000 shocks are applied for most
that are unable to tolerate the administration of NSAIDs,
conditions. Wounds should be treated with low energy
extracorporeal shockwaves may serve as a useful, nonin-
levels, whereas nonunion fractures and OA may be treated
vasive altermative for treatment of osteoarthritic conditions.
with higher energy levels. The optimal frequency of appli-
Anecdotally, treatment of conditions affecting the elbow,
cation is also uncertain, but generally two treatments 3-4
 hip, or back may respond better than other joints. ESWT
weeks apart are recommended for most conditions.
has been used for delayed or nonunion fractures. Tendi-
Improvement of conditions such as OA may occur for
nopathies and ligament conditions may also respond to
several months after treatment.
ESWT. Wounds may also benefit from treatment with
ESWT, especially if they are large wounds treated in the
Adverse Events and Precautions with Use
acute phase of wound healing. ESWT may provide some
of ESWT
antiinfammatory treatment of soft tissues, recently attrib-
uted to a rapid enhancement of eNOS activity in human
Negative effects may be observed with application of high-
vein endothelial cells."
energy shockwaves, a large number of shocks adminis-
tered, or if application is focused on single areas of sensitive
Contraindications to Shockwave Therapy
structures. Lower energy levels generally reduce the risk
of deleterious effects. Caution is advised in young or devel-
Extracorporeal shockwaves should not be used in dogs sus-
oping animals, because directing shockwaves over an open 
pected of having immune-mediated joint disease, infectious
physis has been implicated in the development of focal
arthritis, neoplastic disease, diskospondylitis, or unstable
tibial growth plate dysplasia in rats.91 However, other
fractures, or in dogs with neurologic deficits. Lee and
studies have contradicted Yeaman's results, demonstrating
colleagues°6 studied the effects of various doses of EsWT
that under human shockwave therapy conditions, damage
on the spinal cord of rabbits. Neurologic deficits were not
to the tibial and femoral epiphyses was not evident in a
apparent after shockwave application; however, varying
rabbit model.92.93 Vaterlein and colleagues47 and Lissenhop
degrees of microscopic changes were present, including
 and colleagues94 reported shockwave-induced intramedul-
myelin damage and neuronal loss.% Use of EsWT near gas-
lary ossification with slight shortening of the treated leg in
flled cavities or an organ should be avoided, as the risk for
rabbits; however, this shortening was not clinically signifi-
cant. Interestingly, cartilage has been found to have less
 Delivery of shockwaves over lung fields, brain, heart, major 
detrimental effects associated with shockwave therapy.
blood vessels, nerves, and a gravid uterus should be avoided.
even with higher energy levels.27 The explanation for this
One study investigating the effect of shockwave application
is umknown, but it has been postulated that the decreased
to pregnant rabbits at different gestational stages found
vascularity of cartilage may decrease deleterious effects,
that congestion and parenchymal hemorrhage was present
as cavitation bubble formation requires free fuid to fonm
 in the liver, lung, and kidney of fetuses exposed in the early
before tissue damage takes place.
 gestational period.97
The most common side effects after shockwave therapy
 Avoiding application to sites with neoplasia or infection
include petechiae and bruising. High-energy fux densities
has been recommended because of the potential of induc-
may be associated with small hematoma formation and
ing metastasis or septicemia from physical displacement
local swelling at the application site 24.9 Patients may have
of neoplastic cells or bacteria.?" In mouse melanoma
 discomfort after application, requiring the use of analgesic
and prostate tumor models, lithotripter shockwaves were
 medications. Corticosteroids and NSAIDs are generally
 applied to transplanted tumor cells on the hindlimb of each
not used unless necessary. Interstitial damage of arterial
mouse. Enhanced metastasis was attributed to shockwave
walls can develop if they are within the focal zone, result-
treatment secondary to cavitation.98 9 Conversely, enhance-
ing in rupture, vasoconstriction, or increased permeability.
ment of chemotherapeutic effects was observed when
Repetitive action potentials of nerves can result from
regional exposure to shockwaves was used in combination
Chapter 22
Applications of Extracorporeal Shockwave in Small Animal Rehabilitation
389
with intravenous bleomycin and cisplatin. Proposed mech-
13. McClure SR, Merritt DK: Extracorporeal shock-wave
anisms for this finding include increased penmeability as
therapy for equine musculoskeletal disorders, Compendium
a result of hydrodynamic fow. Combination therapy
25:68-75, 2003
resulted in inhibition of cancer cell proliferation and tumor
14. Sturtevant B: Shock wave physics of lithotripters. In Smith
A, Badlani GH, Bagley DH, editors: Smith's textbook of
growth in rats, and these effects appeared to be dose
endocrinology, St Louis, 1996, Quality Medical Publishing.
dependent: 100-102
15. Bolt DM, Burba DJ, Hubert JD et al: Determination of
functional and morphologic changes in palmar digital
Summary
nerves after nonfocused extracorporeal shock wave treat-
ment in horses, Am J Vet Res 65:1714-1718, 2004.
 Extracorporeal shockwave therapy appears to have several
16. Byron CR, Benson BM, Stewart AA et al: Effects of radial
applications in canine rehabilitation. Wound healing.
shock waves on membrane permeability and viability of
Osteoarthritis, delayed and nonunion fractures, and liga-
chondrocytes and structure of articular cartilage in equine
ment and tendon conditions seem to be positively infu-
cartilage explants, Am J Vet Res 66:1757-1763, 2005.
enced by treatment with ESWT. Further information is
17. Boening KJ, Loffeld S, Weitkamp K et al: Radial extracor-
needed regarding the energy level, number of shocks,
poreal shock wave therapy for chronic insertion desmopa-
thy of the proximal suspensory ligament, Proceedings
and frequency of application to provide the optimal
26th Ann Conv Am Assoc Equine Pract 46:203-207,
treatment for various conditions. In addition, additional
2000.
research is required to further understand the mechanisms
18. Sturtevant B: Shock wave physics of lithotriptors. In Smith
 of action.
AD, Badlani GH, Bagley DH et al, editors: Smith's text-
book of endourology, St Louis, 1996, Quality Medical
REFERENCES
Publishing.
1. Dahlberg J, Fitch G, Evans RB et al: The evaluation of
19. Yang C, Heston WDW, Gulati S et al: The effect of high
extracorporeal shockwave therapy in naturally occurring
 energy shock waves (HESw) on human bone marrow, Uro!
 osteoarthitis of the stife joint in dogs, Vet Comp Orthop
Res 16:427-429, 1988.
Traumatol 18:147-152, 2005.
20. Johannes EJ, Sukul DMKSK, Bijma AM et al: Effects of
 2. McClure SR, Van Sickle D, White MR: Effects of extracor-
high energy shockwaves on normal human fibroblasts in
poreal shock wave therapy on bone, Vet Surg 33:40-48,
suspension, J Surg Res 57:677-681, 1994.
2004.
 21. Haupt G, Chvapil M: Effect of shock waves on the healing
 3. Adams LG, Senior DF: Electrohydraulic and extracorporeal
of partial-thickness wounds in piglets, J Surg Res 49:45-48,
shock-wave lithotripsy, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
1990.
Pract 29:293-302, 1999.
22. Ogden JA, Ogden DA: Electrohydraulic shock wave
 4. Johannes EJ, Kaulesar SDMKS, Matura E: High energy
therapy: bimodal response (abst.), Proceedings. 5th Cong 
shock waves for the treatment of nonunions: an experiment
Int Soc Musculoskeletal Shockwave Ther 2l, 2002.
in dogs, J Surg Res 57:246-252, 1994.
23. Helbig K, Herbert C, Schostok T et al: Correlations between
5. Ogden JA, Toth-Kischkat A, Schultheiss R: Principles of
the duration of pain and the success of shock wave therapy,
shock wave therapy, Clin Orthop Res 387:8-17, 2001.
Clin Orthop Ret Res 387:68-71, 2001.
6. Graff J, Pastor J, Senge Tet al: Effect of high energy shock
24. Laverty PH, McClure SR: Initial experience with extracor-
waves on bony tissuean experimental study, J Urot 137:
poreal shock wave therapy in six dogs—part I, Vet Comp
278-281, 1987.
Orthop Tramatol 15:177-183, 2002.
7. Graff J, Berding C, Pastor J et al: Transmission of shock-
25. McClure SR, Sonea IM, Evans RB et al: Evaluation of
waves through bone—-treatment of iliac ureteral stones in a
analgesia resulting from extracorporeal shock wave therapy
supine position? J Urot 143:231-233, 1990.
and radial pressure wave therapy in the limbs of horses and
8. Mueller M, Bockstahler B, Skalicky M et al: Effects of
sheep, Am J Vet Res 66:1702-1708, 2005.
radial shockwave therapy on the limb function of dogs with 
 26. Chen YJ, Wang CJ, Yang KD et al: Extracorporeal shock
hip oste0arthritis, Vet Rec 160:762-765, 2007.
waves promote healing of collagenase-induced Achilles
 9. Millis DL, Francis D, Adamson C: Emerging modalities in 
tendinitis and increase TGF-β
 and IGF-I expression,
veterinary rehabilitation, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
J Orthop Res 22:854-861, 2004.
Pract 35:1335-1355, 2005.
27. Delius M, Draenert K, A1 Diek Y: Biological effects of
10. Skolarikos A, Alargof E, Rigas A et al: Shock wave therapy
shock waves: in vivo effect of high energy pulses on rabbit
as first-line treatment for Peyronie's disease: a prospective
bone, Uftrasound Med Biot 21:1219-1225, 1995.
study, J Endourot 19:11-14, 2005.
 28. Hausdorf JEH, Tischer T, Maier M et al: Extracorporeal
11. Manganotti P, Amelio E: Long-term effect of shock wave
shock wave treatment of atrophic nonunions—an in vivo
therapy on upper limb hypertonia in patients affected by
study using an animal model, Calcif Tissue Int 80:S52,
stroke, Stroke 36:1967-1971, 2005.
2007.
12. Pauwels FET, McClure SR, Amin V et al: Effects of extra-
29. Takahashi N, Wada Y, Ohtori S et al: Application of shock
corporeal shock wave therapy and radial pressure wave
waves to rat skin decreases calcitonin gene-related peptide
therapy on elasticity and microstructure of equine cortical
immunoreactivity in dorsal root ganglion neurons, Auto
bone, Am J Vet Res 65:207-212, 2004.
Neurosci 107:81-84, 2003.
390
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
 30. Ohtori S, Inoue G, Mannoji C et al: Shock wave application
and synovial fuid biomarkers in horses with induced osteo-
to rat skin induces degeneration and reinnervation of
arthritis, Am J Vet Res 72:772-779, 2011.
sensory nerve fibers, Neurosci Lett 315:57-60, 2001.
46. Ochiai N, Ohtori S, Sasho T et al: Extracorporeal shock
31. Maier M, Averbeck B, Milz S et al: Substance P and pros-
uo ued pue uogoungssp ioou saoidu Aderyn sam
taglandin Ez release after shock wave application to the
nating from knee osteoarthritis in rats, Osteoarthritis Car-
rabbit femur, Clin Orthop Rel Res 406:237-245, 2003.
tilage 15: 1093-1096, 2007.
32. Haake M, Thon A, Bette M: Unchanged c-Fos expression
47. Vaiterlein N, Lissenhop S, Hahn M et al: The effect of
after extracorporeal shock wave therapy: an experimental
extracorporeal shock waves on joint cartilage an in vivo
investigation in rats, Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 122:518-
study in rabbits, Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 120:403-406,
521, 2002.
2000.
33. Haake M, Thon A, Bette M: Absence of spinal response to
48. Dorotka R, Kubista B, Schatz KD et al: Effects of extracor-
extracorporeal shock waves on the endogenous opioid
 poreal shock waves on human articular chondrocytes and
systems in the rat, Ultrasound Med Biot 27:279-284,
ovine bone marrow stromal cells in vitro, Arch Orthop
2001.
Trauma Surg 123:345-348, 2003.
 34. Haake M, Thon A, Bette M: No influence of low-energy
49. Mayer-Wagner S, Ernst J, Maier M et al: The effect
ex tracorporeal shock waves on spinal nociceptive systems:
of high-energy extracorporeal shock waves on hyaline
immune-histochemical  analysis of  substance  P/CGRP,
cartilage of adult rats in vivo, J Orthop Res 28:1050-1056,
J Orthop Sci 7:97-101, 2002.
2010.
35. Murata R, Ohtori S, Ochiai N et al: Extracorporeal shock-
 50. Caminoto EH, Alves ALG, Amorim RL et al: Ultrastruc-
waves induce the expression of ATF3 and GAP-43 in rat
tural and immune-cytochemical evaluation of the effects of
dorsal root ganglion neurons, Auto Neurosci 128:96-100,
 extracorporeal shock wave treatment in the hind limbs of
2006.
36. Takahashi M, Ohtori S, Saisu T et al: Second application of
desmitis, Am J Vet Res 66:892-896, 2005.
low-energy shock waves has a cumulative effect on free
51. Wang CJ, Huang Hy, Pai HC: Shock wave-enhanced neo-
nerve endings, Clin Orthop Rel Res 443:315-319, 2006.
vasculatization at the tendon-bone junction an experiment
37. Abed JM, McClure SR, Yaeger MJ et al: Immunohisto-
in dogs, J Foot Ankle Surgery 14:17-21, 2001.
chemical evaluation of substance P and calcitonin gene-
 52. Wang CJ, Wang FS, Yang KD et al: Shock wave therapy
related peptide in skin and periosteum after extracorporeal
induces neovascularization at the tendon-bone junction—-a
shock wave therapy and radial pressure wave therapy in
study in rabbits, J Orthop Res 21:984-989, 2003.
sheep, Am J Vet Res 68:323-328, 2007.
 53. Hsu RW, Hsu WH, Tai CL: Effect of shock-wave therapy
38. Francis DA, Millis DL, Evans M et al: Clinical evaluation
on patellar tendonopathy in a rabbit model, J Orthop Res
of extracorporeal shock wave therapy for management of
22:221-227, 2004.
canine osteoarthritis of the elbow and hip joint. Proceedings
54. Kersh KD, McClure SR, Van Sickle D et al: The evaluation
of the 3ist Annuat Conference Veterinary Orthopedic
of extracorporeal shock wave therapy on collagenase
Society, Big Sky, Montana, February 22-27, 2004.
induced superficial digital fexor tendonitis, Vet Comp
39. Millis DL, Drum M, Whitlock D: Complementary use of
Orthop Tramatot 19:99-105, 2006.
 extracorporeal shock wave therapy on elbow osteoarthritis 
 55. Bosch G, Lin YL, van Schie HTM et al: Effect of extracor-
in dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 24(3):A1, 2011.
poreal shock wave therapy on the biochemical composition
40. Moretti B, Iannone F, Notarnicola A et al: Extracorporeal
and metabolic activity of tenocytes in normal tendinous
shock waves down-regulate the expression of interleukin- 10
structures in ponies, Equine Vet J 39:226-231, 2007.
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in osteoarthritic chondro-
56. Rompe JD, Kirkpatrick CJ, Kullmer K et al: Dose-related
cytes, BMC Musculoskelet Disord 9:16, 2008.
effects of shock waves on rabbit tendo Achillis—a sono-
41. Zhao Z, Ji H, Jing R et al: Extracorporeal shock-wave
graphic and histological study, J Bone Joint Surg Br 80:546-
therapy reduces progression of knee osteoarthritis in rabbits 
552, 1998.
 by reducing nitric oxide level and chondrocyte apoptosis,
57. Maier M, Tischer T, Milz S et al: Dose-related effects of
Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 132:1147-1153, 2012.
42. Wang CJ, Weng LH, Ko JY et al: Extracorporeal shock-
integrity, Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 122:436-441, 2002.
wave therapy shows chondroprotective effects in osteoar-
58. Maier M, Saisu T, Beckmann J et al: Impaired tensile
thritic rat knee, Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 131:1153-1158,
 sttength after shock-wave application in an animal model
2011.
of tendon calcification, Utrasound Med Biol 27:665-671,
43. Wang CJ, Weng LH, Ko JY et al: Extracorporeal shock wave
2001.
shows regression of osteoarthritis of the knee in rats, J Surg
59. Gremion G, Gobelet C, Siegrist O et al: Efficacy of radial
Res 171:601-608, 2011.
shock wave therapy in the chronic patellar tendonitis, Pro-
44. Wang CJ, Sun YC, Wong T et al: Extracorporeal shock wave
ceedings, 3rd Biennial Congress of the ISAKOS 2001.
 therapy shows time-dependent chondroprotective effects in
60. Lohrer H, Schoell J, Arentz S et al: Effectiveness of radial
osteoarthritis of the knee in rats, J Surg Res 178:196-205,
shockwave therapy (RSwT) on tennis elbow and plantar
2012.
fascitis, Proceedings, Annuat Symposium 2001.
 45. Kawcak CE, Frisbie DD, Mcllwraith CW: Effects of extra-
 61. Danova NA, Muir P: Extracorporeal shock wave therapy for
corporeal shock wave therapy and polysulfated glycosami-
supraspinatus calcifying tendonopathy in two dogs, Vet Rec 
 noglycan treatment on subchondral bone, serum biomarkers,
152:208-209, 2003.
Chapter 22
Applications of Extracorporeal Shockwave in Small Animal Rehabilitation
391
62. Gallagher A, Cross AR, Sepulveda G: The effect of
 77. Bischofberger AS, Ringer SK, Geyer H et al: Histomorpho-
shock wave therapy on patellar ligament desmitis after
logic evaluation of extracorporeal shock wave therapy of
tibial plateau leveling osteotomy, Vet Surg 41:482-485,
the fourth metatarsal bone and the origin of the suspensory
2012.
ligament in horses without lameness, Am J Vet Res 67:577-
63. Kuo UR, Wu WS, Hsieh YL et al: Extracorporeal shock
582, 2006.
wave enhanced extended skin fap tissue survival via
78. Wang CJ, Huang HY, Chen HH et al: Effect of shock wave
increase of topical blood perfusion and associated with sup-
therapy on acute fractures of the tibia, Clin Orthop Rel Res
pression of tissue pro-infammation, J Surg Res 143:385-
387:112-118, 2001.
392, 2007.
79. Wang CJ, Yang KD, Wang FS et al: Shock wave treatment
64. Schaden W, Thiele R, Kolpl C et al: Shock wave therapy
shows dose-dependent enhancement of bone mass and bone 
for acute and chronic soft tissue wounds: a feasibility study,
strength after fracture of femur, Bone 34:225-230, 2004.
J Surg Res 143:1-12, 2007.
80. Saisu T, Takahashi K, Kamegaya M et al: Effects of extra-
65. Haupt G, Haupt A, Ekkernkamp A et al: Infuence of
corporeal shock waves on immature rabbit femurs, J Pediatr
shock waves on fracture healing, Urology 39:529-532,
Orthop B 13:176-183, 2004.
1992.
81. Wang CJ, Wang FS, Huang CC et al: Treatment for osteo-
66. O'Leary JM, Knothe Tate ML, Knothe U: Extracorporeal
necrosis of the femoral head: comparison of extracorporeal
shock waves generate new bone in skeletally mature rats.
shock waves with core decompression and bone-grafting,
In Proceedings, 52nd Annuat Meeting of Orthopaedic
J Bone Joint Surg 87-A:2380-2387, 2005.
Research Society, 2006.
82. Ma HZ, Zeng BF, Li XL: Upregulation of VEGF in sub-
67. Hsu RWW, Tai CL, Chen CYC et al: Enhancing mechani-
chondral bone of necrotic femoral heads in rabbits with use
cal strength during early fracture healing vial shockwave
of extracorporeal shock waves, Calcif Tissue Int 81:124-
treatment: an animal study, Clin Biomech 18:S33-S39,
131, 2007.
2003.
83. Gollwitzer H, Roessner M, Langer R et al: Safety and
68. Wang FS, Yang KD, Chen RF et al: Extracorporeal shock
effectiveness of extracorporeal shockwave therapy: results 
 wave promotes growth and differentiation of bone-mattow
of a rabbit model of chronic osteomyelitis, Ultrasound Med
stromal cells towards osteoprogenitors associated with
Biot 35(4):595-602, 2009.
induction of TGF-β1, J Bone Joint Surg Br 84-B:457-
84. Uwatoku T, Ito K, Abe K et al: Extracorporeal cardiac shock
461, 2002.
wave therapy improves left venticular remodeling after
69. Wang FS, Yang KD, Kuo YR et al: Temporal and spatial
acute myocardial infarction in pigs, Coron Artery Dis
expression of bone morphogenetic proteins in ex tracorpo-
18:397-404, 2007.
real shock wave-promoted healing of segmental defect,
85. Nishida T, Shimokawa H, Oi K et al: Extracorporeal cardiac
Bone 32:387-396, 2003.
shock wave therapy markedly ameliorates ischemia-induced
70. Chen YJ, Wurtz T, Wang CJ et al: Recruitment of mesen-
myocardial dysfunction in pigs in vivo, Circulation 110:
chymal stem cells and expression of TGF-β, and VEGF in
3055-3061, 2004.
the early stage of shock wave-promoted bone regeneration
86. Fukomoto Y, Ito A, U watoku T et al: Extracorporeal cardiac
of segmental defect in rats, J Orthop Res 22:526-534, 2004.
shock wave therapy ameliorates myocardial ischemia in
71. Chen YJ, Kuo YR, Yang KD et al: Shock wave application
patients with severe coronary artery disease, Coron Artery
enhances pertussis toxin protein-sensitive bone formation 
Dis 17:63-70, 2006.
of segmental femoral defect in rats, J Bone Miner Res
87. Khattab AA, Brodersen B, Scuermann-Kuchenbrandt D
18:2169-2179, 2003.
et al: Extracorporeal cardiac shock wave therapy: first expe-
72. Chen YJ, Kuo YR, Yang KD et al: Activation of extracel-
rience in the everyday practice for treatment of chronic
lular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and p38 kinase in shock
refractory angina pectoris, Int J Cardiot 121:84-85, 2007.
wave-promoted bone formation of segmental defect in rats,
88. Belcaro G, Nicolaides AN, Marlinghaus EH et al: Shock
Bone 34:466-477, 2004.
waves in vascular diseases: an in-vitro study, Angiology
73. Sukul DMKSK, Johannes EJ, Pierik EGJM et al: Effect of
49:777-788, 1998.
high energy shock waves focused on cortical bone: an in 
89. Aicher A, Heeschen C, Sasaki K et al: Low-energy shock
vitro study, J Surg Res 54:46-51, 1993.
wave for enhancing recruitment of endothelial progenitor
74. Maier M, Milz S, Tischer T et al: Influence of extracor-
cells: a new modality to increase efficacy of cell therapy in
poreal shock-wave application on normal bone in an
chronic hind limb ischemia, Circulation 114:2823-2830,
animal model in vivo, J Bone Joint Surg Br 84-B:592-599,
2006.
2002.
 90. Rompe, JD, Meurer A, Nafe B et al: Repetitive low-energy
75. Da Costa Gomez TM, Radtke CL, Kalscheur VL et al:
shock wave application without local anesthesia is more
 Effect of focused and radial extracorporeal shock wave
efficient than repetitive low-energy shock wave application
therapy on equine bone microdamage, Vet Surg 33:49-55,
with 1ocal anesthesia in the treatment of chronic plantar
2004.
fascitis, J Orthop Res 23:931-941, 2005.
76. Ringer SK, Lischer CJ, Ueltschi G: Assessment of scinti-
91. Yeaman LD, Jerome CP, McCullough DL: Effects of shock
graphic and thermographic changes after focused extracor-
waves on the structure and growth of the immature rat
poreal shock wave therapy on the origin of the suspensory
epiphysis, J Urot 141:670-674, 1989.
ligament and the fourth metatarsal bone in horses without
 92. Nassenstein K, Nassenstein I, Schleberger R: Effects of
lameness, Am J Vet Res 66:1836-1842, 2005.
high-energy shock waves on the structure of the immature
392
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
epiphysis—a histomorphological study, Z Orthop lhre
 98. Miller D, Dou C, Song J: Lithotripter shockwave-induced 
Grenzgeb 143:652-655, 2005.
 enhancement of mouse melanoma lung metastasis: depen-
93. Van Arsdalen KN, Kruzweil S, Smith J et al: Effect of litho-
dence on cavitation nucleation, J Endourot 18:925-929,
tripsy on immature rabbit bone and kidney development,
2004.
J Urof 146:213-216, 1991.
 99. Oosterhof GON, Cornel EB, Smits GAHJ et al: The infu-
94. Lissenhop S, Seemann D, Hahn M et al: The infuence of 
ence of high-energy shock waves on the development of
shock waves on epiphyseal growth plates: frst results of an
metastases, Ultrasound Med Biol 22:339-344, 1996.
in-vivo study with rabbits. In Siebert W, Buch M, editors:
100. Kambe M, Ioritani N, Shirai S et al: Enhancement of che-
Extracorporeat shockwaves in orthopaedics, Berlin, 1997,
 motherapeutic effects with focused shock waves: extracor-
 Springer.
poreal shock wave chemotherapy (ESwC), In Vivo 10:
 95. Mariotto S, Cavalieri E, Amelio E et al: Extracorporeal
369-376, 1996.
shock waves: from lithotripsy to anti-infammatory action
101. Holmes RP, Yeaman LI, Li WJ et al: The combined effects
by NO production, Nitric Oxide 12:89-96, 2005.
 of shock waves and Cisplatin therapy on rat prostate tumors,
96. Lee TC, Huang HY, Yang YL et al: Vulnerability of the
J Urol 144:159-163, 1990.
spinal cord to injury from extracorporeal shock waves in
102. Miller DL, Song J: Lithotripter shock waves with cavitation
rabbits, J Clin Neurosci 14:873-878, 2007.
nucleation agents produce tumor growth reduction and
97. Gimis B, Lekili M, Kandiloglu AR et al: Effects of extra-
gene transfer in vivo, Ultrasound Med Biot 28:1343-1348,
 Corporeal shockwave lithotripsy at different stages of preg-
2002.
nancy in the rabbit, J Endourot 11:323-326, 1997.
Other Modalities in Veterinary
Rehabilitation
Darryl Millis and David Levine
 everal altemative and  complementary modalities
claim to have beneficial effects on pain, blood fow, tissue
have been used in veterinary rehabilitation, includ-
 Oxygenation, bone and tissue regeneration, infammation,
ing static magnetic fields, pulsed electromagnetic
and sleep. The current literature is sparse, however, and
fields (PEMFs), and shortwave diathermy. Other modali-
little convincing evidence exists for these claims. For all
ties that have been used in rehabilitation include acupunc-
 of these applications, increased blood fow is one theory
ture and chiropractic. Acupuncture and chiropractic have
provided to explain why magnets may have an effect. At
been described in detail elsewhere, have their own training
this time no solid explanation for why magnets may have
programs, and are stand-alone disciplines and are not
 a physiologic effect seems to be available. Unfortunately.
 described here.
only weak evidence exists, not only for the effects of pain
alleviation and bone or wound healing, but also for the
Static Magnet Therapy
theorized cause, blood fow changes. When studies have
shown a potential physiologic effect, the mechanism
Magnet therapy has been used as an altermative therapy in
causing the effect is often poorly explained or may be more
human medicine for many years and has gained popularity
strongly associated with a placebo effect.
more recently in veterinary medicine. Magnets used for
therapeutic purposes are either static in nature or electro-
Effects on Blood Flow
magnets. Static magnets have magnetic fields that do not
The Lorentz force law states that a magnetic field exerts
change, whereas electromagnets generate magnetic fields
a force on a moving ionic current.3 The Hall effect further
only when electrical current fows through them. Magnet
states that when a magnetic feld is placed perpendicular
strength is measured in units of gauss (G) or Tesla (T)
to the direction of flow of an electric current, it will tend
(1 T = 10* G). The earth's magnetic feld is approximately
to defect and separate the charged ions. Ions will be
 0.5 G, whereas magnetic resonance imaging machines use
 deflected in opposite directions depending on the magnetic
magnets of 15,000 G and higher. Static magnets for thera-
pole encountered and the charge of the ion.? In theory,
peutic purposes are usually in the 300- to 5000-G range.
when a magnetic field with a series of altemating north
and south poles is placed over a blood vessel, the infu-
History
ence of the field may cause positive and negative ions to
 Magnet therapy in the treatment of various medical condi-
bounce back and forth between the sides of the vessel,
tions dates back as early as 200 AD with Greek healers
creating currents in moving blood similar to those in a
reportedly using magnetic rings as a treatment for arthri-
river. The combination of the electromotive force, altered
tis. During the Middle Ages, magnets were thought to be
jonic pattern, and currents may potentially cause blood
effective in the treatment of baldness, wounds, arthritis,
vessel dilation with a corresponding increase in blood
and gout.' In the early 1600s, an English physician, Thomas
fow. However, magnetic forces are smaller than the physi-
Browne, may have been one of the first to scientifically
 cal forces already present caused by the heart muscle.?
evaluate magnets. He concluded that the use of magnets in
The iron in hemoglobin causes blood to be only weakly
the treatment of such diseases as gout, headache, and vene-
repelled or attracted by magnets. If they were attracted to
real disease amounted to wishful thinking.' Because of its
a magnet this could have a clotting effect negatively affect-
continued popularity as an altermative therapeutic modality
 ing circulation. Static magnets, to be effective, must over-
and the business that it generates, therapeutic efficacy has
come the strong physical forces of blood flow propelled by
been studied in various models.
the heart and normal thermal induced Brownian random
Magnets continue to be in use today, with a myriad of 
 movement of the particles suspended in the blood, which
products available claiming various therapeutic values. An
is unlikely.3
Intermet search? of magnetic therapy for dogs yields prod-
Increased flow rates of concentrated saline have been
ucts such as beds, collars, and jackets, among others, that
observed within a glass capillary tube under the infuence
393
394
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
of a magnetic field.3 The reason for the increased fow is
 45 minutes while patients remained in the experimental
not explained but because the capillary cannot expand, it
 setting.13 This study was double-blinded and appears to be
cammot be related to vasodilation.3 However, the investiga-
 One of the best-controlled studies using magnets because
tor of this study wams that these findings should not be
patients had little opportunity to test for magnetism. Pain
extrapolated to tissue perfusion.6 Many studies have shown
levels were assessed by palpation of trigger points before
static magnets to be ineffective in altering circulation both
 and after application of the magnetic device. The McGill
in animal and human studies regardless of the level of
pain questionnaire was used to evaluate subjective pain,
magnetic field.3
elicited by palpation of the single most painful trigger
In a study performed on six horses, the effect of
point, even if multiple sites were present. Following
static magnetic therapy on blood flow was assessed in the 
application of the magnets, trigger points were again
palpated and pain was reassessed by the subjects. Twenty-
Tc 99m phosphate and dorsal images of both metacarpi
two patients in the active group showed improvement as
were acquired with a gamma camera. One metacarpus
compared with four in the placebo group, a significant
was treated with a magnetic wrap with 270 G at its surface,
difference.
and the other metacarpus was treated with an identical
 In 2007, Pittler and colleagues'4 published a systematic
wrap in which the magnets had been replaced with identi-
review and metaanalysis of 29 randomized trials in humans
cal size and weighted polytetrafluoroethylene sheet. The
 On the effect of static magnets on pain and concluded that
metacarpi were treated for 48 hours and the scintigraphy
the evidence does not support the use of magnets for pain
relief for low back pain, delayed-onset muscle soreness, or
fusion of the metacarpal region between groups. The
foot pain.14 The exceptions to this fnding were three
authors noted that in the commercially available wraps
 double-blinded randomized controlled trials assessing pain
used in this study, the strength of the magnetic field
relief in osteoarthritis (OA) that found pain reductions rela-
dropped off to 0.5 G at 7 mm from the surface of the
tive to placebo when treatments lasted 2 to 12 weeks.14 A
magnet, making it unlikely that the underlying blood
separate study evaluated the use of magnets continuously
vessels were actually exposed to a clinically relevant mag-
for 24 hours and found that there was no pain relief. The
netic feld. Static magnetic felds have also been shown
authors concluded that for the condition of OA, there is
to have no significant effect on mucosal blood fow in
insuffcient evidence to exclude a clinically beneficial
humans,β soft tissue healing in rats,? or blood flow to the
effect and believed that further investigation might be
skin of rats.10
warranted.14
 In a large randomized double-blind study assessing the
Pain Alleviation
effectiveness of magnet therapy on pain intensity and
A variety of theories exist attempting to explain how
 opioid requirements in human patients with acute postop-
 magnets may provide pain relief. Likewise, a wide variety
erative pain, investigators found no difference in pain inten-
of protocols with varying magnetic strengths is observed
sity level or opioid requirement between groups treated
in the literature. One theory to explain pain relief is associ-
with magnets or sham magnets.1s Patients with various
ated with increased or altered blood fow. As discussed
abdominal surgeries or lipoma excision were treated with
previously, little to no evidence supports the contention
quadrapolar static magnets of 1900 G strength placed at
that magnets have a measureable effect on blood fow. A
the ends of the incisions and around them and left in place
second theory to explain pain relief is reduced nerve con-
for 2 hours. The control group was treated with sham
ductivity. This theory proposes that nociceptive C fibers
 magnets of equal weight and size. Patients rated their pain
have a lower threshold potential and that magnetic fields
via a numerical rating scale and the number of rescue doses
selectively attenuate neuronal depolarization by shifting
of morphine was recorded. The authors concluded that
the membrane resting potential. However, this is an
magnetic therapy should not be used for treatment of post-
unlikely theory as a 10% reduction in nerve conductivity
 operative acute pain or any pain that results from tissue
would require 24 T,' a field strength obtained only in the
injury.'s
strongest superconducting magnets used for research.3
A comparison of commercially available static bipolar
magnetic shoe insoles with identical sham insoles in 101
Clinical Effects
human subjects diagnosed with plantar fasciitis (heel pain)
Perhaps one of the most successful studies conducted on
showed no significant difference in outcome variables
the use of static magnets to treat pain was done by Vallbona
studied.'6 Insoles were worm for at least 4 hours a day.
and colleagues' on 50 patients with postpolio syndrome
 4 days a week for 8 weeks. The sham group reported
who reported muscular or arthritic pain. Based on a hypoth-
significant improvement in morming foot pain intensity,
n mo ui nuaod u pda sno y p
the greatest effect, they applied static magnets ranging
foot pain interfered with their employment enjoyment;
in strength from 300-500 G to palpated trigger points for
however, magnets did not induce additional benefit over
Chapter 23
Other Modalities in Veterinary Rehabilitation
395
nonmagnetized insoles. The sham insoles used in this study
OA was created by transecting a cranial cruciate ligament.
averaged a surface reading of 2.2 G and active magnetic
Dogs were subjected to no foor mattress, a foor mattress
insoles averaged 192.1 G.16
with ceramic pieces placed between two layers of foam but
In a multicenter, double-blinded, placebo-controlled
no magnetic feld (sham control), or a foor mattress with
study investigating the role of static magnetic insoles on
ceramic penmanent magnets placed between two layers of 
 diabetic peripheral neuropathy-caused neuropathic foot
foam. The magnetic feld had a surface feld strength of
pain, investigators found that chronic use of 450 G multi-
1100 G, whereas the magnetic field strength at the surface
polar, static magnetic shoe insoles significantly reduced
of the mattress was 450-500 G and was equally distributed
symptoms of burming, numbness, tingling, and exercise-
over the surface. The magnetic mattress group appeared to
induced foot pain compared with sham insoles.17 Subjects
 have less synovitis, less synovial effusion, less disruption
wore magnetic insoles or sham insoles for 24 hours per
of the cartilage surface, and less cartilage ulceration than
day for 4 months and tabulated validated daily pain scores
did the other groups. Histologic scores for OA were less
and unvalidated quality of life scores. No new analgesic
 in the magnetic mattress group as compared with the other
drugs were allowed during the study. Significant differ-
 groups, but the differences were not statistically signifi-
ences between groups were not apparent until after the
cant. There were similar trends in immunohistochemical
second month of treatment. Of note was that the magnitude
studies for matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 and MMP-3,
of the reduction of burming, numbness, tingling, and
with the magnetic mattress group having less staining; this
exercise-induced foot pain, especially in the severe and
 group had similar MMP-3 to normal cartilage. The mat-
extreme cases, was comparable or better than those previ-
tress and magnetic feld group did not differ from the
ously reported for gabapentin, tramadol, and lamotrigine
normal group in MMP-3 as determined by Westerm blot
studies.17 The mechanism of action of the magnets is
 analysis. The results of this study suggest that cartilage
umknown, but this study suggests that long-term use may
exposed to a magnetic field may have reduced progression
be required to see improvement in symptoms.
of OA early in the disease process. Further studies are
The effectiveness of commercially available magnetic
needed to confirm this and to delineate the mechanisms of
bracelets for pain control in OA of the hip and knee in
action that magnetic fields may have in reducing the pro-
people was evaluated in a multicenter, randomized,
gression of OA.
 placebo-controlled trial.α Three groups were evaluated
over a 12-week period: (1) standard strength static bipolar
Use
magnetic bracelet, (2) a weak magnetic bracelet, or (3) a
 Although the evidence supporting use of magnet therapy
nommagnetic (dummy) bracelet. Mean pain scores using
is limited at best, and at worst not generally supported, they
the standardized validated Westem Ontario and McMasters
continue to be used by owners on their pets. Fortunately
Universities score were reduced more in the standard
there are no known side effects of their use; however, it is
magnet group than in the dummy group (27% change from
recommended that they not be used in patients with pace-
baseline). However, some patients discovered that the
makers or any other device that may be adversely affected
bracelets had a magnetic field, resulting in unblinding.
by the magnetic feld. If used, magnets should be placed
although the analysis indicated that this had a small effect
directly over the affected target area to avoid the rapid
 On the results. The authors concluded that pain from OA
decrease in magnetic field over short distances. In addition,
of the hip and knee decreases when wearing magnetic
 any positive effects seem to be associated with the use of
bracelets, but it remains uncertain whether the effect is due
strong magnets (50-120 mT). Treatment time should be
to specific or nonspecific (placebo) effects.
over prolonged periods if tolerated and magnets should not
Studies on magnets for therapeutic purposes in animals
be considered a sole treatment modality but rather an
are limited. Two studies by workers from Hungary dem-
adjunct to more conventional, proven therapy.
onstrated a reduction of writhing from visceral pain in
mice induced by intraperitoneal injection of acetic acid.
Pulsed Electromagnetic Fields
 Mice were treated by placing them in a cage with magnets
with nonhomogeneous 2-754 mT strength. The pain reac-
PEMFs have been used for a variety of purposes, but their
tion was significantly reduced in the treated mice com-
 main therapeutic purpose is for enhancement of bone Or
pared with mice injected and placed in cages without the
are created when bone is stressed as the result of electrolyte-
observed effect was somehow mediated by the peripheral
rich fuid moving through bone channels. These electrical
opioid system because naloxone antagonized the static
currents may act as a stimulus for new bone growth. A
magnetic field-induced analgesic response if given periph-
similar mechanism occurs with cartilage compression
erally but not centrally.20
leading to current transduction and subsequent cartilage
 One study determined the effect of a permanent mag-
matrix synthesis. Streaming potentials are created within
netic field on the progression of OA in a canine model.?
cartilage when electrolyte-rich fuid fows past areas of
396
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
compression and fixed negatively charged sulfated proteo-
yim pae[nuns sem dnois auo fiagans iay sg ssop inpe 
glycans.23 The maximal production of glycosaminoglycan
a pulse burst-type signal PEMF for 30 minutes a day,
 occurs at a low frequency (less than 15 Hz), and intermit-
another group was stimulated with the same PEMF for
tent compression is better than continuous compression.
60 minutes a day, and a third group received no active
At 15-16 Hz, calcium ion transport occurs and cartilage
PEMF stimulation. No difference in the radiographic or
growth is stimulated, perhaps because of increased tran-
histologic appearance of the fusion mass could be detected
scription and DNA synthesis. The effect occurs quickly,
between the stimulated and control groups, suggesting
with peak transcription in 20 minutes.
that PEMF stimulation had no effect on the healing of
Electromagnetism is generated by running an electric
current through a coiled wire (electromagnetic induction).3
the use of PEMF in the late phase of bone healing in a
PEMFs are hypothesized to have electric rather than
stable tibial defect model did stimulate bone healing in one
magnetic effects on tissue.? PEMF stimulation may act
study in which dogs were stimulated 1 hour per day for 8
 On cell surface receptors, such as parathyroid hormone
weeks.36 Load bearing in the PEMF group at 8 weeks was
and transfonming growth factor (TGF)-β, and secondary
 greater than in the control group. In addition, callus area
messengers, such as calcium or cyclic adenosine mono-
 increased earlier in the PEMF group, and maximum torque,
phosphate. PEMF may have an effect on stabilizing intra-
torsional stiffness, new bone formation in the osteotomy
cellular calcium stores by altering the conformation of
calcium channel proteins that may ultimately reduce the
group.
production of free radicals by mitochondria and subse-
quent inflammation.24
Osteoarthritis
One of the most common uses for PEMF is the treatment
Wound Healing
of OA. PEMF treatment has a number of physiologic
Healing may be promoted by using PEMF in chronic
effects on cells and tissues, including the upregulation of
wounds,2 in soft tissue, and in neuronal regeneration.26
gene expression of members of the TGF-β family. an
The effects of PEMF on healing of open and sutured
increase in glycosaminoglycan levels, and perhaps an anti-
wounds was evaluated in dogs.?27 Open and sutured wounds
 infammatory action.37
were created in the skin of the trunk of the dogs. The
Pipitone and Scott? looked at the effects of magnetic
PEMF-treated dogs received treatment twice a day start-
pulse treatment for knee OA in human patients. They
ing the day before surgery and lasting through day 21
used a unipolar magnetic device that was used to treat
 after surgery. PEMF treatment resulted in significantly
both knees simultaneously for 10 minutes three times a
enhanced epithelialization of open wounds 10 and 15 days
day for 6 weeks. The devices were set at 7.8 Hz for the
after surgery. PEMF treatment also shortened wound con-
moming and aftemoon treatment sessions and at 3 Hz
traction time. Conversely, PEMF have not been found
for the evening session. Outcome measures included evalu-
to have any significant effects in other studies of soft-
ation by a rheumatologist, and several subjective pain
tissue wound healing in rats? or on blood fow in the
assessment scales, two of which are disease-specific mea-
brains of mice.28
S dr    sd n  e  s
There were no significant differences between the active-
Bone Healing
and sham-treated groups in any outcome measures after
Mechanical and electrical signals may regulate synthesis
treatment.38
of extracellular matrix ?9 Endogenous electric current den-
Another review article of PEMF therapy for people with
sities produced by mechanical loading of bone under phys-
knee OA concluded that PEMF has little benefit in the
 jologic conditions approximate 1 Hz and 0.1 to 1 uA/cm2.6
treatment of OA in people, and that resources might be
 PEMF therapy stimulates biologic processes pertinent to
better directed to other rehabilitation efforts, such as
Osteogenesis3° and bone graft incorporation.3 In fact,
exercise.39
several devices are approved for the treatment of delayed
Another randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
and nonunion fractures. PEMF may also attenuate bone
clinical trial investigated the effectiveness of PEMF for the
loss during disuse.32 PEMF therapy study results suggest
treatment of OA of the knee in people.4 Patients were
that therapy may delay healing of fresh fractures,however.33
treated 2 hours daily, 5 days per week for 6 weeks. Com-
 One recent metaanalysis suggested that the proportion of
parison of all treated patients with an untreated control
delayed and nonunion fractures that united with PEMF was
group revealed no significant improvements over time.
small and not statistically significant, and there was no
Analysis of patients younger than 65 years old, however,
reduction in pain.
revealed a significant improvement for stiffness on the
The effect of PEMF on the healing of experimental
 treated knee. Analysis of activities of daily living score for
lumbar spinal fusions was evaluated in dogs. Bilateral pos-
the PEMF-treated group revealed a significant correlation
terior facet fusions were performed at L1-2 and L4-5 in
 between less improvement and increasing age.
Chapter 23
Other Modalities in Veterinary Rehabilitation
397
A Coc hrane review evaluated PEMF for OA treatment.41
extension was significantly better in the treatment group
Two trials used PEMF, using a noncontact device that
for both time points, and the function portion of the CBPI
 delivered three signals in stepwise fashion, ranging from a
and thigh circumference was significantly improved in the
5 Hz to 12 Hz frequency at 10 G to 25 G of magnetic
 treatment group from day 0 to day 42. This study suggested
energy. The affected knee was treated for 9 hours over a
that PST was useful in treating canine patients with OA.
1-month period. There was a small to moderate effect on
 outcomes for knee OA, with clinical benefit ranging from
Pain
13-23% greater with active treatment than with placebo.
Some investigators have evaluated the use of PEMF
The main outcome measures were for pain, ability to
for pain management after surgery. A randomized, pro-
conduct activities of daily living in tenms of pain or diff-
spective, double-blind study was performed to evaluate
culty, joint pain on motion, and tendermess. Although these
the long-term effects of PEMF in patients undergoing
results suggest that PEMF result in improvement for knee
 arthroscopic treatment of knee cartilage.*6 Patients with
OA, they suggested that further studies should be per-
knee pain were recruited and treated by arthroscopy with
formed to confirm these results and to establish the clinical
 chondroabrasion and/or perforations and/or radiofrequen-
relevancy of treatment.
cies. They were randomized into two groups: a control
In another Cochrane review of electrotherapies used
group (magnetic feld at 0.05 mT) and an active group
for mechanical neck disorders, 5 of 11 studies included
(magnetic feld of 1.5 mT). Patients were instructed to
used magnets as an intervention.22 Four of the five used
use PEMF therapy for 90 days, 6 hours per day. The
pulsed magnets, whereas the fifth used static magnets.
patients were evaluated with a knee injury and osteoar-
Two of the five had significant results and both of these
thritis outcome score before arthroscopy, and 45 and 90
studies used pulsed magnets, one using low-frequency
days after treatment. Patients were also interviewed for
 5-25 Hz 10-25 G, and one using high-frequency 27 Hz.22
long-term outcome 3 years after surgery. Differences were
Interestingly, two of the five studies were led by the same
significant at 90 days. The percentage of patients who
author, using a similar intervention with reported signifi-
used nonsteroidal antiinfammatory drugs was 26% in the
cance in the first study followed by no significant differ-
active group and 75% in the control group. At 3 years
ence 2 years later in the second study. Furthenmore,
follow-up, the number of patients who completely recov-
 another group used a similar intervention and had no sig-
ered was higher in the active group compared with the
nificant results. Finally, the subjects of the two studies
control group.
with positive results retained these benefits for only a
 A randomized controlled clinical trial evaluated PEMF
short duration.22
 therapy on postoperative pain in dogs following ovariohys-
Another Cochrane review assessed the effectiveness of
terectomy, and the interaction with postoperative morphine
PEMF compared with placebo for the treatment of knee
 analgesia.47 Following extubation, dogs were divided into
 OA in randomized, controlled trials.47 Nine studies, includ-
four groups: a control group that received no PEMF, a
ing 483 patients, were pooled. No significant difference
PEMF group, a morphine group with no PEMF, and a
could be shown for pain or stiffness. There was a signifi-
PEMF and morphine group. Although no clear benefit was
cant effect on activities of daily living and scores. The
seen in this study, the results suggested that PEMF may
authors concluded that PEMF improve clinical scores and
augment morphine analgesia following ovariohysterec-
tomy in dogs.
 patients with OA of the knee, but there is no evidence for
Use
an effect on pain. Another study indicated that PEMF does
not add additional benefit to patients already receiving
 PEMF therapy appears to have benefits for the treatment 
treatment for knee OA, including hot packs, therapeutic
of certain conditions. Many of the biophysical effects on
ultrasound (US), and exercise.43 Another study also found
cells and tissues have been confirmed. However, its use is
no added benefit to PEMF therapy for knee OA when
still limited likely because of confusing and often conflict-
patients received hot packs and transcutaneous electrical
ing results. As with many modalities used in human and
 nerve stimulation and exercise.44
veterinary medicine, dose, frequency, and characteristics
A randomized, controlled, blinded, clinical trial consist-
of the modality used in studies are bewildering, making the
ing of 60 dogs with OA indicated some positive effects of
meaningful interpretation of studies difficult. In addition,
dno.a quaugean ay ui soa s,'(isd) Adeayn [eusis pas[nd
dogs must remain still when in a PEMF unit. This can
were given nine treatments over 11 days. There were 24
 provide a challenge for many dogs. Although the modality
dogs in the treatment group and 35 dogs in the control
may show promise for certain conditions, its common use
group.Peak vertical force was significantly more improved
 in veterinary medicine is hampered by the lack of prospec-
in the treatment group from day 0 to day 11, but not from
tive, blinded, placebo-controlled studies; the expense of the
day 0 to day 42. The improvement in the canine brief
equipment; and the need to maintain dogs in a relatively
pain inventory (CBPI) score and measurement of joint
quiet state during treatment.
398
Section IV
Therapeutie Modalities
Pulsed Shortwave Diathermy
Diathermy has also been investigated for tissue healing.
 An in vitro study found PSWD given at mean power of
 Pulsed shortwave diathenmy (PSWD) operates at approxi-
48 W for 10 minutes increased fibroblast proliferation
mately 27.12 MHz and creates an electrical field, which
compared with control groups (P < 0.001), and chondro-
heats the tissues in its field. It is also called pulsed short-
cyte proliferation also increased with PSWD exposure of
wave therapy and pulsed electromagnetic energy. It has
6 W at 10 minutes' duration (P = 0.015).51
some advantages over therapeutic ultrasound (US), which
include:
Summary
· Larger treatment area than US
· Less reflection off bone
Static magnets, PEMF, and diathenmy are some of the
· Use over irregular areas such as the paw, where US use
modalities that are emerging in veterinary rehabilitation.
is difficult
 Unfortunately, despite some evidence that there are bio-
The disadvantages include a few additional contraindi-
logic effects in tissue culture or laboratory experiments,
cations not seen in US, including metal implants in the
there are few published well-designed clinical studies in
feld because metal heats up in response to PsWD.
veterinary medicine to make finm recommendations for
their use. In particular, questions regarding dosage, the
length of treatment, and the most effective treatment pro-
Contraindications and Precautions
tocols for specific conditions are lacking. Users should
·Over the eyes
demand proper studies of products before purchasing
● Over or near malignancies and tumors
them, and veterinary funding agencies should provide
· Over a pregnant uterus
adequate resources for investigators to test such devices
· Over epiphyses of growing bone
independently.
 Over the spinal cord after laminectomy
REFERENCES
Vascular thrombus and embolus
Over the heart
1. Basford JR: A historical perspective of the popular use of
 Electromedical devices (e.g., pacemakers)
electric and magnetic therapy, Arch Phys Med Rehabil
 Plastic and metal implants
82:1261-1269, 2001.
 2. ww w.google.com, search terms "'magnetic therapy for dogs."
Metal in the treatment field and immediate area includ-
3. Ramey D: Magnetic and electromagnetic therapy in horses,
ing collars, or performed on a metal treatment table
Compendium Cont Ed Pract Vet 553-560, 1999.
 Decreased or absent sensation
4. Porter M: Magnetic therapy, Equine Vet Data 17(7):371,
· Over acute infammation
1997.
· Over areas of active infection
5. Livingston J: Magnetic therapy: plausible attraction? Ace-
Another disadvantage is that dogs must remain still
 magnetics.com, 2011. Retrieved March 29, 2012, from http://
 during diathenmy, which can provide a challenge for many
www.acemagnetics.com/eduarticles-magsportsbracelets-
dogs. Most PSWD units involve placing a drum with a built
 plausibleatt.htm1.
in spacer over a body part and having the patient stay in 
6. MacGinitie L, Gluzband Y, Grodzinsky A: Electric feld
 One place. Newer technology that attaches a sleeve over a
stimulation can increase protein synthesis in articular carti-
lage explants, J Orthop Res 12(2):151-160, 1994.
  n sn    
7. Steyn PF, Ramey DW, Kirschvink J et al: Effect of a static
tion. Although diathermy has evidence for tissue heating
magnetic field on blood fow to the metacarpus in horses,
and increases in muscle fexibility in humans, its use in
J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:874-877, 2000.
veterinary medicine is hampered by the lack of prospec-
 8. Saygili G, Aydinlik D, Ercan M et al: Investigation of the
tive, blinded, placebo-controlled studies; the expense of the
effect of magnetic retention systems used in prostheses on
equipment; and the need to maintain dogs in a relatively
buccal mucosal blood fow, Int J Prosthodont 5(4):326-332,
quiet state during treatment.
1992.
In humans, PSWD has been shown to be as effective
 9. Leaper D, Foster S, Brennan P et al: Do magnetic felds
as US in heating muscle and more effective than US in
infuence soft tissue wound healing? A preliminary commu-
heating large areas of muscle 4.49 A well-controlled study
nication, Equine Vet J 17(3):178-180, 1985.
compared PSWD and stretch to sham PSWD and stretch
10. Barker A, Cain M: The claimed vasodilatory effect of a com-
in hamstring fexibility. After 5 days of treatment the
mercial permanent magnet foil: results of a double-blind
trial, Clin Phys Physiol Meas 6(3):261-263, 1985.
diathermy/stretch group had an increase in knee extension
11. Ledney V: Possible mechanisim for the infuence of weak
of 15.8 degrees ± 2.2 degrees, compared with the sham
magnetic fields on biological systems, Bioelectromagnetics
diathenmy/stretch, which had an increase in knee extension
12(2):71-75, 1991.
of 5.2 degrees ± 2.2 degrees. Diathenmy with stretch sig-
12. Wikswo J, Barach J: An estimate of the steady magnetic field
nificantly improved hamstring fexibility in comparison
strength required to infuence nerve conduction, IEEE Trans
with stretching only in this study.50
Biomed Eng 27(12):722-723, 1980.
Chapter 23
Other Modalities in Veterinary Rehabilitation
399
13. Vallbona C, Hazlewood C, Jurida G: Response of pain
31. Miller G, Burchardt H, Enneking W et al: Electromagnetic
to static magnetic felds in postpolio patients: a double-
stimulation of canine bone grafts, J Bone Joint Surg Am 66
blind pilot study, Arch Phys Med Rehabit 78(11): 1200-1203,
(5):693-698, 1984.
1997.
32. Skerty TM, Pead MJ, Lanyon LE: Modulation of bone loss
 14. Pittler MH, Brown EM, Ernst E: Static magnets for reducing
during disuse by pulsed electromagnetic fields, J Orthop Res 
pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
9:600-608, 1991.
trials, Can Med Assoc J 177(7):736-742, 2007.
33. De Haas W, Lazarovici M, Morrison D: The effect of low
15. Cepeda MS, Carr DB, Sarquis T et al: Static magnetic
frequency magnetic fields on the healing of the osteotomized
therapy does not decrease pain or opioid requirements: a
rabbit radius, Clin Orthop Relat Res 145:245-251, 1979.
randomized double-blind trial, Ambut Anesth 104(2):290-
34. Griffin XL, Costa ML, Parsons N et al: Electromagnetic field
294, 2007.
stimulation for treating delayed union or non-union of long
16. Winemiller MH et al: Effects of magnetic vs sham-magnetic
bone fractures in adults, Cochrane Database of Systematic
insoles on plantar heel pain, a randomized controlled trial,
Reviews 2011, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD008471. DOI: 10.1002/
JAMA 290(11):1474-1478, 2003
1465 1858.CD008471.pub2.
17.
Weintraub MI, Wolfe GI, Barohn RA et al: Static magnetic
35. Khanaovitz N, Arnoczky SP, Nemzek J et al: The effect of
field therapy for symptomatic diabetic neuropathy: a ran-
electromagnetic pulsing on posterior lumbar spinal fusions
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, Arch Phys
in dogs, Spine 19(6);:705-709, 1994.
Med Rehabil 84:736-746, 2003.
 36. Inoue N, Ohnishi I, Chen D et al: Effect of pulsed electtO-
18. Harlow T, Greaves C, White A et al: Randomised controlled
magnetic fields (PEMF) on late-phase osteotomy gap healing
tial of magnetic bracelets for relieving pain in osteoarthritis
in a canine tibial model, J Orthop Res 20:1106-1114, 2002.
of the hip and knee, BMJ 329:18-25, 2004.
37. Fini M, Giavaresi G, Carpi A et al: Effects of pulsed
19. Laszio J, Reiczigel J, Szekely L et al: Optimization of static
electromagnetic fields on articular hyaline cartilage: review
  pe isae s d  on
 of experimental and clinical studies, Biomed Pharmacother
Bioelectromagnetics 28:615-627, 2007.
59(7):388-394, 2005.
20. Gyires K, Zadoni ZS, Racz B et al: Pharmacological analy sis 
 38. Pipitone N, Scott DL: Magnetic pulse treatment for knee
of inhomogeneous static magnetic field-induced antinocicep-
osteoarthri tis: arandomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
tive action in the mouse, Bioelectromagnetics 29:456-462,
study, Curr Med Res Opin 17(3):190-196, 2001.
2008
39. McCarthy CJ, Callaghan MJ, Oldham JA: Pulsed electro-
21. Rogachefsky RA, Altman RD, Markoy MS et al: Use of a
magnetic energy treatment offers no clinical benefit in reduc-
permanent magnetic field to inhibit the development of
ing the pain of knee osteoarthritis: a systematic review, BMC
canine osteoarthritis, Bioelectromagnetics 25:260-270, 2004.
Musculoskeletal Disorders 7:51, 2006.
22.B
Kroeling P, Gross A, Goldsimith C, Cervical Overview
40. Thamsborg G, Florescu A, Oturai P et al: Treatment of knee
Group: A Cochrane review of electrotherapy for mechanical
osteoarthritis with pulsed electromagnetic felds: a random-
neck disorders, Spine 30(2 1):E641-E648, 2005.
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, Osteoarthr
23. Maroudas A, Muir H, Wingham J: The correlation of fixed
Cart 13(7):575-581, 2005.
negative charge with glycosaminoglycan content of human
41. Hulme JM, Welch V, de Bie R et al: Electromagnetic fields
articular cartilage, Biochim Biophys Acta 177(3):492-500,
for the treatment of osteoarthritis, Cochrane Database of
1969.
Systematic Reviews 2009, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD003523. DO1:
24. Gordon GA: Designed electromagnetic pulsed therapy: clini-
10.1002/14651858.CD003523.
cal applications, J Cell Physiot 212:579-582, 2007.
42. Vavken P, Amich F, Schuhfried O et al: Effectiveness of
25. Ieran M, Zaffuto S, Bagnacani M et al: Effect of low fre-
pulsed electromagnetic field therapy in the management of
quency pulsing electromagnetic felds on skin ulcers of
osteoarthritis of the knee: a meta-analysis of randomized
yenous origin in humans: a double-blind study, J Orthop Res
controlled trials, J Rehabil Med 41:406-411, 2009.
8(2):276-282, 1990.
43. Ozgigli E, Cetin A, Cetin M et al: Additional effect of
26. Ito H, Bassett C: Effect of weak, pulsing electromagnetic
pulsed electromagnetic feld therapy on knee osteoarthritis
felds on neural regeneration in the rat, Clin Orthop Relat Res
treatment: a randomized, placebo-controlled study, Clin
181:283-290, 1983.
Rheumatol 29:927-931, 2010.
27. Scardino MS, Swaim SF, Sartin EA et al: Evaluation of treat-
44. Ay S, Evcik D: The effects of pulsed electromagnetic felds
ment with a pulsed electromagnetic field on wound healing,
in the treatment of knee osteoarthritis: a randomized, placebo-
clinicopathologic variables, and central nervous system actiy-
controlled trial, Rheumatol Int 29:663-666, 2009.
ity of dogs, Am J Vet Res 59(9):1177-1181, 1998.
45. Gordon-Evans WJ, Knap K: Randomized, controlled, blinded
28. Bellossi A, Nicol L, Dazord L: No effect of a low-frequency
clinical trial evaluating pulsed signal therapy for the treat-
pulsed magnetic feld on the brain blood fow among mice,
ment of osteoarthritis in the treatment of osteoarthritis in
Panminerva Med 35(1):57-59, 1993.
dogs, Proc Ann Meeting Am Coll Vet Surg, 2010.
29. Aaron R, Ciombor D: Acceleration of experimental endo-
46. Zorzi C, Dall'oca C, Cadossi R et al: Effects of pulsed elec-
chondral ossification by biophysical stimulation of the pro-
tromagnetic felds on patients’ recovery after arthroscopic
genitor cell pool, J Orthop Res 14(4):582-589, 1996.
surgery: prospective, randomized and double-blind study,
 30. Shimizu T, Zerwekh J, Videman T et al: Bone ingrowth into
Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 15:830-834, 2007.
porous calcium phosphate ceramics: infuence of pulsing
47. Shafford HL, Hellyer PW, Crump KT et al: Use of a
electromagnetic field, J Orthop Res 6(2):248-258, 1988.
pulsed electromagnetic field for treatment of post-operative
400
Section IV
Therapeutic Modalities
pain in dogs: a pilot study, Vet Anaesth Anaig 29(1):43-48,
 50. Draper DO, Castro JL, Feland B et al: Shortwave diathermy
2002.
 and prolonged stretching increase hamstring fexibility more
48. Galrett CL, Draper DO, Knight KL: Heat distribution in the
than prolonged stretching alone, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
lower leg from pulsed short-wave diathermy and ultrasound 
34:13-20, 2004.
treatments, J Atht Train 35:50-55, 2000.
 51. Hill J, Lewis M, Mills P et al: Pulsed short-wave diathermy
 49. Draper DO, Knight K, Fujiwara T et al: Temperature changes
effects on human fibroblast proliferation, Arch Phys Med
in human muscle during and after pulsed short-wave dia-
Rehabil 83:832-836, 2002.
thermy, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 29:13-22, 1999.
SECTION V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
24
Biomechanics of Physical
Rehabilitation and Kinematics
of Exercise
JosephP.Weigel andDarryl Millis
echanics as developed by Sir Isaac Newton
fracture is in static equilibrium, a condition that fosters
describes how force and mass interact in three-
bone bridging. It is important to exercise caution when
dimensional space and time on the surface of
applying physical rehabilitation to animals with healing
the earth. Biomechanics is the application of Newtonian
fractures such that these activities do not result in creating
mechanics to biologic systems. Newtonian mechanics is
an imbalance of force, causing motion of the fracture. The
founded on three classic laws of motion. The first law
static state of the fracture must be maintained even though
describes the static state of a body under the infuence of
the therapist is focused on motion of joints and the strength
balanced force. The second law describes the motion or
of muscles.
dynamic state of a body under the influence of unbalanced
Static exercise can be an effective way of stretching and
force. The third law describes the interaction between mul-
 enhancing fexibility by the strategic and controlled appli-
tiple bodies.
cation of force without producing motion. Static stretching
may improve soft tissue extensibility, which increases the
Law I (Law of Statics)
capacity for energy absorption and transfer when running.
for example. Practical methods for preexercise preparation
When the sum of all the forces acting on a body
in animals have not been established. Dogs are often left
equals zero, the body is in a static state (i.e.,the body
sedentary for long periods and then are suddenly released
is at rest or in unchanging. constant motion with no
for unrestrained activity, often at high performance levels.
acceleration).
After long periods of relative inactivity, ligaments, muscle,
tendons, and fascia are "tight,"' less ductile and less able to
∑F = 0F = 0
tolerate acute strain. Stiff soft tissue has less capacity to
Under certain conditions, the static state is desirable.
absorb impact, lending itself to tearing or rupture. A
For example, to enhance the conditions for healing, frac-
common thread in the clinical history of cranial cruciate
tured bones are managed by fixation systems designed to
injury in the dog is the occurrence of sudden lameness
place fracture segments in a static state or at rest. It is
during vigorous activity  following long periods of
therefore the goal of the surgeon to balance, both in direc-
inactivity.
tion and magnitude, all the forces that tend to cause motion
of the fragments. In the case of a fractured tuber calcis the
Law Il (Law of Dynamics)
 proximal fragment is under a large tension load caused by
the pull of the attached gastrocnemius muscle. Without
When the sum of all the forces(resultant force) acting on
fixation this pull is unopposed, causing motion of the bone
a body is not equal to zero, the body is in a dynamic state
fragments, which disrupts the body's attempt to bridge and
(i.e., the body is not at rest and is ina state of changing
stabilize the fracture. When a system of pins and a tension
motion or accelerating).
band wire are placed across the fracture, the wire, by virtue
F=ma
of its position and strength, counters the tension load of
the gastrocnemius muscle with a corresponding compres-
Force (F), is a vector and therefore has not only inten-
sion load provided by the tension band wire. When the sum
sity (magnitude) but also direction. Acceleration (a), the
of the forces acting across the fracture equals zero, the
change in velocity over time, also has intensity as well as
401
402
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
direction. Newton's second law directly relates the cause
animal impacts the plate, which results in a reaction force
of motion to the motion itself. In tenms of magnitude, the
that is recognized by the plate and analyzed by a computer
harder a body is pulled or pushed by an increasing force,
 program. The reaction force, recorded at the point of foot
the faster it moves as seen with increasing acceleration
impact (foot strike), is directly related to the force of weight
and velocity. In terms of direction, the body will move
bearing. This reaction force, called the ground reaction
or accelerate in the same direction as the applied force
force (GRF), is transmitted up the limb in part as an elastic
that has caused the motion. Therefore motion analysis or
reaction where it is refected by the stiffer tissues, and in a
dynamics involves the application of arithmetic functions
large part as an inelastic response where it is absorbed by
but within three-dimensional space, which also necessi-
the softer tissues. This absorption of force is an important
tates the use of trigonometric functions. Newton's second
function of the limb and all its components, and as a result,
law of motion can be expanded to describe the associated
is an important consideration in physical rehabilitation.
concepts of motion such as impulse, momentum, energy,
The therapist can manipulate the reaction force by apply-
work, and power.
ing various forms of exercise. For example, the aquatic
The physical therapist applies Newton's second law of
 treadmill mitigates the reaction force by using the buoy-
motion when the speed or acceleration (change in velocity
ancy of the animal in water to reduce its weight. Slinging
over time) of a therapeutic exercise is increased. When
the abdomen during ambulation also reduces the impact of
speed or acceleration increase, the load (force) on the limb
weight, thereby decreasing the reaction force. Sometimes
must also be increased to achieve the faster motion. For
a reaction force is magnifed so it can be a means of "active
example, hitting a wall with an automobile at 5 miles an
therapy'" during which it can stretch contracted tissues.
hour might dimple a bumper, but hitting the same wall with
Exercising down an inclined plane magnifies the reaction
the same automobile at 100 miles an hour could result in
force by increasing the magnitude of impact on the front
irreparable damage. Going faster means greater force,
limbs. Also, a reaction force can be magnifed by applying
which then increases the risk for exacerbating an injury or
a syringe cap to the foot of the sound limb to encourage a
 inducing new injury. For example, repeated rapid, forceful
shift of weight bearing to the contralateral limb, accelerat-
fexion of the stife in the case of a contracted quadriceps
ing its rehabilitation. Conditions of the terrain, such as the
muscle can result in avulsion of the tibial tuberosity. Slow
stiffness of the foor, obstructions in the gait pathway, or
range of motion (ROM) exercises, slow stretching, and
unstable fooring can alter the magnitude and direction of
 slow walking keep the applied forces low, preserving and
reaction forces. When devising therapeutic plans, the ther-
protecting healing tissues.
apist should consider the nature of the reaction forces and
how they can be modified for the patient's benefit.
Law Ill (Law of Action and Reaction)
 In the case of animal physical rehabilitation, the appli-
cation of the Newtonian laws of motion can be an ominous
When several bodies interact, the force resulting from the
challenge. The animal is a complex and sophisticated
interaction is equal in intensity to the force causing the
system of interconnected objects having complex pattems
interaction and willact along the same line but opposite
 of motion. This chapter attempts to incorporate the funda-
in direction.
mental concepts of biomechanics to the practice of animal
Newton's third law describes the event when one body
rehabilitation.
impacts another. Newton observed that when one mass,
moving under the infuence of a causative force, impacts a
The Body in Equilibrium: Statics
second mass, a reaction force occurs. This reaction force
is equal to the magnitude of the impacting force (original
Force is intuitively understood as a measure of intensity
 causative force) but acts in the opposite direction. This is
but also it must be viewed with respect to direction. For
easily observed in the case of a bouncing ball. When a
example pulling on a car door causes it to open while
ball is dropped to the foor, it impacts the floor and then
pushing on it causes it to close. To know only how hard to
reverses direction, moving away from the foor. The initial
pull or push is insufficient in understanding the design,
throwing force is reversed after the impact into a reaction
operation, and composition of a car door. Similarly, in
or "bouncing" force. If the bouncing ball is replaced by a
biomechanics it is not only beneficial to know how hard
bag of sand, the bag will not bounce; however, reaction
the leg impacts during an exercise but also from which
forces are still created but are absorbed by the sand in the
direction the force is acting. For example, living bone
bag. When an animal moves across the foor there is both
responds to weight bearing by increasing its mass and this
an elastic response (like the bouncing ball) where force is
response is not only caused by the intensity of the weight
refected and an inelastic response (like the bag of sand)
but also by where on the bone the weight load is localized.
where force is absorbed.
The classic Wolff's Law can be described as the case where
Newton's third law is the basis for the use of a force
 bone increases in mass in response to force that tends to
plate in analyzing an animal's gait. When in motion, the
push it together, whereas it decreases in mass where the
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
403
force tends to pull it apart. In the case of corrective oste-
tendency for rotation. This tendency is called "moment of
otomies, the goal is to help improve limb alignment, dis
a force," and the distance from the center of rotation to the
tribution of weight bearing forces, and joint function by
point of force application is called the moment arm. Math-
altering the anatomy and redirecting weight bearing, creat-
ematically, moment is represented by multiplying the force
ing an improved mechanical environment.
by the moment amm:
When the animal is at rest (standing still), the forces
M = Fd
acting on the body have not disappeared but have been
counterbalanced by forces acting in opposite directions.
where M is the moment of the force, F is the force, and d
Mechanical analysis of the body in this static state facili-
 is the moment anm.
tates understanding of the types of forces at play. There are
Moment is critical to the understanding of how force
four basic forces: compression, tension, shear, and moment
acts in the musculoskeletal system. Although forces of
or torque. The kind of force depends on its direction. A
body weight and muscle contraction push and pull at the
force that tends to push on a body is referred to as compres-
body, they also cause rotation at each of the joints when
sion; if it tends to pull on the body, it is called tension; if
these forces do not pass through the center of rotation of
it tears or shreds the body, it is shear, and finally, if it tends
the joint. For example, there is a tendency toward fexion
to rotate or tum the body, it is a moment or torque.
(rotation in one direction) of the joints in the front limb
To evaluate direction, a reference or coordinate struc-
Of a standing animal, which is caused by the body's
ture is necessary. Commonly a three-axis rectangular
weight pushing down at a location that is off center of the
system representing the three dimensions of space (height,
respective joint. The animal is able to stand because the
width, and length) is used. By convention this axis system
tendency toward fexion is counterbalanced by a tendency
is composed of three perpendicular axes, labeled z for the
toward extension (counter rotation in the opposite direc-
vertical direction, y for the horizontal direction, and x for
tion) caused by contraction of several muscles, including
the transverse direction.
the supraspinatus, triceps brac hii, and extensor carpi radia-
lis muscles. In the rear limb, fexion caused by the body's
Compression (Push)
weight at the hip, stife, and tarsal joints is counterbalanced
When the vertical dimension of the limb is oriented along
by contraction of the gluteal, quadriceps, and gastrocne-
the z axis, a force parallel to the z axis and directed toward
mius muscles, which causes extension at each of these
the center of the limb is called compression. Compression
joints. The actions of these forces of weight and muscle
is the major load on the hard tissue elements, bone and
contraction are defined as moments, which are very impor-
cartilage, as it tends to push them together.
tant, especially in the analysis of gait.
 Moments of force are important in the effective function
Tension (Pull)
of muscle in sustaining weight bearing. For example, in
With the vertical dimension of the limb oriented along the
the stife the normal position of the patella creates an effec-
z axis, a force parallel to the z axis and directed away from
 tive moment by the quadriceps about the center of rotation
the center of the limb is called tension. Tension is the major
of the stifle such that extension of the stifle is maintained
load on the soft tissue elements, muscles, tendons, and
enough to bear weight. However, the function is altered
ligaments, as it tends to pull them apart.
when the patella is not in its normal position and is dislo-
cated medially. In the dislocated position the moment arm
Shear (Tear or Shred)
of the tension force in the quadriceps is reduced or elimi-
With the vertical dimension of the limb oriented along the
nated (Figure 24-1). The closer the tension force is to the
z axis, a force perpendicular to the z axis is called shear
center of rotation, the less extension is possible. Therefore
Shear is a significant force causing the elements of the
a dog with luxating patellas is weak in the rear limbs and
system to tear or slide apart. For example, the cranial cruci-
unable to bear weight normally or perform activities, such
ate ligament (CCL) encounters a shear load that occurs
as jumping.
across the stife during weight bearing. When this ligament
is torm, the shear is unopposed and cranial drawer occurs.
Lever Systems in the Body (Application
Redirection of the weight-bearing forces by a tibial plateau
of Moments of Force)
leveling osteotomy eliminates the shear component,
thereby preventing the occurrence of cranial drawer while
A lever is a simple machine using the principle of moments
in weight bearing.
to overcome a resistance load. There are three classes of
levers: Class I, in which the fulcrum (point of rotation) is
Rotation (Moment of a Force or Torque)
between the effort force (applied force usually resulting
A force can also tend to cause a mass to rotate about a
from muscle contraction) and the resistance force (load
point called the center of rotation. The farther away from
force, which is generally the weight of the body or limb);
the center of rotation the force is applied, the greater is the
Class II, in which the resistance is between the effort and
404
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Fulcrum 
Effort (triceps
contraction)
Load (body weight)
Mn 5 Fdn
M, . M
M, 5 Fd
Normal Patella
Luxated Patella
(n)
Figure 24-1  The moment arm of the tension force in the quadri-
Kllepaw patexnl s! ellated ayi uayn pateuwae lo paonpal s! sdas
 Luxation of the patella compromises weight bearing by lessening the
Figure 24-2 Extension of the elbow is a Class I lever system. The
moment (M) generated by quadriceps contraction by shortening the 
fulcrum is located at the center of rotation of the joint, the resistance
moment arm (d).
or load force is located at the point where the foot contacts the
 ground and the effort or action force produced in the triceps muscle
 is located at its insertion point on the olecranon.
fulcrum; and Class IMl, in which the effort is between the
resistance and the fulcrum.
A variety of levers are used by the animal to extend and
flex the various joints of the limbs. For ex ample, extension 
of the elbow is accomplished with a Class I lever in which
the fulcrum is located at the center of rotation of the
joint, the resistance or load force is located at the point
Fulcrum
where the foot contacts the ground, and the effort or
Effort (biceps
action force, which is produced in the triceps muscle, is
contraction)
located at its insertion point on the olecranon (Figure
24-2). With fexion of the elbow, a Class MI lever is in
 operation in which the effort is located at the insertion of
the biceps brachi, which is between the fulcrum (elbow
joint) and the resistance force, which is located at the end
of the antebrachium (Figure 24-3).
 Class II levers are uncommon. An example is the rear
foot, in which the weightbearing toes act as the fulcrum,
the resistance or load force is the body weight just caudal
to and at the foot, and the effort force is the gastrocnemius
muscle (Figure 24-4).
In contrast, both extension and fexion of the stifle joint
Load
are accomplished with a Class IlI lever, in which the effort
(forearm
 Or action load is located at the insertion of the quadriceps
weight)
muscle on the tibial tuberosity (for extension) or the inser-
Figure 24-3 A Class Ill lever occurs with flexion of the elbow where
tion of the semitendinosus muscle on the proximal tibia
the effort is located at the insertion of the biceps brachi, which is
(for fexion), which is located between the fulcrum (stife
between the fulcrum (elbow joint) and the resistance force, which is 
joint) and the resistance force, which is located at the distal
 located at the end of the antebrachium.
end of the limb.
The relative magnitudes of the effort versus the resis-
tance is the value of understanding lever systems and their
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
405
Effort (gastrocnemius
 contraction)
Figure 24-4 An example of a Class Il lever is the rear
Fulcrum
foot, where the weight-bearing toes act as the fulcrum,
Load (body weight)
the resistance or load force is the body weight just caudal
to and at the foot, and the effort force is the gastrocne-
mius muscle.
function in the musculoskeletal system. The effort force
multiplied by its distance (moment arm, d) to the fulcrum
Fulcrum
is the effort moment. The resistance force multiplied by its
 perpendicular distance (moment amm, d.) to the fulcrum is
the load moment. In the balanced state in which the lever
is not moving or moving without acceleration, the effort
moment must equal the load moment. This Law of the
Lever system establishes the relationship between the
 Effort 
effort and resistance loads. When comparing the magni-
(therapist)-
tude of required effort to overcome the magnitude of a
Load (quadriceps)
specified resistance, compare the respective moment arms.
If the effort moment anm is longer than the resistance
moment anm, then the effort force necessary to overcome
the resistance will be relatively less than the magnitude of
the resistance.
(E)(d,)=(R)(d。)
Figure 24-5 Stretching in flexion of a dog with hyperextension
stiffness of the stifle presents the conditions for a Class ll lever. The
In the case in which rotation is inhibited by contracture
point of resistance is the insertion of the quadriceps muscle on the
or fibrosis leading to decreased ROM, therapists use
tibial tuberosity, which is located between the fulcrum (stifle joint)
"passive" ROM exercise by pushing or pulling on the lower
and the effort, which is the location of the therapist's hold on the
 part of the limb to induce fexion or extension in a target
distal shin or crus of the leg. In this case the effort is relatively far
joint. Passive ROM is often used to reduce the possibility
from the stifle when compared with the resistance, which is close to
of stiffness or to improve the mobility of stiff joints. In
the joint.
some of these exercises the lever action is altered. For
example, stretching in fexion of a dog with hyperextension
stiffness of the stifle presents the conditions for a Class
the therapist pushes on the tibia to produce fexion in the
II lever (Figure 24-5). The point of resistance is the inser-
stife, the resistance load in the stiff quadriceps quickly
tion of the quadriceps muscle on the tibial tuberosity,
rises, creating a magnitude of force that has the ability to
which is located between the fulcrum (stifle joint), and the
result in tearing of the quadriceps or even avulsion of the
effort, which is the location of the therapist's hold on the
tibial tuberosity. Because the moment arm length of the
distal crus of the leg. In this case, the effort is relatively
effort force is great, a large moment can be generated,
far from the stife when compared with the resistance that
potentially causing damage. It is important for the therapist
 is close to the joint. When the quadriceps is adhered to the
to understand the relationship between the effort or action
underlying bone and joint capsule and has lost its elasticity,
load and the reactive or resistance load when employing
it has also lost its capacity to absorb energy and load. As
certain therapeutic exercises. In the previous example,
406
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
the addition of shear force across the hip joint has the
potential of increasing mechanical stresses in the articular
cartilage, which may be deleterious to a dysplastic joint.
Increased moment across the stifle would likely be resisted
by increased contraction of the quadriceps muscles,
strengthening this muscle group. The effectiveness of
physical rehabilitation exercises could be enhanced by
detailed mechanical evaluation looking at not only the
magnitudes of weight-bearing forces but also the altered
direction of these forces.
Tissue Response to Force
To understand how force affects the body, the response of
the various tissues to force is important to analyze. Each
of the tissues involved respond differently because the
Figure 24-6 Wheelbarrowing to increase weight bearing on the
composition of each is different. These responses are
front limbs results in the spine becoming a Class Il lever in which the
unique to the tissue and can be called the material proper-
resistance (center of gravity of the body) is located between the
ties of the tissue. These properties include measures of
fulcrum at the shoulder joint and the effort where the therapist is
lifting the caudal end of the body. As the spine is raised from the rear,
stiffness, elasticity, plasticity, strength, failure limits, and
alow s! ieui uojeool e oi saaow Apog aui jo Aiiaein jo lauan aul
energy absorption. Basically, a tissue responds to force
in two ways: frst, an intrinsic resistance to the applied
dorsal to the shoulder.
force is called stress; second, an accommodation to the
applied force by a change in the shape of the tissue is called
strain.
moving the hands closer to the stife joint reduces the
Stress
moment arm length, and therefore makes it more difficult
to generate a large moment, reducing the possibility of
 Stress is directly related to the magnitude of the applied
tissue damage.
force (i.e., the greater the applied force, the greater the
Other exercises such as "wheel barrowing" on the front
stress within the tissue). Stress is also inversely related to
limbs or "dancing" on the rear limbs employ the use of
the area over which the total force is acting (i.e. the larger
lever systems. In the case of wheel barrowing or walking
the area, the lower the stress). This understanding of the
down an incline (to increase weight bearing on the front
nature of stress explains how a scalpel cuts the skin. A
limbs), the spine becomes a Class II lever in which the
 m pn o aa u xa u s a d
resistance (center of gravity [COG] of the body) is located
pressure the force is concentrated at the edge of the blade
between the fulcrum at the shoulder joint and the effort in
and the stress in the skin is very high, causing the skin to
which the therapist is lifting the caudal end of the body. It
break away and separate. A dull blade with a wider edge
is also important to note that as the spine is raised from the
requires more force to increase the stress to the skin and
rear, the COG of the body moves to a location that is more
cause it to separate.
dorsal to the shoulder, introducing a horizontal component
Stress is particularly important in the understanding of
of the weight, which acts as a shear force across the shoul-
 how articular cartilage responds to force applied across a
der joint (Figure 24-6). As a result, increased stress in
joint surface. Under conditions in which the anatomy is
the joint capsule, collateral ligaments, and tendons will
normal and the joint is physiologically and mechanically
likely occur. This horizontal shear force may also cause
normal, the surface of the joint spreads the applied forces
an additional moment to occur at the level of the elbow
 over a wide area such that the stress at any specific point
joint, which is likely resisted by additional contraction of
on the cartilage is low. However, if the joint is anatomically
the triceps muscle. It has been observed that the angle of
deranged, such as with a growth deformity, or is mechani-
the shoulder joint becomes more extended with wheelbar-
cally unstable, such as with hip dysplasia, joint forces are
rowing,' which moves weight bearing from the center of
concentrated on smaller surface areas, causing high degrees
the humeral head to a more cranial location where there is
of stress and subsequent breakdown of the articular carti-
less articular cartilage and bone. Dancing is the reverse of
lage (Figure 24-7).
this example; in dancing the spine is raised from the front
Motion of a joint is not only important for the
and used as a Class II lever. As with the effects on the
physiologic health of the articular cartilage, but also for
shoulders, the same likely occurs on the hips. For example,
the mechanical integrity of the cartilage. For example,
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
407
Load Deformation Curve
Yield
Ultimate
point
 strength
peo
Deformation 
Figure 24-8  A stress versus strain curve demonstrates additional
properties of the tissue response to force. A, The initial response in
the graph is termed the toe region of the graph. The collagen fibers
 are in a completely relaxed state with a crimped or wavy pattern.
B, The linear portion of the graph describes the elasticity of the tissue.
The slope of the graph gives a measure of stiffness of the tissue.
C, The upper curved portion of the graph describes the plasticity of
Figure 24-7  In a mechanically unstable joint, such as in a dog with
the tissue. In this range the tissue is deforming, but when the load
is removed, the tissue does not return to its original shape, meaning
causing high degrees of stress and subsequent breakdown of the 
that a permanent change has taken place. D, The peak of the curve
articular cartilage.
is the highest level of stress the tissue tested can withstand and is
referred to as the ultimate strength of the tissue.
long-term immobilization of a nonmal joint can induce
bone deforms less under a compressive load than it does
osteoarthritis. The lack of motion results in a concentration
under the same intensity load in tension). The opposite is
of force over a small area of articular cartilage. This
true in the case of a ligament: the ligament deforms less
 increases the stress, causing a breakdown in the cartilage
under tension than it does under compression.
structure, inducing an infammatory response and osteoar-
Stress versus Strain
thritis. Distributing weight-bearing forces over a wider
area of the joint surface is one way to minimize articular
 For any tissue under the infuence of force, its response
cartilage stress, but also reducing the weight-bearing force
can be graphed as stress versus strain, which demon-
itself while maintaining joint motion should reduce the
strates additional properties of the tissue response to force
stress. This may be accomplished with an aquatic treadmill
(Figure 24-8). The initial response in the graph is termed
in which the water tempers the weight-bearing force but
the toe region of the graph. This phenomenon is more
allows normal ROM.
typical with soft tissue such as a tendon or ligament as
opposed to bone. A tendon in its completely relaxed state
Strain
has a crimped or wavy patterm of the collagen fibers.
As a result of an applied force, a tissue can change shape.
When the tendon is mounted in the testing machine and
For example, a ligament stretched by a tension force will
then pulled, the initial recording represents a straighten-
lengthen, and this increase in length is termed tensile
a jo d Au jasaau nu saop pue d au jo su
strain. Likewise, compressive force compacts tissue, creat-
strength of the tendon in tension. It is also helpful to pass
ing a compressive strain, and shear force translates por-
upu an .suissansad, Aq uolan .amn, sun yanon
tions of tissue, creating a shear strain. For some tissues,
(i.e., stretching the tendon to eliminate the crimp). The
strain and strain rates may depend on the direction or ori-
slope of the graph gives a measure of stiffness of the
entation of the force causing the strain. Such a property is
tissue. Steep slopes occur when the tissue is infexible
referred to as anisotropy. For example, depending on which
 and brittle like that of bone, whereas a shallow slope rep-
direction the force is acting on a section of bone, the strain
resents tissue with fexibility, like that of muscle
or
value is different. Bone is stronger under compression than
tendon. The linear portion of the graph describes the elas-
it is under tension, meaning that the strain is less (i.e., the
ticity of the tissue. In this range the tissue is deforming or
408
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
undergoing strain, but when the load is removed, the
bolt and nut become loose and the fixation is lost. This
tissue retums to its original length. The upper curved
phenomenon is referred to as stress relaxation in which the
 portion of the graph describes the plasticity of the tissue.
strain is constant but the stress decreases over time.
In this range the tissue is deforming, but when the load is
The converse event, in which the stress is constant and
removed the tissue does not retum to its original shape,
the strain changes over time, is referred to as creep. Creep
meaning that a permanent change has taken place; there-
is used frequently in passive ROM exercises in which a
fore the tissue has undergone a "plastic deformation." The
muscle tendon unit is stretched with a constant force and
peak of the curve is the highest level of stress the tissue
held for a period. During this time the strain in the muscle
tested can withstand and is referred to as the ultimate
changes without increasing the force. The therapist can
strength of the tissue. Failure under stress is demonstrated
then relax the muscle, rest it, and then repeat the exercise,
as a decreasing capability to maintain the stress and the
stretching the tissue to a new length while maintaining the
value begins to drop as the load increases, or complete
pressure, allowing the tissue to stretch more without
failure as the stress drops to zero, indicating that the
increasing the force. Understanding how creep functions,
ul 'peol padde Aue iapun dn pioy iasuol ou ueo anss
and that force does not have to be continuously increased
addition to these features, the area under the stress versus
to achieve lengthening, helps to make injuries, such as
strain curve represents the amount of energy that is
avulsion fractures, less likely to occur during therapy
absorbed or stored in the material as it is loaded. Once
sessions.
failure occurs, the stored energy is released in the form of
a fracture or tearing event.
For bone, the response is more predictable and consis-
The Body in Motion: Dynamics
tent as compared with muscle, tendon, and ligament. Bone
behaves in a linear way as a elastic solid, but for the soft
When the forces acting on a body become unbalanced and
tissues where the response is more variable and less pre-
the sum of these forces is not equal to zero (resultant
 dictable, the response is nonlinear. As opposed to bone,
force), the body will move in the same direction as the
these tissues behave as a viscoelastic material. A viscoelas-
resultant force. The displacement, in terms of acceleration,
tic solid's properties, like stiffness, change over time. The
is directly proportional to the resultant force by Newton's
response of a viscoelastic material additionally depends on
second law:
factors like moisture content and temperature. For example,
F=ma
under the condition of cold temperatures, the tissue is
stiffer so the stress is greater. When exercise is planned,
where F is the resultant force, m is the mass, and a is the
often the tissues are physically warmed, which has the
acceleration.
effect of reducing the stiffness and increasing its fexibility
Evaluation of the left side, or the force side, of this
and elasticity. If the ligaments are cold and therefore stiff,
equation is the science of kinetics, whereas evaluation of
a normal load could result in a higher than normal stress
the right side, or the displacement side, is the science of
and in some cases the stress may be high enough to super-
kinematics.
sede the capacity of the ligament to remain intact, resulting
Kinetics
in ligament damage.
Stress relax ation and creep are also additional phenom-
Kinetic gait analysis can be used to evaluate normal weight
ena that occur in viscoelastic materials. Stress relaxation
bearing, identify alterations in weight bearing, aid in the
is the condition when a tissue is deformed to a consistent
diagnosis of disorders of locomotion, and evaluate treat-
state and the stress gradually diminishes over time.
ment effects. The typical format for evaluating the forces
Although bone is more like an elastic solid, it exhibits
involved in the motion of an animal is the use of the force
some properties of viscoelasticity when compared with
platform. The force platform is a plate instrumented with
 Other solids, such as metal. The moisture in bone accounts
a series of strain gauges or crystals and mounted into the
for this response. In fracture repair, bolts and nuts are not
foor. Because of their symmetry and convenient speed, the
used because of the viscoelasticity of bone. When a bolt
walk and trot are the conventional gaits that are used for
and nut are used, the material in between is compressed.
evaluation of gait and assessment of lameness. The trot is
This material resists the compression by pushing back on
usually the easier gait to obtain data. At a walk, dogs are
the bolt and nut. This interaction of the applied force by
more likely to be distracted and have a less consistent gait.
the bolt and nut and the reactive force in the material sta-
When the animal steps on the plate, the sensitive strain
bilizes the bolt and nut. In a material that retains its stiff-
 gauges or crystals generate an electrical signal that is sent
ness the fixation remains stable; however, if the material is
to a data processor and a computer. Multiple signals,
viscoelastic and its properties change, such as with bone,
collected over time, define the stance phase of the gait,
the stiffness decreases as water is squeezed from the bone.
from the time the foot strikes the plate until the instant the
As the stiffness decreases, the push back decreases and the
foot leaves the plate. The right side of the equation, the
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
409
0100-
75
50
20406080100020406080100
Percent stance
Figure 24-10  Vertical forces of the forelimbs and hindlimbs while
trotting. Note that there is only a single smooth curve for the fore-
limbs and hindlimbs, with the greater forces placed on the
forelimb.
plate. This vertical GRF represents the animal's weight-
bearing performance and is often measured as a percent of
body weight. The term peak force represents the maximum
value of the GRF during the stance phase of gait, whereas
Figure 24-9 The dog is trotting over the force platform, which is
connected to a computer for the measurement of ground reaction
impulse represents the generation or dissipation of reaction
force occurring over time. Normal peak vertical GRF for 
forces.
the front limb at a trot is 110-125% of body weight, and
for the rear limb is 65-75% of body weight,4 and are
typically symmetric with a single peak (Figure 24-10).
displacement side, is kept constant by setting the velocity
Walking generates a biphasic Z force curve similar to that
and acceleration to a well-defined range, for example, trot-
seen in humans, resulting in a classic m-shaped graph
ting at a velocity of 1.7-2 m/s and acceleration of ± 0.4 m/
in which the initial peak represents the vertical force
s?. To generate a readable report, the animal is trotted
component associated with the initial paw strike in the
across the plate such that the front and rear limb, on the
early stance phase and the second peak represents the
same side, fully contact the plate once (Figure 24-9). Often
increase in vertical force at the time of toe off or propulsion
an animal may not lead consistently or may be cautious of
(Figure 24-11). Typical peak vertical force (Zeak) mea-
the plate by shifting weight, attempting to avoid contact.
surements for the fore- and rear limbs while walking are
Therefore a single tracing is not considered reliable by
lower than those measured while trotting and are typically
itself. Several identical tracings (usually a minimum of
60% and 30% of body weight, respectively. Zpak is affected
three) are considered more reliable in presenting to the
by the gait, velocity, and acceleration of the dog, the
 evaluator a more realistic representation of the actual gait
dog's body weight, conformation, and musculoskeletal
routine for that animal.
structure.-- In both the walk and the trot, Zpeak increases as
The force plate is capable of measuring reaction forces
the forward velocity of the animal increases.6.9
in all three dimensions: the vertical (z axis), the horizontal
Impulse, the area under the force-versus-time curve, is
(y axis), and the transverse direction (x axis). Pressure
 the change in momentum over time. As velocity increases
pads or mats have also been developed and have the advan-
at a trot, the vertical impulse (VT) increases as a result of
tage of being able to evaluate patients too small to partici-
 the increased force.6.9.10 When comparing only peak verti-
pate in force platforn analysis and to collect data from
cal GRFs between individuals, how rapidly the limb is
multiple limb strikes. This may allow the objective evalu-
loaded and how long the limb bears the load are over-
ation of small dogs and cats with conditions such as avas-
 looked. These factors affect the impulse value and are not
cular necrosis of the femoral head and medial patella
refected in the peak force. If the limb bears load longer,
luxation.?3 However, they typically only measure relative
for a similar peak load, the impulse will be significantly
weight bearing by a limb rather than actual force, and they
greater (Figure 24-12). Zreak of a rear limb is greater while
do not allow the resolution to z, y, and x forces.
trotting than while walking, but because the stance time
is longer at a walk, the impulse is greater while walking
Vertical Ground Reaction Forces
 than while trotting. Therefore changes in both peak reac-
 Pressure exerted in the vertical direction on the force plate
tion force and impulse should be evaluated when rating
 generates an equal but opposite reaction force in the force 
gait performance, and repeated evaluations may only be
410
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
whereas variation is higher for braking and propulsive
weig
forces. Most of the variability is due to dog and trial varia-
80-
tion, with little infuence on variation by experienced han-
Ap
0
60
dlers." The symmetry of the tracing can also be altered
/N
with lameness. If the shape of the tracing is shifted to the
[100
left or right, the animal is quickly loading the limb and
20
peaking early in the stance phase and then slowly unload-
or
ing the limb throughout the remainder of the stance phase,
020406080100020
406080100
 or slowly loading the limb and quickly unloading it. The
Percent stance
clinical significance is not clearly understood regarding
Figure 24-11  Vertical forces of the forelimbs and hindlimbs while
this shift, but one study has suggested that a combination
walking. Note the biphasic nature of the force curve.
of Zpak and the falling slope (unloading the limb) is more
valuable in assessing lameness caused by cruciate ligament
disease than either measure by itself.'? Changes in the
shape of the tracing could represent lameness because it is
reasonable to surmise that a painful limb would not be
allowed to increase its load all the way to midstance but
would peak early, or the limb would be rapidly unloaded,
100
when the limb pain reaches an intolerant level. However
75
this shift has been seen in contralateral limbs that are com-
body
50
pensating for lameness in other limbs. In the compensation
25
mode, loading of the limb peaks early to reduce the load
on the painful limb. The difference may be related to the
-0
Zpeak. In the case of the shift occurring with lameness, the
 Zpeak is less than normal, whereas in the case of compensa-
0250300
tion, the left shift in the compensating limb is normal or
50
100
150
200
higher than normal.
Stance phase (msec)
The stance time may also be assessed. The stance time
Peak
Impulse
Time  Average rise
of the gait cycle is the time when the limb is in contact
|100*N/N 100*N-sec/N msec slope N/msec
with the ground and depends largely on the velocity of
A
50.97
5.56
207
1.34
the subject. As the velocity increases,
the stance
time decreases.910 In addition, a lame limb typically has
B
52.45
8.49
283
4.77
a shorter stance time compared with the unaffected
 The rate of limb loading and stance time affects the
limb.7.8,.10. 12
Figure 24-12
impulse value and is not reflected in the peak force. If the limb bears
Horizontal Ground Reaction Forces
load longer, for a similar peak load, the impulse is greater.
Pressure exerted in the direction of the animal's motion
occurs when the animal places the foot on the plate. This
creates a GRF that is equal to the applied pressure but in
the opposite direction. This GRF pushes back against the
compared if the dog is ambulating at the same gait, and
forward motion of the animal resulting in a braking action.
 velocity, and there is no acceleration or deceleration while
As with the vertical force, the intensity of this braking
measuring GRFs.
force increases to a peak value then begins to decrease
The animal's COG is particularly important in weight
(Figure 24-13). However, there are important differences.
distribution at a stance or while in motion. Traveling uphill
Unlike the Zpak, the braking force rises and falls in the
tends to shift the balance of forces toward the hindlimbs,
frst half of the stance phase, such that the horizontal GRF
and moving downhill shifts the forces to the forelimbs.
is zero at the midpoint of the stance phase. In addition,
These factors may affect the forces generated during
the braking force is opposite to the direction of animal
muscle contraction and be used advantageously during
motion and is therefore negative and appears below the
strengthening programs. Further evaluation of kinetic
horizontal axis. After the animal passes the midpoint of
information includes symmetry of the tracing, and com-
the stance phase, the pressure exerted by the foot on the
parisons of tracings to the contralateral limb and previous
plate causes a GRF that is in the same direction as the
tracings. In cases of lameness, the peak vertical GRF and
animal's motion. This GRF pushes the animal along its
VI are significantly reduced. Coefficients of variation
motion and is therefore a propulsive force. Similar to
between trials range from 5% to 9% for Zpeak and VI,
braking, the propulsive force increases to a peak value and
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
411
25-
Forelimb
Rear limb
YA
YB
YA
Forc
25-
1000
100
Percent stance
Figure 24-13  Braking and propulsion forces of the forelimbs and
hindlimbs while trotting. Note the biphasic nature of the force curve,
with the negative deflection representing braking, and the positive
 deflection representing propulsion.
then decreases. The propulsive force cycles completely
Figure 24-14 A computerized system may be used to measure
within the second half of the stance phase. These forces
weight bearing on each limb while standing. In addition, the distribu-
of braking and propulsion occur along the y axis. Normally,
tion of weight to various limbs may be assessed during therapeutic
the forelimbs have greater braking forces than propulsive
exercises, such as weight shifting.
forces, and the hindlimbs have greater propulsion as com-
pared with braking.
Transverse Ground Reaction Forces
equation relates displacement to its cause, the unbalanced
Some side-to-side pressure is exerted by the foot during
force. Typically the equation is stated using acceleration
stance phase; however, in the case of the quadruped animal
as the unit of displacement. Acceleration is the rate at
moving in a straight line, the intensity is minimal when
which the velocity changes with respect to time. Velocity
compared to the x and y forces. As a result this GRF is
is the rate at which the displacement occurs with respect
 seldom used in the evaluation of lameness. The forces may
to time. When viewing an animal in motion, linear motion
be quite significant, however, in an animal that is turming
is easily understood as the animal is seen moving in a
rapidly, such as negotiating vertical weave poles during an
straight line from one point to another. However, when the
agility competition.
intemal mechanics of the animal's muscles and bones are
studied, the initiating action is more circular than linear.
Measurement of Static Weight Bearing
This is analogous to the motion of an automobile. When
Force plate and motion analysis systems are costly and
viewing the car in motion, the action is linear as the car
require a relatively large dedicated workspace. Therefore
moves from one point to another. However, when the inter-
their use in private practice is limited. Subjective lame-
nal mechanics of the car are studied, the action is circular
ness scales have traditionally been used, but have signifi-
involving drive shafts, axels, and wheels. In the car, the
cant limitations. Weight bearing at a stance may be one
force is generated by the up-and-down motion of pistons
method to obtain quantitative data regarding the relative
and rods. The action of this force is transmitted to a rotat-
amount of force placed on each limb while standing. A
ing camshaft to circular gears and rotating drive shafts and
computerized system  to objectively evaluate weight
ultimately to the wheels, which rotate to propel the car
bearing at a stance in dogs may be useful for this purpose 
forward in linear motion. In the animal, the force is gener-
(Figure 24-14). Preliminary studies indicate that there is 
ated by the up-and-down contraction of actin and myosin
good correlation between Zpeak at a trot determined by
elements in the muscle. The contraction of these muscle
force plate analysis and static weight-bearing pressures
elements causes rotation of the bones about the joints,
 a   g s   so 
propelling the animal forward in linear motion. A car is
between the lame and contralateral sound limb may be
rated in terms of torque (i.e., its ability to generate force
greater at a stance because there are three other limbs to
for motion). Similarly, in the analysis of the forces that
shift the weight to, and the limbs are in contact for a
 generate motion in the body, torque or angular moment is
longer time than at a trot, allowing additional time to
important. Because circular motion is important in the
shift the weight.
generation of body motion, angular displacements must be
measured and from these measurements angular momen-
Kinematics
tum can be derived.
Kinematics is the science of the right side of Newton's
Real-time photographic,(
 optoelectric technology is
fundamental equation of motion. The right side of the
effective in measuring angles during continuous motion.
412
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Optoelectric technology involves the use of infrared
has three distinct movements. The limb initially swings
cameras positioned for views in three-dimensional space.
caudally following propulsion. The limb is then pulled
The animal is prepared with refective markers secured to
cranially, and finally travels briefy caudally toward the
the body at predetermined points (Figure 24-15). These
 ground in preparation for the next stance phase.14.15 The
points are anatomic features that represent joint anatomy.
distance from initial contact of one limb to the point of
Infrared light emitted from individual cameras is refected
second contact of the same limb is termed stride length.
from these markers back to the camera (Figure 24-16). As
 and a gait cycle is a series of events that includes one stride
the joints move, the cameras record the displacement of
for each of the four limbs.5.14.15
the markers. Data points are analyzed with respect to a
The joint angle data can be plotted over the period of a
three-dimensional grid set up and calibrated at the begin-
single stride (Figure 24-17). These patterms of motion are
    s n  isn a g 
specific for each joint and gait. Some results have been
excursion throughout a full stride. Typical data acquired
 obtained both for normal gait and for lameness associated
include stride length, stance and swing times, joint angles
with cranial cruciate deficiency'6 and hip dysplasia.
in all planes of motion, and linear and angular joint veloc-
Combining Kinetics and Kinematics
ity and acceleration.
A stride includes a single swing and stance phase. The
The evaluation of force (kinetics) and of displacement
stance time of gait is the period when the foot is in contact
(kinematics) can be combined or connected via Newton's
with the ground, and the swing phase occurs when the foot
second law of motion. This connection is possible when
is off the ground between stance phases. The swing phase
kinetic and kinematic data are synchronously obtained.
Figure 24-15 The animal is prepared with reflective markers
Figure 24-16  Cameras that detect infrared light reflected back to
anatomy.
the camera are used to capture the motion of reflective markers as
the animal moves through the test area.
Contact
Toe off
Contact
185.000
165.000
Figure 24-17 Angular data from each joint can be
145.000
plotted over the period of a single stride. This graph repre-
sents motion of the hip, stifle, and hock joints at a walk
125.000
for a dog.
105.000
0.000
0.150
0.300
0.4500.6000.750
0.900
1.050
Time (sec)
Coxofemoral,
Stifle angle,
-Tibiotarsal,
3D angles
3D angles
3D angles
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
413
Such effort requires special technology to coordinate data
 acquisition. Once this is achieved, the constant in Newton's
described kinematic motion of the joints of nonmal dogs at
equation, mass, must be determined for the body segments
a trot.17.18 The coxofemoral and carpal joints were charac-
involved in the analysis. This includes not only the mass
terized by a single peak of maximal extension and the
value itself, but also the distribution of mass (mass moment 
femorotibial, tarsal, scapulohumeral, and cubital joints had
of inertia). Therefore Newton's second law may be
two peaks of extension, with one peak occurring prior to
expressed specifically for linear motion (the study of the
the stance phase, and a second peak occurring during the
entire animal moving in a linear fashion):
F=ma
between trials and few differences among dogs of similar
body type. It was concluded that kinematic gait analysis
where F is the force (kinetics: evaluation of force), m is
may provide a reliable description of joint motion in dogs
mass, and a is acceleration (kinematics: evaluation of
of similar size and conformation. A recent study has evalu-
linear displacement). Specifically for angular motion (the
ated not only the joint angle excursions at a walk, but also
study of the interior forces of the muscles and the angular
defined angular velocity and acceleration rates of those
movements of the bones):
movements. This study indicated that these parameters are
M=1a
consistent and repeatable and helps to further characterize
the normal walking gait of hound-type dogs.27 Additional
where M is the moment (kinetics: evaluation of moment
studies are warranted to determine the sensitivity and spec-
of force), I is the mass moment of inertia, and α is the
ificity of alterations in these parameters as indicators for
angular acceleration (kinematics: evaluation of angular
specific causes of lameness.
displacement).
When kinetics and kinematics are connected mathemat-
Cranial Cruciate Ligament Disease
ically, forces and moments of individual joints can be
 Following cranial cruciate ligament rupture (CCLR), Zpeak
determined by calculating the values from force plate
may be only 50% of normal at a walk, and dogs may be
 ground reaction and joint motion values. This approach is
non-weight bearing at a trot.? By 7 months after extracap-
referred to as inverse dynamics.
sular surgical repair, weight bearing is usually equal in
both rear limbs at a walk. Experimentally, Zpak at the trot
Kinetic and Kinematic Gait
with an extracapsular repair technique was normal by 20
weeks after surgery.29 Weight bearing in the contralateral
Analysis Research
rear limb initially increases, likely as a result of redistribu-
tion of weight from the affected limb to normal limbs, then
Normal Gait
returms to normal as weight bearing improves on the
 Knowledge of typical weight-bearing patterns in normal
affected limb.
dogs and those with orthopedic conditions provides infor-
Dogs with CCLR have variable degrees of lameness and
mation that may be valuable in the rehabilitation of patients.
demonstrate altered movement in the hip, stife, and hock
In a normal standing patient, each forelimb bears approxi-
joints.16 The stife joint angle in the cruciate-deficient state
mately 30% of the dog's body weight, and each rear limb
was more fexed throughout the stance and early swing
bears 20% of body weight. The relative proportion of
phase of stride and failed to fully extend in late stance,
weight bearing on the fore- and rear limbs is relatively
when limb propulsion is typically developed. In addition,
consistent at the walk and trot, which are symmetric gaits.
extension velocity was negligible. The hip and hock joint
However, because of the relationship of velocity and accel-
angles, in contrast, were extended more during the stance
eration to the forces placed on the limbs during the stance
 phase, perhaps as a result of compensatory changes.6 Paw
phase of gait, significant increases in absolute forces during
velocity and stride length were also significantly reduced
weight bearing occur with increasing speed at various
 in dogs with CCLR walking on a treadmill as compared
gaits. For example, a dog may have Zpeak measurements of
with the contralateral side, and to normal dogs.30
55% and 30% of body weight at a walk in each fore- and
Changes in kinematics were evaluated over a 2-year
rear limb, respectively. The forces may increase to 100%,
 period in dogs with CCL-deficient stifes3 All changes
118%, and 125% in the forelimbs and 70%, 80%, and 85%
occurred primarily between 6 and 12 months. Peak cranial
in the rear limbs while trotting at 1.5-1.8, 2.1-2.4, and 2.7-3
tibial translation increased by 10 mm and the range of
meters per second, respectively.
abduction and adduction motion nearly doubled (from 3.3
Several studies have evaluated normal GRFs and kine-
degrees to 6.1 degrees) after CCL transection and did
matic motion of dogs at the walk and trot.46.7.912.14.17-27
not improve with time. These changes may overload sec-
Studies in normal dogs indicate that each joint has a char-
ondary restraints such as the medial meniscus. This objec-
acteristic and consistent patterm of flexion and extension
tive information further defines the pathologic gait of
during the walk, but complex joint movements may occur
CCLR patients.
414
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
More sophisticated tec hniques have been used to quan-
side with the total hip replacement. In addition, young dogs
tify net joint moments, joint powers, and joint reaction
having triple pelvic osteotomy for treatment of hip dyspla-
forces (JRFs) across the hock, stife, and hip joints in Lab-
sia have weight bearing while walking on the operated side
rador retrievers with and without CCL disease using
that is similar to preoperative levels by 10 weeks, and have
inverse dynamics calculations.32 Kinematic, GRF, and
significantly greater weight bearing on the operated side
morphometric data were combined in an inverse dynamic
 by 28 weeks after surgery as compared with preoperative
approach to compute hock, stife, and hip net moments,
values.35
powers, and JRF while trotting. Vertical and braking GRF
 A recent study reported that dogs with hip dysplasia
and JRF were decreased in CCL-deficient limbs. In fact,
have complex gait alterations that may not be manifested
the braking/propulsion ratio shifted from 50%:50% in
as overt clinical lameness, making subjective evaluation of
normal limbs to 33%:66% of the stance phase in CCL-
lameness difficult. Dynamic fexion and extension angles
deficient limbs. It is possible that reduced braking may
and angular  velocities have been calculated for the
result in decreased cranial tibial thrust. In affected limbs,
coxofemoral, femorotibial, and tarsal joints.36.37 In the late
extensor moments at the hock and hip, fexor moment at
stance phase of the gait cycle, the hindlimb gait of dogs
the stife, and power in all three joints were less than
with hip dysplasia was characterized by a more extended
normal. Greater joint moment and power of the contralat-
coxofemoral joint, and more fexed femorotibial and tarsal
eral limbs compared with normal were also identifed.
joints throughout stance and early swing phases of the
Other compensatory changes included increased time
stride. All joints fexed more rapidly in the early swing
spent with the sound foot on the ground and an increased
phase. These changes may be the result of pain in the hip
amount of force applied to all joints of the sound limb,
joint early in the stance phase when maximum weightbear-
especially during propulsion, compared with normal and
ing and propulsion would be expected, with the increased
CCL-deficient limbs. Propulsion generated around that
extension at the end of the stance phase the result of a rela-
   s n s   
tively passive sudden extension of the hip to complete the
refecting increased stife extensor muscle contraction.
gait cycle. Other characteristic changes in the swing phase
Lameness predominantly affected forces during the braking
of the gait cycle, such as an increased stride length and
phase and extension during push-off, and a greater contri
decreased Zreak measurements, were also evident in dogs
bution of the contralateral limbs to propel the dog forward
with hip dysplasia. Another study determined that dogs
was identified. These changes may be somewhat protective
with hip dysplasia had a greater degree of coxofemoral
against damage to the articular cartilage and joint and
joint adduction, greater range of abduction-adduction, and
may be mediated, in part, by the nervous system and a
greater lateral pelvic movement, compared with controls.26
response to pain. In one study using a CCL transection and
These differences were thought to be indicative of com-
hindlimb deafferentation model, extension of the hip, knee,
pensation in gait of affected dogs as a result of discomfort
and ankle joints of the unstable limb was increased, and
 or biomechanical effects attributable to hip dysplasia and
braking of the unstable knee was delayed or attenuated.33
degenerative joint disease.
These changes are different than models that have not used
 Joint motion while walking on a treadmill was evaluated
deafferentation. The model used in this study results in
 in dogs with borderline radiographic signs of hip dysplasia
rapid onset and progression of osteoarthritis with cartilage
and normal GRFs. Affected dogs had a later time for
erosions present by 13 weeks, perhaps because there is
maximal flexion of the hip joint and more flexion and ROM
no pain sensation or joint proprioception is altered. Stifle
of the stife joint, compared with dogs with no radiographic
hyperextension resulting from limb deafferentation, and
signs of hip dysplasia. In addition, max imal angular veloc-
knee instability resulting from CCL transection may work
ity of the stife and tarsal joints was significantly greater
synergistically to create increased tibiofemoral motion and 
during the swing phase in dogs with borderline hip dyspla-
changes in the loading of articular surfaces that result in
sia, suggesting that dogs with borderline hip dysplasia have
rapid joint breakdown.
altered joint kinematics.38
Hip Dysplasia
Elbow Arthritis
Dogs with hip dysplasia also have reduced weight bearing
The compensatory load redistribution caused by osteoar-
on the affected limbs. In addition, hindlimb propulsion is
thritis of the elbow joint was determined by evaluating
reduced in dysplastic limbs. These differences persist 1
GRFs in one study." Dogs with osteoarthritis had a com-
month after total hip replacement, and in many instances,
pensatory gait patterm that reduced the stress on the affected
weight bearing is initially lower after surgery in the oper-
limb. The load was reduced on the lame limb and increased
on the contralateral hindlimb. A symmetry index indicated
6 months after surgery, weight bearing is improved at a
a weight shift to the contralateral forelimb and diagonal
trot. In most dogs, hip dysplasia is bilateral, and weight
hindlimb, which resulted in a more balanced weight distri-
may actually be transferred from the unoperated side to the
bution compared with normal dogs. It is possible that
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
415
forelimb lameness could overload nonaffected extremities
associated moment arms. With the hip, for example, body
and the vertebral spine.
weight causes the femur to rotate into flexion while the
extensor muscles of the hip cause the femur to rotate into
Lumbosacral Disease
extension. Therefore for every unit of moment causing hip
Thoracolumbar spinal movement has been evaluated in
fexion, there is a corresponding moment causing hip
normal Belgian Malinois dogs and those with subclinical
extension. Like a bicycle gear, for every umit of turm by the
radiographic changes of the lumbosacral region.4 Markers
pedal, there is a corresponding turm of the rear wheel. This
were placed on the spinal processes of C7, T6, T13, L3,
relationship can be described in terms of a gear ratio. A
L7, and S3, and dogs were walked on a treadmill. ROM in
low ratio means that the turm of the pedal gear generates
the transverse and vertical direction and the time of occur-
nearly the same turm in the wheel, whereas a high gear ratio
rence of the maximal marker position were calculated.
means that for every turm of the pedal gear the wheel gear
Significant kinematic changes were detected between clin-
tums many times. One can conceptualize the interplay of
ically sound dogs with radiographic lumbosacral changes
extermal moments (GRF moment) and intemal moments
 and dogs with no radiographic abnormalities.
(muscle force moment) as a gearing mechanism with a
gear ratio. This ratio is found by dividing the extemal
Golden Retriever Muscular Dystrophy
 moment arm by the intemal moment anm.
Various fonms of muscular dystrophy in people cause
Gear ratios are important especially when acceleration
altered gait kinematics. Stife and tarsal kinematics of the
is initiated. In the case of the bicycle the cyclist tums the
   e    
pedals faster to generate more force for more speed. In the
dystrophy (GRMD) were evaluated while walking at a
animal it might be assumed that the speed of muscle con-
self-selected speed and compared with carrier littermates
traction is increased to generate more velocity. Some have
(controls).41 GRMD dogs walked significantly slower than
observed that as the speed of muscle contraction increases
controls. At the stife joint, both groups displayed similar
there is a decrease in the force of contraction; however, it
ROM, but GRMD dogs walked with the stife joint rela-
has also been observed that as the speed of contraction
tively more extended. At the hock joint, GRMD dogs dis-
increases, the power (rate of work) generated is increased.
played less ROM and walked with the joint relatively more
When the cyclist accelerates the bicycle, there is an upshift-
extended compared with controls.
 ing of the gears (i.e., a transition from a low gear to a high
 gear that reduces the requirement for additional force pro-
duced by the cyclist). That is, for a given pedal revolution
Dynamic Gearing
 per minute (a constant force), the bicycle can still acceler-
 ate because the gear ratio is increased. It has been theorized
As described previously, the biomechanics of the quadru-
and demonstrated that in the dog there is a similar change
 ped animal is similar in a general sense with the mechanics 
 in gear ratios as the animal accelerates. This is called
of vehicles such as automobiles and bicycles. These vehi-
dynamic gearing. For a given velocity of muscle contrac-
cles produce rotary motion, which is transferred to linear
tion (the optimal velocity), the ratio between the extemal
movement. The efficient transfer of energy in these
moment arm and intermal moment arms increases, facilitat-
machines is modulated by gearing mechanisms. The
ing acceleration. These moment arms change because of
bicycle has a simple gearing mechanism and can be used
the change in the angles of the joints.
-raus iso au leue padnpenb ayn o Aoue ue se
 In the case of running, dynamic gearing has been dem-
ates motion by pedaling. In this action the cyclist pushes
 onstrated to occur about the shoulder and stife joints.47
on the pedal, producing a moment of force that tums the
 Such a phenomenon was not demonstrated when evaluat-
sprocket, which tums a second sprocket in the rear wheel.
ing the gear ratios about the carpus, elbow, hock, and hip.
The relationship between the pedal sprocket and the wheel
Dynamic gearing facilitates motion, especially accelera-
 sprocket is described as a gear ratio. Sprockets with dif-
tion and running, by maximizing the efficiency of muscle
ferent diameters can affect the energy transfer, making it
contraction and the transfer of energy from one segment to
more or less difficult for the cyclist to move the bicycle.
another and eventually to the ground. Alterations in mass
Gearing mechanisms have been proposed for biologic
and its distribution in limb segments, imbalance in the
systems, including people and animals.
contraction of muscle groups, disruption of angular motion
In the body, muscles produce forces that function as
 in the joints, and changes in limb dimensions can poten-
moments that rotate bones about joint centers of motion.
tially infuence the relationship between the various joint
A second set of forces, those that resist gravity, the GRFs,
moments (i.e., the gearing ratios), resulting in suboptimal
also figure into the production of motion. These muscle
performance and maybe creating more stress and strain on
moments can be labeled as internal moments as opposed
the elements of the system. For example the effects of
to those produced by the GRFs, which can be referred to
patella instability and luxation can be better visualized
as external moments. Each set of these forces has
from the perspective of the efficient or inefficient
416
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Muscle belly
Fiber bundle
Musclefiber
Myofibril
A band
Z disc
Mline
Z disc
Myofibril
Hzone
Sarcomere
Figure 24-18 Muscle fibers are composed of smaller subunit myofibrils. The sarcomere is the unit of the contractile system of muscles found
in the myofibrils and consists of actin and myosin arranged in transverse bands.
transmission of energy across abnormal segments. It has
connective tissue structures, the mobility of the joints, and
been shown that in the process of running, hock joint
the neurologic control of gait. Energy fow can be analyzed
excursion is 58 degrees, whereas stife excursion is 36
by assessing the mechanical energy used by the body as
 degrees; however, the quadriceps is not only responsible
work. Work can be assessed mathematically by determin-
for extending the stifle, but it is also partially responsible
 ing power values for physical activities such as walking.
for extending the hock.42 This is related to the muscles that
running, jumping, and so on. The core of physical rehabili-
cross both joints and to the various moments that these
tation is the use of these activities as a means of therapy.
muscles produce. When the moment arm decreases in the
Determining work and power values of the animal's per-
stifle because of a dislocated patella, the gear ratios are
formance can facilitate decisions regarding which activi-
 changed and the quadriceps is less effcient, which could
 ties and their intensity are appropriate for the treatment of
translate to less efficiency in extension of the stife and
specific conditions.
hock, resulting in poor performance. Therefore what
In mechanical systems such as the musculoskeletal
happens in the stife has an effect on the hock. Such theo-
system of the body, energy is neither created nor lost but
ries at this stage are assumptions that require more testing
 transferred between a stored state (potential energy) and
by combined kinetic and kinematic measures.
an expended state (kinetic energy). In the body, this trans-
fer physically occurs between muscle and bone, and the
result is body movement, such as walking, trotting, running.
Energetics
or swimming.
Isolating analysis to specifc biomechanical phenomena,
Biomechanics of Muscle
such as joint moments and GRF, does not refect the infu-
Muscle is  the principal source of  the mechanical
ence of a whole host of variables that are involved in the
energy used in the generation of motion. It is important
generation of gait. Another perspective in the study of
to understand the biomechanics of muscles so that strate-
animal motion is that of energy fow. Throughout motion
gies may be designed to restore function in animals with
and gait, energy is transferred from the muscle to bone and 
decreased muscle force or movement caused by disease. A
then from the bone back to muscle. This transfer of energy
brief review of basic muscle contraction is necessary to
depends not only on the forces of weight bearing, and
more completely understand the biomechanics of skeletal
linear and angular motion, but also on the physiologic and
muscle. Muscle fibers are composed of smaller subunit
metabolic status of the muscles, the integrity of the
myofibrils (Figure 24-18). The sarcomere is the unit of the
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
417
contractile system of muscles found in the myofibrils, and
motion by the distance moved. The rate at which work is
consists of actin and myosin arranged in transverse bands.
performed represents the power of the system. Power,
 The myosin filaments have crossbridges that attach to the
therefore, is the rate of fow of mechanical energy and is
actin filaments. During muscle contraction, it is the rela-
mathematically calculated by dividing work by time (W/t),
tionship of the crossbridges to the actin that results in
or the rate of work.44 Power is a sensitive indicator for
shortening of the myofibrils, similar to an oar that is rowing
abnormal gait because it depends on the function of all
to advance a boat through the water. This is also known as
components of the musculoskeletal system.
the sliding filament theory.43 The force of muscle contrac-
Positive Work: Concentric
tion depends on the relative number of crossbridges fonmed
Muscle Contraction
by the interaction of the actin and myosin filaments via the
crossbridges.
When muscle contracts, it produces a moment that causes
Muscle not only expends this energy with contraction
a bone to rotate. To calculate the work done, the moment
 of myofibrils but also stores and absorbs this energy during
is multiplied by the displacement (angular displacement).
the process of weight bearing and gait. The elastic compo-
The product of angular moment and acceleration is positive
nents of muscle (epimysium, perimysium, and endomy-
when the direction of the angular moment and acceleration
sium) and tendon store potential energy as the muscle is
passively stretched. For example, as the hamstrings con-
and is associated with concentric muscle contraction,
tract, the quadriceps is stretched. After contraction in the
which is defined as the circumstance in which the direction
hamstrings is terminated, the quadriceps releases the stored 
 of the motion is the same as the contraction. For example,
potential energy and springs back to its resting length. This
when a dog jumps a barrier, the quadriceps muscle is pro-
spring-like function of muscle-tendon units prevents over-
ducing positive work by extending the stife joint. The
stretching and damage to the muscle. When an animal
direction of the contraction (i.e., the shortening of the
stands motionless, the muscles contract in a coordinated
muscle) is in line with the action of extension of the stifle.
and balanced fashion, without the production of motion.
Co-contraction and positive work are ideal for muscle
Muscle contraction under such conditions is termed iso-
function and pose less risk for muscle injury as compared
metric contraction. In isometric contraction, all the
with eccentric muscle contraction.
mechanical energy is stored in the muscle as potential
energy. Muscle also absorbs energy from impact and
Negative Work: Eccentric Muscle Contraction
dampens vibration, protecting and preserving the moving
 Eccentric contraction occurs when the direction of the con-
parts of the skeletal system. Although the function of
traction or shortening is opposite the direction of the
muscle in expending energy (i.e., kinetic energy in the
motion of the bone to which the muscle is attached.
 generation of motion, which is the focus of the physical
 Because the directions are opposite each other, the product
therapist) is important, the function of muscle in storing
of the moment and acceleration is negative, and therefore
energy is equally important. Muscle fibrosis and the loss
the work is negative. For example, when a dog is landing
of elasticity compromise its capacity to store and absorb
on its front limbs after jumping a barrier, the triceps muscle
energy, rendering joint structures and surfaces more vul-
is contracting, trying to extend the elbow in an attempt to
nerable to additional injury and wear. In treatment plans of
cushion the landing. However, the force overpowers the
Osteoarthritis, the focus is naturally on the condition of the
muscle and causes the elbow to fex. The work the muscle
articular cartilage, subchondral bone, intermal and extermal
does in this circumstance is negative and is more likely to
ligaments, and the status of the joint capsule; however, the
result in muscle injury, such as delayed onset muscle sore-
supporting muscles must also be included. The therapist
ness. When formulating and designing physical activities,
the therapist should consider the nature of the work the
management of osteoarthritis by focusing attention on the
muscles will endure. Positive work scenarios tend to build
 condition of the muscle and applying therapeutics designed
muscle strength, whereas negative work could inhibit reha-
to improve muscles' capacity to store, expend, and transfer
bilitation efforts by contributing to muscle soreness.
energy.
 The term mechanical energy represents the ability of a
Zero Work: Isometric Contraction
 mechanical system to do work, such as producing motion.44
Isometric contraction is defined as a contraction that is not
Work represents the fow of mechanical energy between
the kinetic and potential states, between the intermal parts
takes place, the product of joint moment and displacement
of the system, and between the system and its environment.
is zero, so work is not done. Biomechanics traditionally
The motion of the intermal components such as muscle and
involves the "inverse solution" to problems, in which dis-
bone represents intermal work, which leads to motion of
placement (the outcome of applied force) is measured first
the body, and represents extermal work. Work is mathemat-
 and the generating force is then calculated. Assessment of
ically calculated by multiplying the force that generates the
the nature of isometric contraction in tenms of its causative
418
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
force is difficult because no displacement occurs except
contraction is inversely proportional to the load applied to
within the muscle itself and at a microscopic level. To
the muscle.9 For example, as the load applied to a muscle
 understand these forces and energy conditions, direct mea-
increases, the muscle shortens more slowly. If the extermal
surement is required. However, isometric contraction is an
load equals the maximal force of muscle contraction,
important function of muscle and can be used by the thera-
muscle contraction velocity is zero. If the load is further
pist to increase strength and elasticity.
increased, eccentric muscle contraction and muscle length-
ening occur.
Muscle Force Generation
The force of muscle contraction is also proportional to
The force generated by the muscle varies with the muscle's
the contraction time.43 The longer the contraction time, the
length. Muscles generate relatively little tension when a
greater the force of contraction. Although maximum force
 muscle is maintained in a very long or very shortened state.
may be developed relatively quickly in the contracting
Muscles generate greater force with the muscle at interme-
muscle, longer contraction times generate additional forces
diate, or optimal, lengths. For example, the biceps muscle
 in the elastic components of the muscle-tendon unit.
generates the greatest force in humans when the elbow is
The arrangement of the sarcomeres affects muscle con-
at an angle of approximately 90 degrees. The tension gen-
tractile properties. Muscle velocity and excursion are pro-
erated in muscle is a function of the overlap between the
portional to the number of sarcomeres in series, whereas
actin and myosin filaments. This phenomenon is known as
muscle force is proportional to the total cross-sectional
the sarcomere length-tension relationship.4s With a long
area of sarcomeres.* Muscles designed for generation of
muscle length (full extension), there is little overlap
high forces often have muscle fibers slanted at an angle,
between actin and myosin filaments, and because there are
an arrangement called pennate muscles. Various muscle
few cross-bridges, little tension is generated. As muscle
groups appear to be designed for either the production of
length decreases, there is overlap of actin and myosin, and
high forces or velocity and high excursions. The quadri-
greater tension may be generated. This reaches its
ceps muscles seem to be designed more for production of
maximum effect when the muscle is at its optimal length.
force, whereas the sartorius muscles, with their longer
As the muscle further shortens, a point is reached at which
length and lower cross-sectional areas, are more adapted
 un nsa  p  as  ssa r
to high excursions. The caudal thigh muscles are also
tension because there is so much actin-myosin overlap
 designed for large excursions.
that additional cross-bridges cannot be formed. With even
Muscles generate force and transmit this force via
further shortening of the muscle, actin filaments begin 
tendons to the bones. If the muscles generate adequate
overlapping with other filaments on the opposite side of
force, the bones rotate about joint axes. This activity can
the sarcomere, and there is interference with cross-bridge
be defined as a torque, which clinically represents strength.
formation, resulting in decreased muscle tension.
 Torque is a mathematical relationship between force and
The length-tension situation is altered when a muscle is
the length of the moment. Torque, or strength, may be
stretched to various lengths without stimulation, or with
changed by changing the magnitude of force (tension-
passive movement. Near the optimal length of muscle,
producing capability of muscles), changing the length of
passive tension in the muscle is almost zero. As the muscle
the moment (changing the location of the muscle insertion 
is stretched to longer lengths, however, passive tension
site), or changing the angle between a force, such as a
increases. Therefore passive tension by stretching the
loading force and the magnitude of the moment generated
muscle can play a role in providing resistive force even
by a muscle. When a joint is fully extended, there is an
in the absence of muscle activity. The phenomenon of
unfavorable mechanical advantage to the muscle because
 passive muscle tension may be due to titin, a large protein
 ag a go yn gt ts eai si u a
within the myofibrils that connects the thick myosin fila-
ated by muscles in this situation compress the joint surface
ments end to end.*6 This protein may also stabilize the
rather than rotate the joint. The maximum moment of most
myosin lattice so that high muscle forces do not disrupt the
joints occurs with the joint fexed to 90 degrees. However,
sarcomeres.4
studies of torque generation have demonstrated that the
The effect of passive tension is greater in muscles that
joint angle at which the muscle generates maximal force
cross two joints, such as the hamstring or caudal thigh
is not the same angle at which the moment arm is maximum.
muscles. In this situation, it is difficult to fully extend the
In reality, both the moment arm and muscle force are con-
stife joint while the hip is fexed maximally because the
stantly changing during normal joint motion, making the
passive tension of the stretched hamstring muscles pre-
measurement of torque very complex. A thorough under-
vents further stifle extension.
standing of the principles regarding generation of force by
 In contrast to the length-tension relationship, the force-
muscles may allow development of treatments for specific
velocity relationship seen in muscle contraction does not
muscle groups that have a rational physiologic basis and
have a precise anatomically identifed basis. The force-
that result in measurable improvements. For example,
velocity relationship establishes that the velocity of muscle
when administering neuromuscular electrical stimulation
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
419
B
Figure 24-19 If hip joint extension is desired, the contribution of the rectus femoris muscle to resistance may reduce hip extension if the stifle
is kept flexed during hip extension (A), as compared with extending the stifle (B), because of the influence of the rectus femoris muscle on hip
extension.
for quadriceps muscle strengthening in a patient with
should also be considered. It is usually easier to perfonm
muscle weakness, it may be beneficial to perform the treat-
an exercise at a medium rate of speed than a very slow or
ment with the stife in mild fexion as compared with full
very rapid rate.
extension or fexion.
 Consideration of limb position is also important when
targeting muscles that cross two joints. The tension exerted
Biomechanics of Exercise Modification
by a muscle spanning more than one joint depends on
 Knowledge of the alterations in body posture or position-
the position of the second joint over which it passes,
ing that patients undergo while recovering from surgery or
because this determines the total length of the muscle.
during rehabilitation of chronic conditions helps the thera-
The semitendinosus and semimembranosus muscles are
pist to appreciate and take advantage of these factors to
more effective fexors of the stifle when the hip is also
improve the effectiveness of therapeutic exercises. In
fexed as compared with the hip joint extended. If hip joint
patients with proprioceptive disorders, the size of the base
extension is desired (with concurrent shortening of the
of support affects stability. For ex ample, it is more difficult
gluteal muscles), the contribution of the rectus femoris
to balance with the feet close together than it is with the
muscle (which crosses both the hip and stife joints) to
feet spaced wide apart. Similarly, the stability of the ground
resistance may be minimized if the stife is kept extended
surface may progress from a static or stable surface, such
during hip extension as compared with fexing the stife
as the floor, to a more mobile base, such as a balance board
(Figure 24-19).
 Or trampoline. The tactile and proprioceptive input may
Likewise, hip fexion is limited if the stife is concur-
also be altered by standing and walking on various sur-
rently extended, but hip fexion increases if the stife
faces, such as foam rubber.
is simultaneously fexed (Figure 24-20). Similarly, hock
Increasing the extermal load that a limb experiences is
fexion is greater when the stifle is concurrently fexed,
important for muscle strengthening. Although it is obvious
but is limited if the stifle is kept extended (Figure 24-21).
that increasing the weight that a limb carries (e.g., by using
 These biomechanical considerations are particularly impor-
weights or resistive elastic bands) increases the magnitude
tant when planning stretching and ROM exercises.
of resistance, there may also be increased feedback from
Sensory facilitation or inhibition may be used to alter
muscle and joint receptors, enhancing the response. The
muscle responses. For example, compression of a joint
length of the moment arm undergoing an increased load
may stimulate the joint receptors and facilitate extensor
 also affects the resistance that a limb undergoes. Placing
muscle activity and stability around a joint. One method
the weight or elastic band distally on the limb increases
of increasing extensor muscle activity with joint compres-
the length of the moment arm and increases the force nec-
sion is rhythmic stabilization. This activity may be accom-
essary to move the limb. Therefore if a muscle is relatively
plished by placing the dog in a standing position on a
weak and a limb is not able to withstand a high load, a
compressible surface, such as an air mattress or exercise
leg weight or elastic band should be placed relatively
 ball. Weak dogs may be supported with a sling to be certain
 proximal on the limb. As muscle strength improves and
that they do not collapse. While keeping the dog in a stand-
additional strengthening is desired, the weight or band
may be moved further distally. The speed of the exercise
down (Figure 24-22). As the joints become compressed,
420
Section V
Therapeutie Exercise and Manual Therapy
B
Figure 24-20  Hip flexion is limited if the stifle is concurrently extended (A), but hip flexion increases if the stifle is simultaneously flexed (B).
Figure 24-21  Hock flexion is greater when the stifle is concurrently flexed (A), but is limited if the stifle is kept extended (B).
the extensor muscles responsible for maintaining posture
 are stimulated to prevent collapse. Conversely, traction
 separates joint surfaces and is useful if increased ROM is
desired.
Biomechanics of Therapeutic Exercises
Walking
Walking is perhaps the most simple therapeutic exercise,
but one of the most valuable in the early phases of reha-
bilitation. Zrak measurements of the forelimbs and
respectively (Table 24-1). Total motion excursion in the
Figure 24-22   Rhythmic stabilization may be accomplished by sup-
shoulder, elbow, and carpus at a walk is approximately 30,
 45, and 90 degrees, respectively (Table 24-2).1.7 In the 
porting the dog in a standing position on an exercise ball and gently
 pushing the dog down in a rhythmic fashion to stimulate the extensor
rear limb, motion in the hip, stifle, and hock is approxi-
muscles to contract to maintain body posture.
mately 35, 40, and 35 degrees, respectively.
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
421
Table 24-1 
 Kinetic Characteristics of Therapeutic Exercises
Walking
Walking
Trotting
Trotting
Wheelbarrowing
Dancing Forward
Forelimb
Hindlimb
Forelimb
Hindlimb
Forelimb
Hindlimb
Peak vertical force
54%
40%
111%
66%
91%
76%
Vertical impulse
21%
15.2%
20%
12%
17%
16%
Values are a percent of body weight.
Table 24-2
Kinematics of Walking and Trotting in Dogs
Joint
Position
Walks3
Walk14.19
Trot:4
Trot17.18
Shoulder
Extension
148
146
138
137
Flexion
120
121
119
107
ROM
28
25
19
30
Elbow
Extension
144
143
140
140
Flexion
94
97
94
88
ROM
50
46
46
52
Carpus
Extension
192
65
199
80
Flexion
99
-20
84
-20
ROM
93
85
115
100
Hip
Extension
136, 140
132
142
132
Flexion
103, 103
100
105
100
ROM
33,36
32
37
32
Stife
Extension
154, 155
146
152
150
Flexion
106, 109
111
88
97
ROM
48,51
35
63
53
Tarsus
Extension
162, 165
158
163
155
Flexion
125, 123
128
97
120
ROM
37,42
30
67
35
ROM, Range of motion.
Trotting
Treadmill Walking
 Trotting is frequently used to increase the speed of muscle
Walking on a ground treadmill is a commonly performed
contraction and the forces placed on the limb, with
exercise for conditioning and to encourage limb use after
increased strength of muscle contraction. Zeak measure-
surgery. One study determined that dogs have an increased
 ments of the forelimbs and hindlimbs at the trot are approx-
stance time and greater stride length when walking on a
imately 115% and 66% of body weight, respectively (see
ground treadmill as compared with walking over ground,
Table 24-1). Increasing the speed to a trot results in little
but there were no differences in swing time.4* Furthermore,
change in shoulder joint motion, increases elbow joint
maximum extension, fexion, and ROM angles are similar
excursion slightly, and increases carpal joint motion
for the forelimb and hindlimb joints between ground and
 (  s s    
treadmill walking (Table 24-3). Maximum joint fexion
trot, hip and hock motion is similar to that at the walk, but
velocity tended to be lower in dogs walking on ground
motion in the stifle increases to approximately 55 degrees.
treadmills, perhaps because of the active assisted nature of
422
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Table 24-3
 Joint Motion during Selected Therapeutic Exercises
Walking Ground 10% Incline
Dancing
Dancing
Joint
Walking
Treadmill
Ground Treadmill  Wheelbarrowing
Forward
Backward
Shoulder
Ext
148
146
162*
Flex
120*
121
131
ROM
28
25
31*
Elbow
Ext
144
146*
130
Flex
94
93
80*
ROM
50f
53*
50
Carpus
Ext
192
194
198*
Flex
*66
100
112
ROM
93
94*
86
Hip
Ext
136
138
141
140
164*
Flex
103*
107
103*
120
135
ROM
33
31
38*
20
29
Stife
Ext
154
156*
153
155
129
Flex
106
111
109
110
88*
ROM
48*
45
44
45
41
Hock
Ext
162
163
166*
163
157t
Flex
125
128
125
134
115*
ROM
37
35
41*
29t
37
Ext, Extension, Fex, flexion, ROM, range of motion in degrees.
Values represent mean flexion and extension angles, respectively.
paeii ane ( uoisuaxa pue uxal uoisuaxa uio iseal lo () od pue uoxal uoisuaxa iol isow au 'uo yea io
walking on a treadmill. Therefore if increased weightbear-
Table 24-4 
 Joint Motion while Walking on a
Treadmill with an Incline at 5%,
 but less rapid joint motion is desired, walking on a ground 
0%, 0r -5%
treadmill should be considered.
Walking on a treadmill with a 10% incline results in
Joint
joint motion similar to walking on a level treadmill, prob-
Joint
Position
Decline
Level
Incline
   o a  n  a 
Hip
Extension
120.9
120.8
121.8
 motion to that obtained with walking over level surfaces.49
Flexion
95.8
95
94.5
ROM
25.1
25.9
27.3
The mean maximum hip extension and total hip ROM were
3 and 7 degrees greater with incline treadmill walking.
Stifle
Extension
146.2
144.9
143.1
Flexion
93.7
93.4
91.6
whereas mean stife extension was 3 degrees less with
ROM
52.6
51.5
51.5
incline treadmill walking.
Another study evaluated dogs walking on a treadmill at
ROM, Range of motion.
inclines of 5%, 0%, and -5% 50 Stance or swing phase
durations were not affected by treadmill inclination. When
the inclination increased from -5% to 5%, hip joint ROM
ascending stairs. Elbow fexion and extension are greater
increased and  stife extension decreased significantly
 n m p s dn n d m um
(Table 24-4).
level ground. In another study, incline walking on an 11%
slope resulted in increased hip fexion and decreased stife
Incline Ramp Walling
joint flexion.
 In general, walking up an inclined ramp results in greater
 ROM of the forelimb joints as compared with ascending
Decline Ramp Walking
stairs or trotting on a level surface.5l Shoulder extension,
Walking down a ramp results in less femorotibial fexion
 ROM, and carpal fexion are greater when walking up a
and tibiotarsal fexion and extension compared with
ramp as compared with ascending stairs or trotting over
walking down stairs (see Table 24-5).3 ROM of the
level ground (Table 24-5). Shoulder ROM while ascending
 hip, stife, and hock joints are also less with decline ramp
the ramp was 66 degrees, compared with 20 degrees while
walking as compared with descending stairs. Decline
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
423
Table 24-5
 Kinematics of Stair and Ramp Ascent and Descent
Joint
Joint Position
Trotting
Stair Ascent
Ramp Ascent
 Stair Descent
Ramp Descent
Shoulder
Extension
138
126
152
Flexion
119
106
85
ROM
19
20
66
Elbow
Extension
140
149
157
Flexion
94
57
46
ROM
46
92
111
Carpus
Extension
199
189
187
Flexion
84
68
36
ROM
115
121
151
Hip
Extension
142
147
123
120
Flexion
105
102
96
97
ROM
37
45
27
23
Stife
Extension
152
145
158
157
Flexion
88
61
62
77
ROM
63
83
96
80
Tarsus
Extension
163
171
159
152
Flexion
97
61
61
77
ROM
67
108
98
76
ROM, range of motion.
Hindlimb trotting and stair ascent from Durant et al.54
 Stair and ramp decline from Millard et al.s3
 Forelimb trotting, stairs and ramp from Carr et al.51
walking at a slope of 11 % resulted in decreased hip fexion
are due to changes in extension and fexion of forelimb
in another study as compared with overground walking.52
joints. Shoulder extension is less with stair climbing as
Therefore ramp descent may be easier than stair descent
compared with trotting over ground, whereas fexion is
for dogs with musculoskeletal disease of the pelvic limb
greater with stair climbing. Because of these opposite
 and limited motion of pelvic limb joints.
effects, there is no difference in total shoulder ROM.
Elbow extension, fexion, and ROM are greater with stair
Stair Ascent
ascent as compared with trotting over ground, and carpal
ROM of the pelvic limb joints is significantly increased
fexion and ROM are greater with stair climbing. Ramp
during stair climbing compared with trotting on level
 ascent, however gives, greater extension, fexion, and ROM
ground, with increases of 10, 20, and 40 degrees for the
 of all forelimb joints as compared with stair ascent.
hip, stife, and hock joints, respectively (see Table 24-5).54
Stair Descent
Extension of the hip and hock joints is increased with stair
climbing (approximately 5 and 8 degrees, respectively),
Stair descent results in significantly greater stife fexion
whereas stife extension is decreased by 7 degrees. Flexion
and hock fexion and extension compared with walking
is also significantly increased in the stife and hock by 26
 down a declined surface (see Table 24-5).53 Significantly
 degrees and 35 degrees, respectively.54 Hip fexion does not
 greater ROM was also achieved in the coxofemoral, femo-
contribute to stair ascent, but the stife and hock joints
rotibial, and tibiotarsal joints during stair descent. Another
 contribute significantly to raising the limb up to the height
study, using different stair parameters and a convention of
of the step.
joint angle measurement used in people, agreed that tarsal
Another study also found that tarsal fexion, extension,
fexion, extension and ROM, stife fexion and ROM, and
and ROM; stife fexion and ROM; and hip extension and
hip fexion were greater when descending stairs as com-
 ROM were greater when ascending stairs as compared with
 pared with walking on level ground.5s
walking on level ground.$$ However, they found that stife
Wheelbarrowing
extension increased with stair climbing. The difference
may be due to different stair parameters and a convention
 Raising the rear limbs off the ground and walking the dog
of joint angle measurement used in people.
 forward is a therapeutic exercise known as wheelbarrowing
Regarding the forelimb joints, there are some differ-
(Figure 24-23). The main objective is to increase the use
ences between stair ascent and trotting. These differences 
of the forelimbs and increase weight bearing on them.
424
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 24-23  Wheelbarrowing exercise is performed by supporting
the rear limbs of the dog and walking forward on the forelimbs.
front limbs of the dog and moving the dog in a forward or backward
However, several specifc events occur during wheelbar-
direction. A muzzle is recommended if the dog is painful or resists
rowing. The forelimb is a complex structure, with multiple
the exercise in any way.
 joints continuously undergoing joint angular acceleration
and deceleration, with the limb held at changing angles
to the ground during the stance phase. During wheelbar-
limbs. A comparison of Zreak measurements and VI of nine
rowing, the dog must move its forelimbs to keep from
hound-type dogs that danced forward and were trotted
falling and in doing so, the stride length changes as the
across a force plate indicated that dancing resulted in
dog attempts to keep its balance. In one study of hound-
greater Zpeak measurements than trotting (75.6% vs. 65.4%
type dogs, wheelbarrowing resulted in significantly shorter
body weight) and greater VI (16.1% vs. 12%) (see
stride length (0.66 vs. 0.86 m), stance time (0.27 vs. 0.37 s),
Table 24-1).'
and swing time (0.22 vs. 0.27 s) as compared with walking
 Dancing forward may result in different kinematic char-
at the same speed.' Dogs had a mean Zreak of 91% of body
acteristics compared with dancing backward or walking
weight, which is intermediate between that expected of
over ground. There was significantly less hip fexion, total
Aexae) aon pe (ss Aiede) um
hip ROM, hock fexion, and hock total ROM with forward
100% to 110%) (see Table 24-1). Mean VI was 17% of
dancing compared with walking (see Table 24-3). The
body weight, which is similar to walking (approximately
stride length (0.56 vs. 0.84 m, respectively) and swing time
23% of body weight), but greater than trotting (approxi-
(0.18 vs. 0.26 s, respectively) were shorter with forward
mately 13% of body weight) because of the shorter stance
dancing as compared with walking, but the stance times
time while trotting. So although some of the dog's body
were similar (0.32 s). Dancing backward also differed
weight is shifted to the forelimbs, the forces placed on
from walking over ground. Hip extension and stife fexion
the forelimbs are only intermediate between walking and
were greater with backward dancing as compared with
trotting, likely because of the shorter stride length and
walking, whereas hip fexion, hip ROM, and stife exten-
stance time. In addition, some of the weight is also trans-
sion and stifle ROM were less (see Table 24-3). This infor-
ferred to the handler.
mation may be useful in rehabilitating dogs with various
Regarding joint kinematics, dogs that wheelbarrowed
conditions. For example, in the early phases of a therapeu-
had significantly more shoulder extension, elbow fexion,
tic exercise program for a dog with hip dysplasia that is
and carpal extension, and less shoulder fexion, elbow
painful with hip extension, gluteal muscle strengthening
extension, and carpal fexion as compared with walking
may be more comfortable by dancing the dog forward
(see Table 24-3).' These differences are approximately 10
rather than back ward.
to 15 degrees.
Cavaletti Rail Walking
Dancing
Walking over cavaletti rails results in significant increases
 Raising the forelimbs off the ground and walking the dog
in fexion of various joints, and the increase is related to
forward and backward is known as dancing (Figure 24-24).
the height of the cavaletti rails (Table 24-6).?6 Specifically,
The main goal is to increase weight bearing on the rear
the elbow, stife, and hock have increased joint fexion and
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
425
Table 24-6
 Joint Motion while Walking over a Cavaletti Rail
High (mid
Walking
Low (at Carpus)
Medium
 antebrachium)
Shoulder
Extension
149
152
153
153
Flexion
115
125
124
124
ROM
34
26
29
29
Elbow
Extension
147
145
142
143
Flexion
89
72
60
59
ROM
58
72
82
86
Carpus
Extension
182
187
187
187
Flexion
81
86
79
81
ROM
101
101
108
106
Hip
Extension
140
138
137
138
 Flexion
103
100
97
95
ROM
36
38
40
43
Stife
Extension
155
154
153
154
Flexion
104
83
71
68
ROM
51
71
82
86
Tarsus
Extension
165
153
154
155
Flexion
123
84
71
68
ROM
42
69
84
87
ROM, Range of motion.
subsequent increases in ROM while walking over cavaletti
Table 24-7
 Joint Motion during Walking or
rails as compared with overground walking. There is a mild
Sit-to-Stand Exercise
increase in hip fexion. There are no differences in joint
extension, however. The shoulder surprisingly had no
Sit to
changes. The biceps brachii muscle is a flexor of the elbow
Joint
Walk
Stand
and extensor of the shoulder, and its dual role may result
Shoulder
Extension
125
119
in no net increased movement of the shoulder. In another
Flexion
88
91
study, walking over cavaleti rails at the level of the carpus
ROM
37
27
resulted in increased elbow, carpal, stife, and tarsal fexion,
Elbow
Extension
146
147
and increased carpal and stifle joint extension as compared
Flexion
91
109
with walking.$2 Stife and tarsal ROM were also greater
ROM
55
37
walking over cavaletti rails as compared with overground
Carpus
Extension
239
202
walking.
Flexion
128
133
ROM
111
70
Sit-to-Stand Exercise
Hip
Extension
147,140
115, 135
Compared with walking, sit-to-stand exercise results in
Flexion
111, 103
49, 104
ROM
36, 36
66, 31
greater fexion of the tarsus and nearly twice as much
Stife
Extension
146, 155
fexion of the stifle and hip, while extension of these joints
108,133
Flexion
111, 104
46, 46
is less*7 (Table 24-7). Others have also found that tarsal
ROM
35,51
62,87
and stife fexion and ROM are increased with sit-to-stand
Tarsus
Extension
145, 165
131, 131
exercise, whereas extension of these joints is less with sit
Flexion
111, 123
95,38
to stand as compared with walkings8 (see Table 24-7).
ROM
34, 42
36, 94
Although the values for hip fexion and extension differed
between the two studies, the ROM was similar regarding
ROM, Range of motion.
sit-to-stand and walking exercise.
Data from Feeney LC, Lin C-F, Marcellin-Little DJ,Tate AR, Queen RM, Yu B:Valida-
tion of two-dimensional kinematic analysis of walk and sit-to-stand motions in
Jumping
dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007;68:277-282; and McEachern GL, Millis DL, Headrick J,
Hicks DA. Kinematic assessment of sit-to-stand exercise in dogs with chronic
Jumping over obstacles results in significant increases in
forces placed on the limbs during landing. Hound-type
Congress/Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Keystone CO, Feb, 2006.
426
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Table 24-8
Kinetics of Jumping
Peak Vertical
Vertical
Peak Braking
Braking
Peak Propulsion
Propulsion
Force
Impulse
Force
Impulse
Force
Impulse
HIGH JUMP
 First limb strike
185.8
17.4
-26.0
-0.054
20.9
1.5
Second limb strike
168.1
22.6
-40.2
-2.8
12.2
0.7
LONG JUMP
First limb strike
192.2
17.3
29.4
-0.85
17.0
1.0
Second limb strike
155.1
20.5
-41.4
-3.1
9.8
0.5
dogs were jumped across a high jump (61 cm or 24 inches)
Suol uey uoisindoud 1apas aagy suidun! yay osiapun
and a long jump (two 38-cm or 15-inch tall hurdles placed
jumpers for both the first and second limb strikes. This
61 cm or 24 inches apart). Zrea was significantly higher
may be a result of a spring-like effect in dogs jumping
for the first limb strike than the second limb strike in both
more vertically, with more potential energy stored in the
high jump and long jump (Table 24-8). VI was lower for
muscles and soft tissues. As they prepare to move forward,
the first limb than the second limb for the high jump and
this potential energy may be suddenly released, resulting
long jump because of reduced stance time of the first limb
 in greater propulsion. With information about GRFs, train-
strike. There were no differences in Zrak Or VI between
 ers may be able to adjust jumping techniques to minimize
high and long jumping on the frst limb strike. However,
injury to sporting dogs. More work is needed to study dif-
Zreak and VI were greater for the high jump than long jump
ferences in jumping styles and possible predisposition to
when comparing the second limb strike.
injury.
There were also significant differences between braking
The land-based exercises that result in the greatest
and propulsion force and impulse for both first and second
and least fexion, extension, and ROM are indicated in
strike for the high jump when compared with the long
Table 24-9.
jump. There was less peak braking force and braking
impulse of the first limb strike as compared with the second
Aquatic Biomechanics and Exercises
limb strike for both high and long jumping. There were no
 One of the principal advantages of exercising in water is
differences in peak braking forces between high and long
the buoyancy that the water exerts, resulting in less force
 jumping in either the first or second limb strikes. Braking
 On limbs. Buoyancy is an important force in aquatic therapy
impulse was greater for the first limb strike with long
  o an  a ra n s a
jumping compared with high jumping, but not with the
effect of gravity is partially canceled. Therefore the need
second limb strike. In addition, there was greater peak
for antigravity muscle action is greatly reduced. The
 propulsion and propulsion impulse in the first limb strike
amount of umloading is related to the height of the water
as compared with the second limb strike for high jumping
in relation to the height of the individual. One study evalu-
and long jumping. There was greater peak propulsion force
ated the changes in body weight on ground compared with
and propulsion impulse with the first limb strike for high
different water levels while standing.*? Dogs standing in
jumping versus long jumping, and for the second limb
water to the level of the tarsus, stifle, and greater trochanter
strike.
weighed 91%, 85%, and 38% of body weight, respectively.
 Dogs apparently strike harder with the first limb strike
as compared with standing on dry ground, indicating that
for both high and long jumping, but stay on the second
buoyancy can be a significant factor in reducing loads
limb strike longer for support, resulting in greater impulse 
placed on limbs. This may be of particular advantage in
 On the second limb. There are minimal differences between
amnimals with lower motor neuron conditions that have dif-
high and long jumping regarding the vertical forces placed
ficulty supporting their weight, or in patients with arthritic
on the first limb strike, but the second limb strike is
joints to help reduce the weight-bearing forces on painful
-edde ssoa gudun! yau yim ssop ui ianaa iuas
joints.
ently brake primarily with the second limb strike. High
Movement of a body through water is complex and
jumping results in more vertical drop, perhaps obliterating
 involves forces generated by the individual, and counter-
the need for more active braking because the landing is
forces to the movement by the water.°0 Thrust refers to the
more vertical. Conversely, there is greater propulsion in
forces in the direction of velocity of movement, and may
the first strike as compared with the second. Dogs that
be thought of as the force that the body generates to push
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
427
Table 24-9
 Exercises That Have the Greatest and Least Joint Motion
Greatest Motion
Least Motion
Shoulder
Extension
Wheelbarrowing
Sit to stand
Flexion
Ramp ascent
Wheelbarrowing
ROM
Ramp ascent
Stair ascent
Elbow
Extension
Ramp ascent
Wheelbarrowing
Flexion
Ramp ascent, stair ascent, cavaletti rail
Sit to stand
ROM
 Ramp ascent, stair ascent, cavaletti rail
Sit to stand
Carpus
Extension
All exercises similar
All exercises similar
Flexion
Ramp ascent
Sit to stand
ROM
Ramp ascent
Sit to stand, wheelbarrowing
Hip
Extension
 Dancing backward
Sit to stand, ramp descent, ramp ascent,
stair descent
Flexion
Sit to stand
Dancing backward
ROM
Sit to stand
 Dancing forward
Stife
Extension
Ground treadmill, stair descent, ramp
 Dancing backward, sit to stand
 descent, dancing forward
Flexion
Sit to stand, stair ascent, stair descent 
Dancing forward, ground treadmill,
inclined treadmill
ROM
Stair ascent, stair descent, cavaletti rail
Dancing backward, walking
Tarsus
Extension
Inclined treadmill, stair ascent
Sit to stand
Flexion
Sit to stand, stair ascent, stair descent
Dancing forward
ROM
Sit to stand, stair ascent, stair descent
Dancing forward
ROM, Range of motion.
the water backward. This helps to accelerate the body and
One study determined stife joint ROM and angular
keep it moving forward.
velocities during swimming and walking in healthy dogs,
 Drag is a force that is opposite to the velocity of move-
and in dogs that had undergone surgical treatment of a
 ment and opposes the motion between the body and the
ruptured CCL.6l For dogs in both groups, swimming
fuid.
resulted in significantly greater overall ROM of the stife
Drag Force = (Constant) x(Area) x
fexion. However, dogs had significantly less stife exten-
(Drag Coefficient) x(Velocity)2
sion while swimming compared with walking.
The constant is determined by the density of water, and
Two-dimensional kinematic analysis of gait has been
area is the cross-sectional area of the body in the direction
used to evaluate joint motion in dogs walking on ground
of the motion. The drag coefficient is affected by the shape
and underwater treadmills. In addition, the effect of differ-
of the body and the surface of the body. Of particular
ent water levels on active joint ROM was evaluated when
importance is the velocity of the body part moving through
patients walked underwater.6? Hip, stife, hock, shoulder.
the water, which creates drag related to an exponential
and elbow fexion are greater in dogs walking in water
function of the velocity. Therefore if the velocity of the dog
compared with walking on land (Table 31-3). Joint fexion
 moving in water doubles, the amount of drag quadruples.
is generally greatest with water levels at or higher than the
The major resistance to moving through water is the tur-
joint of interest. Maximum joint extension is similar for
 bulent drag, with formation of eddies and currents behind
underwater and ground treadmill walking. Maximum and
the body.
minimum joint fexion and extension are related to the level
Another important source of drag exists at the surface
of water. These effects are likely a result of the sudden
of the water, at the water-air interface. There is high surface
action of a limb to break the surface tension of the water
tension of the water here, and movement just under the
at different water heights.
surface tends to create waves. The energy loss with this
motion results in an increase in forces that resist movement
Summary
close to the cube of the velocity rather than the square.
Therefore with movement just beneath the surface of the
Technology
will
1 continue to advance, broadening
water, nearly eight times as much energy must be expended
the options  for physical rehabilitation.  Understanding
to double the velocity of the body.
how these technologies are applied depends on an
428
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
understanding of the fundamental concepts of the physics
16. DeCamp CE, Riggs CM, Olivier NB et al: Kinematic evalu-
of motion and the transfer of energy. The musculoskeletal
'simdni jueueai aeionio peueio yiim saop u1 1iea jo uoge
system is a machine, based on applied force and motion,
Am J Vet Res 57(1):120-126, 1996.
with the transfer of energy resulting in work and power.
17. DeCamp CE, Soutas-Little RW, Hauptman J et al: Kinematic
 gait analysis of the trot in healthy Greyhounds, Am J Vet Res
These concepts can be used to predict and evaluate perfor-
54:627-634, 1993.
mance of the body and to evaluate the effectiveness and
18. Allen K, DeCamp CE, Braden TD et al: Kinematic gait
 outcomes of therapies.
analysis of the trot in healthy mixed breed dogs, Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatot 7:148-153, 1994.
REFERENCES
19. Hottinger HA, Decamp CE, Olivier NB et al: Kinematic gait
1. Millis DL, Schwartz P, Hicks DA et al: Kinematic assessment
analysis of the walk in healthy dogs, Vet Surg 23(5):404,
of selected therapeutic exercises in dogs. Proc 3rd Interna-
1994.
tional Symposium onPhysicalTherapy and Rehabilitation in
 20. Rumph PF, Lander JE, Kincaid SA et al: Ground reaction
Veterinary Medicine, Raleigh, NC, August, 2004.
force profles from force platform gait analyses of clinically
2. Besancon MF, Conzemius MG et al: Comparison of vertical
normal mesomorphic dogs at the trot, Am J Vet Res 55:756-
forces in normal greyhounds between force platform and
761, 1994.
pressure walkway measurement systems, Vet Comp Orthop
 21. Budsberg SC, Verstraete MC, Brown J et al: Vertical loading
Traumatotogy 16:153-157, 2003.
Tates in clinically normal dogs at a trot, Am J Vet Res 56:1275-
3. Romans CW, Conzemius MG, Horstman CL et al: Use of
1280, 1995.
 pressure platform gait analysis in cats with and without bilat-
 22. McLaughlin R Jr, Roush JK: Effects of increasing
eral onychectomy, Am J Vet Res 65:1276-1278, 2004.
yelocity on braking and propulsion times during force
4. Rumph PF, Steiss JE, West MS: Interday variation in vertical
plate gait analysis in Greyhounds, Am J Vet Res 56:159-161,
ground reaction force in clinically normal Greyhounds at the
1995.
trot, Am J Vet Res 60:679-683, 1999.
 23. Bertram JEA, Lee DV, Todhunter RJ et al: Multiple force
5. DeCamp CE: Kinetic and kinematic gait analysis and the
platform analysis of the canine trot: a new approach to
assessment of lameness in the dog, Vet Clin North Am Small
assessing basic characteristics of locomotion, Vet Comp
Anim Pract 27(4):825-840, 1997.
Orthop Traumatol 10:160-169, 1997.
6. Budsberg SC, Verstraete MC, Soutas Little RW: Force plate
 24. Schaefer SL, DeCamp CE, Hauptman JG et al: Kinematic
analysis of the walking gait in healthy dogs, Am J Vet Res
gait analysis of hind limb symmetry in dogs at the trot, Am
48:915-918, 1987.
J Vet Res 59(6):680-685, 1998.
7. Roush JK, McLaughlin RM Jr: Effects of subject stance time
 25. Bertram JE, Lee DV, Case HN et al: Comparison of the trot-
and velocity on ground reaction forces in clinically nomal
ting gaits of Labrador Retievers and Greyhounds, Am J Vet
Greyhounds at the walk, Am J Vet Res 55:1672-1676,
Res 61:832-838, 2000.
1994.
 26. Poy NSJ, DeCamp CE, Bennett RL et al: Additional kine-
 8. Millis D, Levine D, Taylor R, editors: Canine rehabilitation
matic variables to describe differences in the trot between
and physicat therapy, St Louis, 2004, WB Saunders.
clinically normal dogs and dogs with hip dysplasia, Am J Vet
 9. Riggs CM, DeCamp CE, Soutas-Little RW et al: Effects of
Res 61(8):974-978, 2000.
subject velocity on force plate-measured ground reaction
27. Arnold G, Millis D et al: Three dimensional kinematic
forces in healthy greyhounds at the trot, Am J Vet Res 54:
motion analysis of the dog at a walk. 32nd Annual Con-
1523-1526, 1993.
ference: Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Snowmass, CO,
 10. Renberg wC, Johnston SA, Ye K et al: Comparison of stance
2005.
time and velocity as control variables in force plate analysis 
28. Budsberg SC, Verstraete MC, Soutas-Little RW et al:
of dogs, Am J Vet Res 60:814-819, 1999.
Force plate analyses before and after stabilization of canine
11. Jevens DJ, Hauptman JG, DeCamp CE et al: Contributions
stifes for cruciate injury, Am J Vet Res 49:1522-1524,
to variance in force-plate analysis of gait in dogs, Am J Vet
1988.
Res 54:612-615, 1993.
 29. Jevens DJ, DeCamp CE, Hauptman J et al: Use of force-plate
12. McLaughlin RM Jr, Roush JK: Effects of subject stance
anal ysis of gait to compare two surgical techniques for treat-
time and velocity on ground reaction forces in clinically
ment of cranial cruciate ligament rupture in dogs, Am J Vet
normal Greyhounds at the trot, Am J Vet Res 55:1666-1671,
Res 57:389-393, 1996.
1994.
 30. Sanchez-Bustinduy M, De Medeiros MA, Radke H et al:
13. Hicks DA, Millis D, Arnold GA, Evans MB: Comparison of 
Comparison of Kinematic Variables in Defining Lameness
weightbearing at a stance vs. trotting in dogs with rear limb
Caused by Naturally Occurring Rupture of the Cranial Cruci-
lameness. 32nd Annual Conference Veterinary Orthopedic
 ate Ligament in Dogs, Vet Surg 39:523-530, 2010.
Society, Snowmass, CO, 2005.
 31. Tashman S, Anderst W, Kolowich P et al: Kinematics of the
14. Hottinger HA, DeCamp CE, Olivier NB et al: Noninvasive
ACL-deficient canine knee during gait: serial changes over
kinematic analysis of the walk in healthy large-breed dogs,
two years, J Orthop Res 22:931-941, 2004.
Am J Vet Res 57:381-388, 1996.
32. Ragetly CA, Griffon DJ, Mostafa AA et al: Inverse dynamics
15. McLaughlin RM: Kinetic and kinematic gait analysis in
anal ysis of the pelvic limbs in Labrador retrievers with and
dogs, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 31(1):193-201,
without cranial cruciate ligament disease, Vet Surg 39:
2001.
513-522, 2010.
Chapter 24
Biomechanics of Physical Rehabilitation and Kinematics of Exercise
429
33. Vilensky JA, O'Connor BL, Brandt KD et al: Serial kine-
50. Lauer S, Hillman RB, Li L et al: Effects of treadmill inclina-
matic anal ysis of the canine hindlimb joints after deafferenta-
tion on electromyographic activity and hind limb kinematics
tion and anterior cruciate li gament transection, Osteoarthritis
in healthy hounds at a walk, Am J Vet Res 70:658-664,
Cartilage 5:173-182, 1997.
2009.
34. Budsberg SC, Chambers JN, Vanlue SL et al: Prospective
 51. Cart J, Millis DL, Weng HY: Canine physical rehabilitation:
evaluation of ground reaction forces in dogs undergoing uni-
range of motion of the forelimb during stair and ramp ascent,
lateral total hip replacement, Am J Vet Res 57:1781-1785,
J Sm Anim Pract In Press, 2013.
1996.
 52. Holler PJ, Brazda V, Dal-Bianco B et al: Kinematic motion
35. McLaughlin RM, Miller CW, Taves CL et al: Force plate
 anal ysis of the joints of the forelimbs and hind limbs of dogs
analysis of triple pelvic osteotomy for the treatment of canine
during walking exercise regimens, Am J Vet Res 71:734-740,
hip dysplasia, Vet Surg 20:291-297, 1991.
2010.
36. Bennett RL, DeCamp CE, Flo GL et al: Kinematic gait
 53. Millard RP, Headrick JF, Millis DL: Kinematic analysis
analysis in dogs with hip dysplasia, Am J Vet Res 57(7):966-
of the pelvic limbs of healthy dogs during stair and
971, 1996.
decline slope walking, J Small Anim Pract 51(8):419-422,
37. Poy NSJ, DeCamp CE, Bennett RL et al: Kinematic gait
2010.
analysis to describe canine hip dysplasia, Vet Comp Orthop
 54. Durant AM, Millis DL, Headrick JF: Kinematics of stair
Traumatol 10(2):73, 1997.
ascent in healthy dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 24:99-
38. Bockstahler BA, Henninger W, Miller M et al: Influence of
105, 2011.
borderline hip dysplasia on joint kinematics of clinically
 55. Richards J, Holler P, Bockstahler B et al: A comparison of
sound Belgian Shepherd dogs, Am J Vet Res 68:271-276,
human and canine kinematics during level walking, stair
2007.
ascent, and stair descent, Wiener Tierarztliche Monatsschrijft
39. Bockstahler BA, Vobornik A, Miller M, Peham C: Compen-
97:92-100, 2010.
satory load redistribution in naturally occurring osteoarthritis
56. Headrick JH, Hicks DA, McEachern GL et al: Kinematics
of the elbow joint and induced weight-bearing lameness of 
of walking over cavaletti rails compared to overground
the forelimbs compared with clinically sound dogs, Vet J
walking in dogs. Proc 2nd World Veterinary Orthopedic
180:202-212, 2009.
 Congress/Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Keystone CO, Feb
40. Gradner G, Bockstahler B, Peham C et al: Kinematic study
2006.
of back movement in clinically sound malinois dogs with
 57. Feeney LC, Lin C-F, Marcellin-Little DJ et al: Validation of
consideration of the effect of radiographic changes in the
two-dimensional kinematic analysis of walk and sit-to-stand
lumbosacral junction, Vet Surg 36:472-481, 2007.
motions in dogs, Am J Vet Res 68:277-282, 2007.
41. Marsh AP, Eggebeen JD, Kornegay JN et al: Kinematics of 
58. McEachern GL, Millis DL, Headrick J et al: Kinematic
gait in golden retriever muscular dystrophy, Neuromuscuf
assessment of sit-to-stand exercise in dogs with chronic
Dis 20:16-20, 2010.
extracapsular cranial cruciate repair. Proc 2nd World Veteri-
42.（
Cartier DR, Gregersen CS, Sil verton NA: Dynamic gearing
nary Orthopedic Congress/Veterinary Orthopedic Society,
in running dogs, J Exp Biot 201:3185-3195, 1998.
Keystone CO, February 2006.
43. Pitman Ml, Peterson L: Biomechanics of skeletal muscle. In 
59. Levine D, Marcellin-Little DJ, Millis DL et al: Effects of
Basic biomechanics of the musculosketetal system, ed 2,
partial immersion on vertical ground reaction forces and
Philadelphia, 1989, Lea & Febiget.
weight distribution in dogs, Am J Vet Res 71:1413-1416,
44. Winter DA: Biomechanics of human movement with appli-
2009.
cations to the study of human locomotion, CRC Critical
 60. Northrip JW, Logan GA, McKinney WC: Fluid mechanics.
Reviews In Biomedical Engineering 9:287-314, 1984.
In Introduction to biomechanic anatysis of sport, ed 2,
 45. Lieber RL, Bodine-Fowler SC: Skeletal muscle mechanics:
Dubuque, IA, 1979, Wm C Brown Company.
implication for rehabilitation, Phys Ther 73:844-856,
 61. Marsolais GS, McLean S, Derrick T et al: Kinematic analysis 
1993.
 of the hind limb during swimming and walking in healthy
46. Funatsu T, Higuchi H, Ishiwata S: Elastic filaments in skel-
dogs and dogs with surgically cortected cranial cruciate liga-
etal muscle revealed by selective removal of thin flaments 
ment rupture, J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:739-743, 2003.
with plasma gelsolin, J Cell Biot 110:53-62, 1990.
62. Jackson AM, Stevens M, Barnett S: Joint kinematics during
47. Horowitz R, Podolsky RJ: The positional stability of thick
underwater treadmill activity. 2nd Intermational Symposium
 flaments in activated skeletal muscle depends on sarcomere
on Rehabilitation and Physicat Therapy in Veterinary Medi-
length: evidence for the role of titin filaments, J Cell Biot
cine, Knoxville, TN, 2002.
105:2217-2223, 1987.
48. Schwartz P, Millis D, Hicks DA, Evans MB: A kinematic
BIBLIOGRAPHY
comparison of over ground vs. treadmill walking in dogs.
31st Annuat Conference,Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Big
Clayton HM: Instrumentation and techniques in locomotion
Sky, MT, 2004.
and lameness, Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 12:337-350,
49. Gassel AG, Millis DL, Schwartz P et al: Kinematic gait
1996.
analysis of the pelvic limb; comparison of overground versus
 Hamill J, Knutzen K: Biomechanicat basis of human movement,
incline walking in 10 dogs, Proc Vet Orthop Soc 32nd Annual
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2003, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Conference for Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Snowman,
Low J, Reed A: Basic biomechanics explained, Boston, 1996,
Colorado, March 5-12, 2005.
Butterw orth-Heinemann.
430
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Meriam JL, Kraige LG: Engineering Mechanics Dynamics Vot 2,
Renberg WC: Evaluation of the lame patient, Vet Clin North Am
Hoboken, NJ, 1986, John Wiley and Sons.
Small Anim Pract 31:1-16, 2001.
Ozkaya N, Nordin M: Fundamentais of biomechanics equilib-
 Straface SF, Newbold PJ, Nade S: The effects of direction and
rium, motion, and deformation, ed 2, New York, 1991,
velocity of movement, and intra-articular fuid volume and
Springer- Verlag.
intra-articular pressure, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:113-121,
1988.
science of human movement, ed 6, Philadelphia, 1978, Lea 
 Technologies PP: Discovering peak motus: user's manual, ed 8,
and Febiger.
Centennial, CO, 2004.
25
Range-of-Motion and
Stretching Exercises
Darryl L. Millis and David Levine
 ange of motion (ROM) and stretching exercises
n ou an aran papiaod aissod se Aralns no Arnu
 are very important to achieve improved motion of
indications. Progression through active assisted and active
joints after acute injury or surgery, or in patients
ROM follows, and when appropriate, some resistance to
afflicted with chronic conditions. They are also important
 motion may be introduced for strengthening.
Passive Range of Motion
soft tissues and bones, remodel periarticular fbrosis, and 
Passive ROM is motion of a joint that is performed without
prevent further injury to joints, muscles, tendons, and
muscle contraction within the available ROM, using an
ligaments.
extermal force to move the joint. In animals, passive ROM
As with many types of rehabilitation activities, it may
is performed by the therapist. Additional force applied at
be beneficial to administer analgesic medication, such as
the end of the available ROM is defined as stretching.
a nonsteroidal antiinfammatory medication, 30 to 60
Passive ROM and stretching can be performed in conjunc-
minutes before beginning any rehabilitation exercises to
tion with each other to help maintain and improve joint
allow peak absorption of the medication and take advan-
ROM.
tage of its maximal analgesic effect.
The benefits of continuous passive ROM immediately
Range of Motion
 colleagues and include decreased pain and improved rate
 Of recovery. The scar tissue deposited after an injury or
The full motion that a joint may be moved through is
surgery is laid down in a random fashion, and ROM helps
termed the ROM. The structure of the joint and the volume,
this scar tissue to align along the lines of stress that the
integrity, character, and fexibility of the soft tissues that
tissue normally undergoes. This results in a stronger scar
surround the joint affect joint motion.' ROM is commonly
and may help prevent future injury. However, it is critical
measured with a goniometer, and each joint has character-
that the therapist maintain a ROM that is comfortable to
istic angles, such as fexion and extension of the stife, and
the patient and not injure tissues by exceeding their limits.
fexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and intemal and
Tissues limiting passive ROM may be normal or
extermal rotation of the hip (Appendix 3).
pathologic and include the joint capsule, periarticular soft 
Muscles also have a ROM, which is termed the func-
tissues, muscles, ligaments, tendons, skin, and scar tissue.
tional excursion of muscles.' This is the distance that a
For example, open wounds over joints that are allowed to
muscle is able to shorten after it has been maximally elon-
 heal secondarily by contraction and epithelialization may
gated. The functional excursion may be affected by the
result in limitations to passive ROM. Surgical incisions
joint it crosses, particularly if joint motion is restricted.
may result in adhesions and fibrosis between skin, subcu-
Some muscles, such as the biceps brachii and the rectus
taneous tissues, fascia, muscles, and bone, limiting the
femoris muscles, cross two joints. In general, muscles that
ability of tissues to glide over one another. Musculotendi-
cross multiple joints may lose functional excursion easier
nous tissue may also be relatively shortened as a result of
than those that cross only one joint.
spasm or contracture. Any restriction of motion may result
ROM exercises are useful to diminish the effects of
 in resistance to joint movement and pain.
disuse and immobilization.? To maintain ROM, the joints
Passive ROM is used whenever a patient is unable to
and muscles must be periodically moved through their
move joints on its own, or if active motion across a joint
available ranges. Movement may be passive, active assisted,
may be deleterious to the patient, such as with a tenuous
or active. In each situation, a load is produced on the
articular fracture repair. Passive ROM is sometimes used
soft tissues that helps to maintain the articular cartilage,
to help relax an anxious patient. The most common indica-
muscles, ligaments, and tendons in a healthy state. It is
tions for passive ROM exercises are immediately after
 generally appropriate to initiate passive ROM as soon after
surgery (before active weight bearing) to help prevent joint
431
432
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
contracture and soft tissue adaptive shortening, maintain
exercise is performed while swimming. Patients with
mobility between soft tissue layers, reduce pain, enhance
limited ability to ambulate on the ground may benefit from
blood and lymphatic flow, and improve synovial fuid pro-
controlled swimming, during which the therapist assists
duction and diffusion.?
movement of the animal's limbs and joints while in the
Another indication for passive ROM is the prevention
water with the patient. The buoyancy of the water helps
of joint contracture during healing and recovery in para-
to support the weight of the limbs while the therapist
lyzed patients. Ideally, exercises should be performed
concentrates on assisting the limb through a normal cycle
two to six times per day to help maintain normal joint
of movement.
 mobility. However, if the patient does not regain functional
Active assisted ROM helps to combat the negative
neuromuscular control (active motion), it is likely that
effects of immobilization on limbs, similar to those
joints will undergo some degree of contracture despite
achieved with passive ROM. Some degree of active muscle
aggressive efforts. Although passive ROM may help
 contraction allows muscle strengthening and strengthening
slow muscle atrophy, it will not prevent muscle atrophy,
of bone at muscle origin and insertion sites. In addition,
increase strength, improve endurance, or be as effective in
some neuromuscular reeducation, and proprioceptive and
improving vascular and lymphatic fow as active ROM
gait training may be achieved.
techniques.
 Proper technique for performing passive ROM is impor-
Active Range of Motion
tant. The patient should be relaxed and comfortable. If
Active ROM is the motion of a joint that may be achieved
active muscle contraction is not desired, it is especially
by active muscle contraction. In addition to increasing
important to be gentle and not create pain or discomfort.
strength, coordination between muscle groups is necessary
The bones proximal and distal to the joint should be
because the guidance of assisting the patient through ROM
supported to avoid excessive varus and valgus stresses on
is no longer provided. The active ROM may be performed
the joint. The therapist should gently hold the limb and
 during a regular gait cycle, in which the excursion of joint
avoid painful areas, such as incisions and wounds. The
motion is relatively limited, or under special conditions
location of the therapist's hands on the limb is also impor-
designed to expand motion and encourage more complete
tant; the closer the hands are to the joint, the less torque
use of the full available ROM. Examples of these activities
will be produced at the joint. This may decrease pain and
include swimming; walking in water, tall grass, snow, or
the risk of patient injury. The motion should be smooth,
sand; climbing stairs; crawling through a tunnel; and nego-
slow, and steady with motion generally occurring by
tiating cavaletti rails.
moving the distal limb with the prox imal limb held steady.
 As the patient improves ROM of a joint, it is helpful to
The patient should be continually monitored for any
 continue to perform passive ROM and stretching to achieve
discomfort, and the technique altered if necessary to
as complete ROM as possible, and then perform active
enhance comfort.
ROM through this increased motion to emphasize more
complete use of the limb. Greater strength is required for
Active Assisted Range of Motion
patients to perform active ROM, and some of the special
Active assisted ROM occurs when the therapist guides
conditions require more muscle strength than normal
joint motion and the patient's muscle activity assists joint
ambulation during walking or trotting. Therefore for those
motion to some degree. In animal patients, the amount
exercises, a transition between active assisted and active
of muscle activity provided by the patient is difficult
ROM may be necessary. Active ROM exercises may be a
to control. In reality, because it is difficult to avoid
prelude to other strengthening activities. Owners may also
muscle activation in patients that are not paralyzed, most
be involved with active ROM exercises in helping with a
ROM exercises in small animal patients involve a degree
 home care program for their pet.
of active assisted ROM. In anxious patients or in those
Precautions and Contraindications to Range
with upper motor neuron conditions, muscle contraction
of Motion
of antagonist muscle groups may oppose joint ROM
exercises.
All forms of ROM exercises are contraindicated when
Active assisted ROM exercises are most useful for those
motion may result in further injury or instability. Such
patients that are weak or recovering from lower motor
examples include unstable fractures near joints and unsta-
neuron conditions. In addition to assisted ROM with the
 ble ligament or tendon injuries. Communication between
patient in lateral recumbency, exercises may be performed
 the surgeon and therapist is critical to be certain that appro-
with the patient supported by a sling, with the therapist
priate ROM exercises are performed and that the limits of
assisting limb movement and joint ROM during ambula-
the range are not exceeded, which may result in damage
tion. This may be performed while the patient is slowly
to the tissues. In most cases, early passive ROM is felt to
walked over ground, on a ground treadmill, or on an under-
be beneficial if the therapist stays within a ROM that is
water treadmill. Another form of active assisted ROM
reasonable for the patient and condition being treated. In
Chapter 25
Range-of-Motion and Stretching Exercises
433
165
160
PT
No PT
155
bap)
150
145
140
135
Stifle
130
125
120-
8
10
12
14
30
60
90
Time (days)
Figure 25-1  Effect of physical rehabilitation on stifle extension. Note the return of normal stifle extension by 2 weeks after surgery, in those
dogs receiving rehabilitation and the loss of complete stifle extension in some dogs not receiving postsurgical rehabilitation. *P< 0.05.
0.8
qw
0.7
Figure 25-2 Correlation between stifle exten-
0.6
sion and peak vertical force. Relationship of com-
fortable angle of stifle extension to peak vertical
0.5
force in dogs 10 weeks after cranial cruciate liga-
0.4
 ment transection and stifle stabilization. Dogs
with normal stifle extension have greater weight
0.3
bearing on the limb at a trot than those with limi-
0.2
tation to stifle extension. Although a cause-and-
0.1
effect relationship cannot be definitively identified
 from these data, there is a significant relationship.
0
160
170
r = 0.78; P < 0.001.
140
150
Stifle extension (degrees)
addition, the therapist should perform the exercises at a
The association of stife ROM with function following
reasonable speed that is not painful for the patient.
surgery for cranial cruciate ligament disease in clinical
patients has been further evaluated.6 In 412 dogs treated
Range of Motion Studies
with tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO) for treat-
 In some canine conditions, active ROM is a prerequisite to
ment of cranial cruciate ligament rupture, dogs were deter-
a successful outcome. For example, it is critical that
mined to have no loss of extension or fexion (n = 322),
 puppies with distal femoral physeal fractures have early
less than 10 degrees loss of extension or fexion (n = 78),
 passive and active ROM exercises to avoid fracture disease
or 10 degrees or more loss of extension or fexion (n = 12).
and tiedown of the quadriceps muscle group.4 Similarly.
Loss of extension or fexion greater than 10 degrees was
dogs with condylar fractures of the distal humerus must
associated with significantly greater lameness in compari-
begin active ROM to prevent permanent joint stiffness.
son with no loss, or loss of extension or fexion less than
In one study of dogs following surgery for cranial cruci-
10 degrees. In addition, osteoarthritis of the stife joint was
ate ligament rupture, patients not receiving early passive
significantly correlated with loss of extension, and loss of
and active ROM exercises had reduced stife extension
extension greater than 10 degrees was less tolerable and
(Figure 25-1). This loss of motion appeared to be perma-
less amenable to physical rehabilitation than flexion loss.
nent in some dogs if extension was not achieved within 2
The authors concluded that loss of extension or fexion
weeks. In contrast, those dogs receiving appropriate reha-
should be assessed in dogs with persistent lameness after
bilitation had retum of near-normal stife extension. There
TPLO so that early intervention can occur.
also appears to be an association of stife extension with
 An explanation for the restricted ROM in clinical cases
weight bearing, with improved weight bearing in dogs with
may include physical restrictions, such as joint capsule
near-normal stife extension (Figure 25-2). However, the
fibrosis, soft tissue approximation, or bony impingement
 cause and effect of this relationship are unknown.
that may occur with osteophytes as a result of joint disease.
434
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Another possible explanation is an increase in intraarticu-
active motion on cartilage healing is unknown in animals
lar pressure with joint motion, resulting in stretch of the
because of the difficulty in achieving consistent limb use 
joint capsule and creation of pain. One study evaluated the
 after cartilage injury.
intraarticular pressure and volume relationships in the knee
Continuous passive motion has also been recommended
joint of dogs.? In general, infusion of fuid into the joint
 to prevent contracture of periarticular tissues and to restore
did not result in intraarticular pressure changes between
joint function. Immobilization results in shortening of
125-110 degrees of stife motion. However, increasing
fibrous tissues and loss of motion, depending on the posi-
fexion from 110 to 50 degrees resulted in an increase in
tion of immobilization. There is a loss of collagen mass
pressure, which was greater with increased intraarticular
 after immobilization, and there is collagen cross-linking
volume. Increasing the intraarticular volume also resulted
of periarticular connective tissues, which may lead to
in decreased total ROM of the joint.
increased stiffness. Passive motion may reduce these
The functional and structural consequences of remobi-
changes and prevent joint stiffness. In one study, 16 hours
lization of the shoulder joint after 12 weeks of immobiliza-
 Or more of continuous motion prevented increased joint
tion were studied in 10 beagle dogs.8 It was found that after
12 weeks of immobilization, the passive ROM was mark-
durations of passive motion may be necessary to help
edly impaired, intraarticular pressure increased during
maintain normal quantities and tumover of collagen and
movement, and the filling volume of the joint cavity was
 glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), as well as to help maintain
reduced. On histologic examination, the capsule showed
the normal alignment of collagen fibers and prevent short-
hyperplasia of the synovial lining and vascular prolifera-
ening and cross-linking.
tion in the wall, but there was no increase of collagen in
 It has been suggested that continuous passive ROM may
the capsular wall. Both the functional and structural
be somewhat antinfammatory in patients with infamma-
changes were unaltered after 4 weeks of remobilization,
tory joint disease. In one study, the effects of continuous
but after 8 weeks they began to reverse, and they returmed
passive ROM on early inflammatory events were evaluated
to normal after 12 weeks, indicating that functional and
in meniscal fibrocartilage of rabbits with antigen-induced
structural changes after immobilization of an uninjured
arthritis. '§ Rabbit knees injected with bovine serum albumin
shoulder joint are potentially reversible. The timing and
and Freund's complete adjuvant were treated with 24 or 48
degree of improvement may not be similar in patients with
hours of continuous passive ROM or were immobilized.
pathologic injury to the shoulder.
Within 24 hours, immobilized knees had marked degrada-
Another study of dogs evaluated the effects of joint
tion of GAGs in meniscal fibrocartilage. Infammatory
mobilization treatment on carpal joints of dogs.? The right
mediators, including matrix metalloproteinase 1, cyclo-
carpal joints of 12 dogs were immobilized for 6 weeks,
 Oxygenase 2, and interleukin (IL) 1b, increased within 24
which resulted in joint hypomobility. The treated group
hours and continued to increase. Knees undergoing con-
received mobilization therapy daily for 4 weeks following
tinuous passive ROM had reduced GAG degradation and
the immobilization period. In control and treated groups,
infammatory mediators during treatment, and increased
passive ROM, peak angles of extension and fexion of
synthesis of the antiinfammatory cytokine IL-10. These
the carpal joint, and the amount of time required in the
results suggest that continuous passive ROM suppresses
 e sd d asr   a 
the deleterious effects of inflammatory arthritis more than
cinematographically during gait before immobilization
immobilization and provide information regarding the
and once weekly for 4 weeks after immobilization. The
involved molecular events.
treated group had improved passive ROM and motion
The duration of daily passive motion treatment has
during gait.
varying effects. For example, relatively short daily passive
Continuous passive ROM has been assessed in several
 motion may reduce stiffness immediately after treatment,
studies to evaluate its use in the management of cartilage
 but there may be greater long-term stiffness.4 In fact,
defects. Salter and colleagues" demonstrated that young
shorter durations of passive motion may be detrimen-
rabbits with a full-thickness defect in the articular cartilage
Oe on oi ym ssauns aou papu Apms au gt'
managed with continuous passive motion had healing of
minutes of passive motion per day than if the joints were
 52% of the defects with hyaline-type cartilage. Similar
results were obtained in adult rabbits, in which 44% of
ness with less than 8 hours of daily passive motion.6
the defects were repaired with hyaline cartilage. Passive
Although somewhat surprising, these results suggest that
motion may also help to reduce cartilage destruction fol-
there may be increased trauma associated with breakdown
lowing infection of a joint.1l.12 The optimal daily dose of
 of soft adhesions that fonm when motion is not occurring.
passive ROM and the total duration of treatment are
 daa o ssa si u  ra  
unknown. However, one study of rabbits found that at least
tissues mobile.
8 hours of passive motion per day was necessary to achieve
Both continuous motion and as little as 4 hours of daily
the level of healing obtained by Salter.'3 The effect of
Chapter 25
Range-of-Motion and Stretching Exercises
435
In fact, 5% to 15% greater limb muscle mass may 0ccur
in rabbits with passive motion as compared with those that
are immobilized.
The effects of passive motion on bone loss are less clear.
It is well documented that immobilization results in a
decrease in bone mineral content; however, 16 or 24 hours
of passive motion resulted in the loss of greater bone
 mineral than immobilization.4 It was suggested by these 
authors that the increased joint stiffness that resulted from
less than 16 hours of motion may have increased the
bending stresses and load on the bones, whereas greater
duration of passive motion maintained normal joint stiff-
ness and prevented the additional loading on the bones.
In people, the use of active and passive knee motion in
the immediate postoperative period and a treatment plan
Figure 25-3   Before performing range-of-motion or stretching exer-
for early postoperative limitations in knee motion has
dises, the patient should be placed in lateral recumbency with the
 proven highly effective in restoring motion after anterior
affected limb up.
 g s o  s'ns  
knees, 91% regained full ROM. The remaining patients did
postoperative phased treatment program of serial extension
supported to avoid any undue valgus, varus, or rotational
casts, early gentle manipulation under anesthesia, Or
stresses to the involved joint.
arthroscopic treatment of intraarticular adhesions and scar
After the hands are in the correct position and the limb
tissue. Most of these patients regained full ROM. Those
is supported, begin by slowly and gently fexing the treated
patients who failed to follow the rehabilitation program
joint (Figures 25-4 to 25-7). In general, the other joints of
had permanent and significant limitation of motion. The
the limb should be allowed to remain in a neutral position
incidence of postoperative motion problems was related to
(a position as if the animal were standing). Try not to move
the extent of the surgical procedure. Patients who had more
the other joints while working on the affected joint because
some joints may be restricted by the position of the joints
a medial collateral ligament repair, had a higher incidence
above or below the target joint. In some situations, the
of restricted motion.
position of one joint may greatly affect the motion in
another joint. In these cases, the other joints should be
Clinical Application of Range of Motion
placed in a position that will allow as complete a ROM as
possible to the target joint. For example, maximal hock
fexion cannot be obtained while the stife is maintained in
Passive Range of Motion
an extended position. In this case, placing the stife in a
Passive ROM treatment should be administered in a quiet
fexed position allows more complete fexion of the hock.
and comfortable area, away from distractions, such as loud
Slowly continue to fex the joint until the patient shows
Paui nou an oum aldoad rauo pue 'sad rauo sasi
initial signs of discomfort, such as tensing the limb,
with the treatment. This will allow the patient to be calm,
moving, turming the head toward the therapist, or trying to
relaxed, and more receptive to the treatment.
pull away, but do not cause undue discomfort, indicated by
 It is recommended that patients have a muzzle applied
behaviors such as vocalizing or attempting to bite.
for the initial treatments, or if they are painful, resistant to
With the hands maintained in the same positions, slowly
treatment, or overly anxious. The patient should be placed
extend the joint. Again, try to keep the other joints in a
in lateral recumbency with the affected limb up (Figure
 a g    p usd g
25-3). Help may be required to restrain the animal and to
joints. Slowly continue to extend the joint until the patient
help keep it quiet and relaxed. In all forms of ROM activi-
shows initial signs of discomfort.
ties, therapists should be comfortable and use proper body
Altermatively, a number of joints may be simultaneously
mechanics to avoid injury to themselves.
placed through a ROM, a technique sometimes referred to
After the animal has relaxed, gently place both hands
as ROM through functional patterns or bicycling move-
 On the injured limb and begin a very gentle massage to help
 ments. This fomm of ROM exercise may be appropriate as
further relax the patient. Massage for 2 to 3 minutes, and
 an animal nears active use of a limb. Flexing and extending
then gently move one hand to the portion of the limb above
all of the joints of a limb in a patterm that mimics an exag-
the joint. Place the other hand on a portion of the limb
erated normal gait patterm may also be beneficial for neu-
below the affected joint. Be certain that the entire limb is
romuscular reeducation.
436
Section V
Therapeutie Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 25-4 A, Carpal flexion. While supporting the radius and ulna in one hand and the foot in the other, the carpus is gently flexed.
apuaixa Auah s! sndies ayi layio ayi ui oot ayi pue puey auo u euin pue snipei ayi buoddns aln uoisuaixa jediey 'g
Figure 25-5 A, Shoulder flexion. while supporting the distal scapula in one hand and the humerus in the other, the shoulder is gently flexed.
B, Shoulder extension. While supporting the distal scapula in one hand and the humerus in the other, the shoulder is gently extended.
B
Figure 25-6 A, Stifle flexion. While supporting the distal femur in one hand and the tibia in the other, the stifle is gently flexed. B, Stifle 
 extension. While supporting the distal femur in one hand and the tibia in the other, the stifle is gently extended.
Chapter 25
Range-of-Motion and Stretching Exercises
437
B
suxa dih 'a paxa Ah si dy aue sayio aui ui sid aun pue puey auo ui anway aun buoddns al uoxa d ' I-iz ana
While supporting the femur in one hand and the pelvis in the other, the hip is gently extended.
B
Figure 25-8 A, Digit flexion. while supporting the carpus in one hand and the digits in the other, the digits are gently flexed. B, Digit exten-
apuaxa Ae ane shiip aue lauo ayi ui shiip aut pue puey auo ui sndieo aui buoddns aun uons
 The number of ROM repetitions and the frequency of
 In addition, it is more effcient to perform ROM in all joints
the treatments depend on the condition treated. In general,
simultaneously (Figure 25-8). Place the fingers or palm on
 -adai oz mn si 'suoun aaneiadogsod aunoi ysou i
the dorsal surface of the digits and slowly fex the digits
tions performed two to four times per day are likely ade-
umtil the point of initial discomfort. Then place the fingers
quate. As the ROM returms to normal, the frequency may
or palm on the pads of the patient's foot and slowly extend
be reduced. For more challenging conditions, such as artic-
the toes until the point of initial discomfort. After ROM is
ular fractures, physeal fractures in young dogs, joints with
performed on the digits, ROM exercises are performed on
contractures, or joints that have been immobilized for a
the other joints.
time, an increase in the number and frequency of repeti-
 The ROM session may be ended with a gentle massage
tions may be necessary.
to the injured limb. Gently and slowly massage for approx-
It is also important to maintain normal ROM in the other
imately 5 minutes. This helps to maintain a relaxed state.
joints of the affected limb. After completing ROM of the
An ice pack may be applied to the injured joint after the
affected joint, keep the limb in a neutral position and
ROM and massage.
slowly move the hands distally to the digits (or if already
Active Assisted Range of Motion
working on the digits, move proximally). Be certain to
keep the injured joint supported. Performing ROM of the
Active assisted ROM is the next step in the progression of
digits requires additional consideration because it is diffi-
joint motion during rehabilitation. In most situations, vet-
cult to passively fex and extend a single joint at a time
erinary patients will have some muscle tension during
because of the proximity of the other joints of each digit.
ROM activities, and there is an equally likely chance that
438
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Overstretching refers to the elongation of tissues beyond
tion of both, will contract with joint movement. Patients
nonmal limits to allow greater joint ROM than normal.
with neurologic conditions may beneft from assisted
 Overstretching may be detrimental if there is inadequate
movement of limbs while in lateral recumbency, or while
standing and generating a gait pattem.
injury. Tightness implies mild shortening of a musculoten-
Active assisted ROM may be performed while the
dinous unit, with no specific pathologic cause. Two-joint
patient is ambulating on a ground treadmill or during
muscles, such as the rectus femoris and gastrocnemius
swimming activity, during which the therapist helps move
muscles, are especially susceptible to tightness. The unit
the limb at the appropriate phase of the gait cycle. Simi-
may be lengthened over time with stretching exercises.
larly, placing the animal in an ambulatory sling and slowly
Contracture occurs when muscles or other soft tissues
moving the animal with the sling while assisting the animal
 that span a joint shorten and limit ROM. Contractures may
to advance the limb are appropriate active assisted ROM
 be defined by the types of soft tissues involved. Myostatic
activities. Another technique involves the use of an elastic
band placed around a limb or the foot. As the animal
 adapted to a shortened position. There is no pathologic
advances the limb, tension on the elastic band helps to
condition, but the joint has significant loss of motion. Scar
 advance the limb.
tissue adhesions between normal tissues, such as muscles
 and fascia, tie down the tissues and prevent normal gliding
Active Range of Motion
motion between the tissues, resulting in reduced ROM.
When the animal is able to ambulate and move the affected
 Most scar tissue adhesions may be prevented with appro-
limb, active ROM exercises may be initiated. Dogs only
priate stretching, exercise, and massage in the early tissue-
use a small amount of their available joint ROM during
healing phase following injury. If the adhesion continues
normal walking and trotting, so the joints do not go through
to mature without tissue modification, a fibrotic adhesion
a complete normal ROM during these activities. If joint
may form. These types of adhesions dramatically reduce
restriction is present, patients may benefit by perfonming
joint ROM, and the resultant contracture is very difficult
activities that encourage a more complete ROM. Swim-
to treat and restore normal function to the joint. When there
ming or walking in water results in greater fexion of joints.
is an excessive amount of fibrous tissue, cartilage, or bone
Decreased joint extension may occur with swimming, but
that forms in the area, there may be permanent loss of soft
walking in water maintains relatively normal active joint
tissue extensibility. Damage to the central nervous system
extension while increasing joint fexion, resulting in greater
with upper motor neuron signs may result in hypertonic
overall joint ROM. Other activities that may be perfonmed
muscles and a pseudomyostatic contracture. In this situa-
include walking in snow, sand, or tall grass and crawling
tion, the muscle seems to be in a chronic state of contrac-
through a play tunnel. Climbing stairs may increase joint
tion, resulting in reduced ROM. Appropriate ROM,
excursion, while also increasing strength. Walking over
 stretching, and massage may help to improve this form of
cavaletti rails is an excellent method of achieving normal
contracture.
limb extension for walking, while increasing joint fexion
The various tissues that are involved, such as muscle,
of certain joints, especially the elbow, stife, and tarsus as
ligaments, tendons, joint capsule, and skin, respond to
the patient negotiates the rails. In addition, the rails may
stretching differently. Interestingly, in a study of rat dener-
be raised or lowered to encourage increased or decreased
vated gastrocnemius muscle-tendon units, the muscle
fexion of these joints, based on the needs of the individual
tissue accounted for 95% of the total increase in length of
patient.
the unit with loading, whereas the tendon contributed only
5% to the length.1 Therefore the therapist must consider
Stretching
which tissues are most likely limiting mobility and choose
the appropriate techniques to help achieve more normal
Stretching techniques are often performed in conjunction
function. If stretching occurs within the normal physio-
with ROM exercises to improve fexibility of the joints and
logic limits of the tissue, elastic deformation occurs in
extensibility of periarticular tissues, muscles, and tendons.?
which the tissues returm to their normal resting length after
Conditions that result in adaptive shortening of tissues,
the stretch is completed. If the tissue is stretched beyond
including immobilization, reduced mobility, injury, and
its limits, permanent deformation of the tissues remains
fibrosis of periarticular tissues, or neurologic conditions,
after the stretch is completed, resulting in an increased
may respond favorably to stretching. Muscle weakness
resting length; this is called plastic deformation.
may occur with adaptive shortening of tissues because
Stretching is a general term that is used to indicate
peak muscle tension cannot occur, and joint ROM may be
maneuvers to elongate tissues shortened as a result of a
decreased as a result of periarticular fibrosis.
pathologic condition and to increase fexibility and joint
Flexibility refers to the ability of tissues, particularly
motion in normal and abnormal tissues. Stretching differs
muscle, to relax and respond to an elongation force.
from ROM exercises in that stretching takes tissues beyond
Chapter 25
Range-of-Motion and Stretching Exercises 
439
the normal ROM. Passive ROM only takes structures
for 5 days, has increased the length of the hamstring
through the available range. Passive stretching techniques
muscles.2 Cyclic submaximal loading may also increase
are most commonly used in veterinary medicine because
resting tissue length through tissue remodeling. Hamstring
of the inability to verbally communicate instructions to the
length was increased in people following a series of
patient to selectively relax and contract various muscle
10-second stretches and 8-second rest periods for 15
 groups. It may be possible, in some situations, to apply
minutes per day, for 5 days.21
neuromuscular electrical stimulation to various muscle
 groups to mimic active muscle contraction of an individual
cases of muscle tightness, 5 to 10 degrees of ROM may be
muscle for certain active stretching techniques, but this
gained per week, and 3 to 5 degrees may be gained in cases
requires coordination of efforts, and usually two or three
with joint capsule tightness. Other factors may alter these
 people must be involved in the treatment session.
expected responses, including the animal's weight-bearing
 Several stretching techniques have been described,
status, other medical conditions such as Cushing's disease,
including static stretching, prolonged mechanical passive
the extent of trauma to the tissues, and the type of surgical
stretching, ballistic stretching, and proprioceptive neuro-
 procedure performed.
muscular facilitation stretching. The acute effect of stretch-
There is no consensus regarding which stretching tech-
ing is an immediate elongation of the elastic component of
nique is most effective, and some controversy exists
the musculotendinous unit. A chronic stretch may be
regarding the efficacy of various stretching techniques for
applied with the limb immobilized with the target tissues
certain conditions. However, if benefits are achieved, the
in an elongated position. Chronic stretching over time may
effects of a consistent stretching program may be main-
 result in sarcomeres being added to lengthen muscle tissue
tained over time, even if stretching is temporarily discon-
-os jo iaqunu aul oz' uonsunf snoupuaonsnut au n
 tinued. A stretching program performed three to five times
meres in series increases, resulting in an increased resting
 per week may result in measurable increases in fexibility
muscle length. This form of stretching is used to lengthen
in patients with stiffness. After fexibility improves, the
shortened tissue and to decrease muscle stiffness. Immo-
frequency of stretching may be reduced. In fact, stretching
bilization of a muscle in a shortened position results in a
too frequently may be harnful in some situations. The
decrease in sarcomeres and increased connective tissue;
natural cycle of stress and adaptive remodeling may be
stretching may correct this process.
 interrupted if adequate time is not allowed for healing
The muscle spindle monitors the velocity and degree of
between intense stretching sessions. Additional caution is
muscle stretch. When a muscle is stretched very quickly,
required in aged animals because collagen becomes less
the muscle spindle is activated, which stimulates the
elastic, and less stretch is tolerated before plastic
primary afferent fibers and results in increased muscle
deformation.
tension. This is termed the monosynaptic stretch response.
Static Stretching
Caution should therefore be used to avoid stretching too
rapidly, which may cause stimulation of the muscle spindle
Static stretching involves placing the joint or joints in a
and an increase in muscle contraction instead of relax-
position so that the muscles and connective tissues are
ation. The Golgi tendon organ senses muscle tension
stretched while held in a static position with the tissues at
during a contraction and provides a protective function to
their greatest length. Stretches should be held for 15 to 30
the muscle by inhibiting contraction of the muscle when
seconds. There is probably little advantage to stretching for
tension is applied slowly. When excessive muscle tension
longer periods in healthy patients.?2 One advantage of this
develops during contraction, the Golgi tendon organ
form of stretching is that less force is applied, reducing the
responds, and the muscle relaxes.
possibility of iatrogenic damage to the tissues. There is
Noncontractile soft tissues, such as tendons and liga-
 also less stimulation of the IA and II spindle afferent fibers,
ments, are composed primarily of collagen. Initial stretch
which increase the muscle's resistance to stretch.? It is
applied to these tissues results in straightening of the col-
important to be certain that the stretch is gentle, comfort-
lagen fibers with relatively little force. As the tissue is
able, and well tolerated by the patient. A low-intensity
stretched to the end of a ROM, the tissue remains elastic,
stretch applied for a longer duration may be more comfort-
and release of the stretch results in returm of the collagen
able for some patients. A slow static stretch is less likely
to its normal resting position. If the stress on the tissues
to induce contraction in the muscle being stretched.' The
continues, the bonds between the collagen fibrils and fibers
gains in ROM are relatively transient with static stretching.
may be damaged, resulting in plastic deformation. Caution
and the increases are generally atributed to elastic changes
must be used during stretching to avoid tissue damage in
 in actin-myosin overlap.
most instances. Low-magnitude forces placed on the
When performing this form of stretching, it is important 
tissues over time allow collagen fibers to rearrange, perhaps
to have the patient as relaxed as possible to allow the
resulting in a safer mode of tissue elongation. In people,
maximal stretching of the muscle and tissues with as little
15 to 20 minutes of low-intensity sustained stretch, repeated
resistance as possible. It is important to properly support
440
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
tissues. The wrap may be changed several times per day.
and static stretching and ROM exercises performed. When
the wrap is replaced, additional stretch may be applied by
increasing the tension on the gauze bandaging material. At
no time should the patient feel undue discomfort. After
several days of this form of treatment, the carpus generally
returms to a normal ROM and function and pain are
improved.
 Other devices to provide prolonged mechanical stretch
 in veterinary medicine include the use of a dynamic fexion
apparatus to apply a fexion stretch to the stife in patients
with fracture disease and quadriceps contracture.25.26 In
some instances, it may be necessary to surgically release
adhesions and scar tissue. A dynamic fexion apparatus
may then be applied to help prevent recurrence of the
contracture. The apparatus consists of transcutaneous pins
placed in the pelvis or proximal femur, and in the tibia,
with elastic bands placed between the pins to provide pro-
longed stretch with the stife in fexion. In addition, the
patient may also actively extend the stifle against the resis-
tance of the elastic band, but when the quadriceps muscle
Figure 25-9 A dog with contracture of the left carpus and digits
relaxes, the elastic band applies stretch to the stife in
after immobilization of the forelimb as a result of a fracture. Note
fexion.
the upright stance of the foot in comparison with the normal contra-
 It is believed that when muscles are maintained in a
lateral side.
lengthened position for several weeks, sarcomeres are
added.20.27 This increase in length persists if the new length
the limb and perforn the stretch with the joints in the
is actively used. Other connective tissues may also lengthen
 proper alignment to reduce any abnormal stresses on the
 as a result of plastic deformation of the tissue.
joints. After the stretching period, the tissues are allowed
to retum to a neutral position, and then the stretch is reap-
Ballistic Stretching
plied for up to 20 repetitions in a session.
Ballistic stretching (sometimes referred to as dynamic
 Prolonged Mechanical Stretching
stretching) differs from static stretching in that a series of
Prolonged mechanical stretching is similar to static stretch-
movements are used to stretch the muscles and connective
ing in that a low-intensity stretch is applied. It differs,
tissues.? This is a high-intensity, short-duration bouncing
however, in that the stretch is prolonged. The stretch,
stretch. The stretch that occurs often results in contraction
applied for a minimum of 20 minutes and up to several
of the antagonistic muscles to the tissues being stretched.
 hours, is effective in increasing ROM in many patients.?3
Although effective stretching may occur with this form of
 In people, a low-intensity prolonged stretch applied 1 hour
stretching, there is a risk of tissue injury, and this form
 per day was more effective than static stretching over a
may not be appropriate for patients early in the postopera-
4-week period in patients with chronic knee fexion
tive period. In fact, the muscle tension that occurs with
 contractures.24
ballistic stretching is approximately twice that obtained
In animals, an effective manner of achieving prolonged
with low-intensity prolonged stretching.2α In general, a
mechanical stretching is the use of splints or other coapta-
period of light warm-up activity and static stretching exer-
tion devices to provide prolonged stretch to tissues. For
cises should precede balistic stretching. In humans, bal-
example, dogs with a fracture of the radius and ulna treated
listic stretching is sometimes used by individuals who need
with a cast often have contracture of the carpus following
to perform quick motions such as in martial arts or hur-
fracture healing (Figure 25-9). Pain and reduced limb use
dling. There may be similar applications in canine athletes,
are frequent sequelae. A dorsal fiberglass splint, which has
but this has not been investigated.
been contoured to the normal contralateral side, may be
Proprioceptive Neuromuscular
placed on the affected limb over several layers of cotton
Facilitation Stretching
cast padding that have been placed over the limb. Gauze
bandaging material may then be used to help pull the foot
Proprioceptive  neuromuscular  facilitation  stretching is
up to the contoured splint with mild tension, applying
more complex and takes advantage of neuromuscular
controlled prolonged gentle stretch to the palmar carpal
stretch activation. The stretches use a contract-relax
Chapter 25
Range-of-Motion and Stretching Exercises 
441
sequence, an agonist muscle contraction, or a contract-
relaxation. With repeated stretches, muscle stiffness tem-
porarily decreased, but retumed to baseline values within
these stretches require the patient to actively and con-
1 hour. Stretching over a 3-week period increased joint
sciously contract a muscle group. Because we cannot ver-
ROM because of a change in stretch tolerance rather than
bally communicate to an animal when the muscle should
in the passive properties of the muscle. Strength training
contract, the therapist must use the other forms of stretch-
resulted in increased muscle stiffness, which was unaf-
ing. There is a possibility that neuromuscular electrical
fected by daily stretching. Infexible and older subjects
stimulation may be used to provide active muscle contrac-
have increased muscle stiffness, and a lower stretch toler-
tion of a particular agonist muscle group, but clinical expe-
ance compared with subjects with normal fexibility and
rience in this technique is limited.
younger subjects. The concept of an increase in stretch
tolerance was confirmed in another study of people in
 Precautions and Contraindications
which individuals underwent a stretching protocol of the
to Stretching
hamstring muscles for 6 weeks.3l Although there was no
increase in the extensibility of the hamstring muscles, there
Joints should not be forced into an uncomfortable position
was an improvement in stretch tolerance, which resulted in
 beyond the available ROM. Patients should not be painful
an increase in joint ROM.
during or after stretching. Caution should be exercised if a
Another study evaluated the effects of one 10-minute
limb has been immobilized for a length of time. The goal
stretch on muscle stiffness in people with short ham-
should be to stretch and realign connective tissue, not rip
strings.32 The subjects were unable to touch the foor when
and tear tissues. Stretching should not be performed if a
bending forward. One group performed static stretching
ligament or tendon has been injured until the fibrous tissue
exercises for 10 minutes interspersed with relaxing, and an
can withstand some stress. Similarly, caution should be
untreated group served as controls. One 10-minute stretch
exercised during stretching in regions of relatively new
resulted in a significant increase in passive muscle moment,
fractures after repair has been performed.
ROM, and elongation of the hamstrings. There was no
significant change in passive muscle stiffness, however,
Stretching Studies
with respect to the prestretch stiffness curve. The authors
also concluded that one session of static stretching does
Although there is a relative paucity of data and scientific
not infuence muscle stiffness, and the increased ROM and
knowledge regarding stretching to improve fexibility,
extensibility of the hamstrings resulted from an increase in 
especially in animals, it is a widespread practice in both
stretch tolerance.
human and animal rehabilitation. A study in Labrador
Acute changes in the fexibility of hamstring muscles
retrievers with elbow and stife osteoarthritis investigated
were evaluated in older adult humans.?3 A single 32-second
the effects of a home passive stretching program carried
 n  m    pa s 
out by owners on joint ROM. Owners were carefully
age of 65 years. Although the changes were moderate, the
insructed on how to perform the stretches and received
increase in fexibility was significantly greater in the stretch
supervised practice. ROM measurements were obtained at
group as compared with the controls (4 degrees vs. 1
the start of the study and after a 21-day home program.
degree).
The home program consisted of owners performing 10
 Although most muscle stretching studies have focused
stretches of 10-second duration each two times daily. After
 on defining the biomechanical properties of isolated ele-
21 days, there was a significant increase in ROM, with an
ments of the muscle-tendon unit or on comparing different
 average increase of 14.6 degrees.29
stretching techniques, one group of investigators evaluated
Studies of stretch behavior of normal human muscle
stretching properties in an entire muscle-tendon unit.34
have yielded interesting results. One study evaluated the
Rabbit long digital extensor and cranial tibialis muscle-
passive properties of the hamstring muscle group during
tendon units were evaluated using common stretching
stretch while measuring passive hamstring resistance and
techniques. The effect of varying stretch rates was also
electromyographic activity.3° Resistance to stretch was
evaluated. Similar to other studies, the muscle-tendon units
defined as passive torque of the hamstring muscle group
responded viscoelastically to tensile loads. Both cyclic and
during passive knee extension. The knee was passively
static stretching resulted in sustained muscle-tendon unit
extended to a predetermined final position where it
 elongations, suggesting that greater fexibility can result if 
remained stationary for 90 seconds (static stretch). Alter-
these techniques are used clinically. With repetitive stretch-
natively, the knee was extended to the point of discomfort
ing, there was little additional alteration of the muscle-
(stretch tolerance). Passive energy and stiffness were cal-
tendon after four stretches, implying that a minimum
culated. Torque decline in the static phase was considered
number of stretches leads to most of the elongation in
to result from viscoelastic stress relaxation of the tissues.
repetitive stretching. Also, greater peak tensions and
A single static stretch resulted in a 30% viscoelastic stress
 greater energy absorptions occurred at faster stretch rates,
442
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Tarsal Angle
100
 Control
99
US
6
98
pero
97
96
6
95
flex
94
Ho
93
Pre-stretch
 Following ultrasound   5 minutes after ultrasound 
Figure 25-10 A mild stretch applied to the common calcaneal tendon immediately after ultrasound treatment (10 minutes of 3-MHz continu-
ous ultrasound heating at 1.5 w/cm) resulted in a 5-degree increase in hock flexion, but this increased flexion was lost within 5 minutes after
the ultrasound was discontinued. Repeated stretching of control tendons without ultrasound resulted in no increase in hock flexion.
suggesting that the risk of injury in a stretching regimen
1 W/cm?. Interestingly, the greatest temperature increase
may be related to the stretch rate. Indeed, one group of
occurred within 3 minutes, with little increase thereafter.
investigators found that during slow (or static) muscle
Tendon cooling occurred very rapidly, with retum to base-
stretching, factors inhibiting motor neurons contributed to
line temperature within 1 minute after stopping ultrasound.
the lengthening of the muscle.3s
A 4-kg stretch applied to the tendon immediately after
Passive stretching may also help to prevent muscle
ultrasound treatment (10 minutes of 3-MHz continuous
atrophy by allowing constant change in the length of the
ultrasound heating at 1.5 W/cm?) resulted in a 5-degree
muscle fibers. Intermittent muscle stretching helped to
increase in hock fexion, whereas two bouts of stretching
 prevent atrophy and loss of sarcomeres in muscles of mice 
of the contralateral nontreated calcaneal tendon within 5
that were immobilized in a shortened position.36 In this
minutes did not result in increased hock fexion. However,
model, a static stretch for as little as 30 minutes per day
the increased hock fexion was lost within 5 minutes after 
helped to preserve sarcomeres. In addition, there was less
the ultrasound was discontinued (Figure 25-10). Clearly.
 development of intramuscular connective tissue with some
methods of maintaining the increased stretch are needed to
stretching. In a study of rat tail tendons, a low-force stretch
improve tissue extensibility.
 Over a prolonged period resulted in effective elongation of
 One study performed on humans also evaluated the
the tendon.37 Also, the proportion of prolonged tendon
effects of (1) static stretch and ultrasound, (2) static stretch
lengthening was greater with low-force, long-duration
alone, or (3) no treatment on triceps surae muscle extensi-
stretching.?3 Heating tissue before stretching has been
bility.40 Static stretch and ultrasound consisted of 7 minutes
advocated to help improve the effectiveness of stretching.
of continuous ultrasound at 1.5 W/cm? to the muscle with
Elevating the tissue temperature before stretching the rat
stretch applied during the seventh minute. Static stretch
tail tendons resulted in significantly less tissue damage;
alone consisted of a 51-lb load applied for 1 minute. Static
and lower loads applied with heating for a prolonged
stretch and ultrasound treatment increased elbow fexion
 period resulted in significantly greater elongation. One 
an average of 1.2 degrees, or 20%, more than static stretch
researcher concluded that approximately three times as
alone, whereas static stretch alone increased fexion an
much force is needed to elongate tendons at temperatures
average of 1.3 degrees, or 27%, more than no treatment.
of 20° to 30° C than at 43° C.38
 Both increases were statistically significant.
Therapeutic ultrasound is frequently mentioned as
A similar study on people confinmed the short-tenm
an adjunctive treatment to improve the effectiveness of
benefit of heating with ultrasound before stretching.4 One
stretching through its ability to warm tissues. However, the
group received ultrasound (1.5 W/cm²) to the musculoten-
specifc effects of heating on tissues and the manner in
dinous junction of the triceps surae and then stretching.
which stretch is affected is unclear. In a study of ultrasound
 and another group received stretching alone. Ultrasound
treatment of the common calcaneal tendon of dogs, it
and stretch increased mean ROM more than did stretch
was found that pulsed-mode ultrasound was not effective
alone, but there were no long-term residual effects.
in increasing tendon temperature, but continuous-mode
 Another study evaluated whether heating with continu-
ultrasound was.39 The amount of heating with 3-MHz
 ous-mode ultrasound would augment the effect of stretch-
continuous-mode ultrasound was related to the power, with
ing of the medial collateral ligament of the knee in normal
1.5 W/cm? increasing tendon temperature more than did
humans.4? Treatment consisted of 3-MHz, 1.25 W/cm²
Chapter 25
Range-of-Motion and Stretching Exercises
443
continuous ultrasound or sham treatment over the medial
sport-specific warm-up activity. However, stretching prior
collateral ligament. A valgus stretch of the knee (10 ft-lb
to an activity that has more overuse injuries rather than
for 2.5 min) was perfonmed after ultrasound treatment.
 muscle strains is unlikely to be effective in reducing injury.
Stretching alone resulted in a 1-degree valgus displace-
ment of the knee, whereas stretching with ultrasound
Clinical Application of Stretching
resulted in a displacement of 1.24 degrees. However, these
differences were not statistically significant.
In preparation for stretching, it is beneficial to perform
The effect of stretching on athletic performance such as
some low-intensity active exercise if possible, such as
agility competitions, feld trials, Schutzhund, etc. is con-
walking and light jogging. In addition, application of
troversial. Traditionally, static stretching precedes athletic
superficial heat or therapeutic ultrasound before stretching
 performance. However, the effectiveness of stretching on
may improve tissue ex tensibility. There may be less damage
athletic performance has come into question in recent years
to tissues, and less force may be required to attain increased
based on research. Several studies have shown a decrease
tissue length with stretching if the tissues are warmed. The
of muscle force output around a single joint associated
combination of muscles, tendons, skin, and joint capsule
should be considered and their relative contributions to
decrease in muscle force include a decrease in muscle stiff-
restricted motion assessed. For example, the target tissue
ness,4s muscle inactivation during muscle stimulation,43
for lengthening a muscle that is contracted is the muscle
and decreased muscle activity after maximum voluntary
belly, not the tendon. The patient should be in a comfort-
contraction. In addition, because stretching can reduce
able position, which is generally in lateral recumbency, and
muscle stiffness, it may have a negative effect on the ability
should be on a padded surface. It is important that the
to generate a forceful contraction.* Stretching also appears 
patient be as relaxed as possible, and, in some cases, mild
to decrease motor neuron excitation.*6 One study evaluated
sedation or tranquilization may be beneficial.
the effect of stretching on agonist and antagonist muscle
Static Stretching
activity and muscle force output with joint isometric con-
tractions.7 The authors concluded that stretching appears 
 One hand should stabilize the bone proximal to the joint,
to decrease muscle force output by up to 20% in a single
and the other should stabilize the bone distal to the joint.
joint isometric contraction and the rate of force develop-
In general, the distal bone should be moved relative to the
ment in a multiple joint isometric contraction in people.
proximal bone. The affected limb and joint should be
Stretching may cause a decrease in muscle force genera-
slowly placed through one end of a ROM (usually begin-
tion up to 16 minutes after stretching and may not be
ning in fexion) until a restriction to motion is felt. Very
recommended as a general warm-up procedure, especially
gentle traction may be applied to the joint while slowly
prior to strength or power activities. Current recommenda-
stretc hing to the point of initial restriction. The patient may
tions for stretching during warm-up activities should be
 indicate that it feels mild discomfort, such as by turming
carefully considered. It is not clear how applicable these
the head or mildly tensing the muscles in the affected limb.
results would be when combined with warm up, practice
Under no circumstances should more severe pain be
drills, and low-intensity dynamic exercises.
inflicted, which might be indicated by vocalizing, trying to
Another traditional belief is that stretching prior to activ-
move away, or attempting to bite. The stretch should be
ity may result in fewer injuries associated with perfor-
prolonged, ideally for at least 15 seconds. During the
 mance. This topic has been recently reviewed in people.4&
stretch, a conscious effort should be made to try to increase
The purposes of stretching before athletic performance
the joint excursion without increasing the level of discom-
include ensuring that there is sufficient ROM in the joints
fort. There should be no bouncing motions during the
to perform the activity, and to reduce muscle stiffness, theo-
stretch with static stretching. Following the stretch at one
retically reducing the risk of injury. The effect of stretching
end of the motion range, the pressure is slowly released
 On injury prevention has shown mixed results. In general,
and the opposite end of the ROM should be stretched. In
it is believed that stretching along with warm-up does not
some situations, dogs that resist manual stretching may
affect the incidence of overuse injuries. However, stretching
tolerate other stretching techniques, such as placing the
may reduce the incidence of muscle strains. In general, it
dog in ventral recumbency with the limbs fexed under the
may be beneficial to perform static stretching when a large
body and slowly pressing down on the body to achieve
ROM of various joints is required for activity. A combina-
 greater elbow fexion (for example, Figure 25-11).
tion of stretching and warm up is likely needed to reduce
In some situations, muscles that cross two joints, such
the risk of injury in these situations. It is most beneficial to
as the rectus femoris and biceps brachii muscles, may be
target the stretching to those muscle groups known to be
restricted. In these situations, it is beneficial to put an
at risk for a particular activity. At least four to five 60-
 individual joint through a stretching session, and then place
sec ond stretches to the point of initial discomfort are recom-
the other joint through a stretching session. As ROM and
mended to reduce resistance to stretch, followed by some
fexibility improve, both joints may be simultaneously
444
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
limb. The dorsal splint is applied, and gauze bandaging
material is rolled on to the limb under mild tension to pull
the foot up to the splint, applying controlled prolonged
gentle stretch to the restricting tissues. The wrap is changed
one to three times per day, and static stretching and ROM
exercises should be performed while the wrap is removed.
When the wrap is replaced, additional stretch may be
 applied by increasing the tension on the gauze bandaging
material. In general 5 to 10 days is usually adequate to
regain normal ROM of the digits. Similar principles may
be applied to more proximal joints, such as the elbow and
stife. In some situations, it may be difficult to use a fiber-
glass splint, and placement of transcutaneous pins in the
bones proximal and distal to the affected joint may be
necessary to provide good fixation. Elastic bands may be
Figure 25-11  A mild stretch is applied to increase elbow flexion
placed to achieve fexion or extension as needed.
using the dog's body weight. The antebrachium is comfortably sup-
Ballistic Stretching
 ported on a table with padding.
To perform ballistic stretching, the patient should be com-
placed through stretching exercise. For example, the hip
fortable and the affected limb stabilized. The joints are
and stife joints may be stretched in extension. This is more
positioned until a gentle stretch of the target tissues occurs,
challenging, and there will usually be less joint excursion
and then the therapist applies gentle “"bouncing" of the
with simultaneous extension of both joints than if each
tissues. The therapist should be careful to use only gentle
joint is individually stretched in extension. However, these
movements to avoid damage to the tissues and pain.
motions more completely reflect the use of these joints and
Because of the risk of tissue injury, this technique should
muscles during normal gait, and it is valuable to perfonm
 not be performed in traumatized tissues, after surgery, or
these maneuvers.
 On tissues that are infamed or edematous.
The therapist should be patient and not try to achieve
 Ballistic stretching may be beneficial to normal dogs
full ROM in one or two sessions. The ideal daily frequency
that undergo ballistic-type activities, such as agility dogs
of stretching is unknown for dogs. In general, two to four
that jump and tum sharply, or dogs that play Frisbee. A
sessions per day may initially be required, with the fre-
technique of ballistic stretching in sporting dogs may be
 quency decreased as normal ROM and tissue extensibility
performed using a therapy ball or roll, trampoline, or infat-
improve. The process must be applied consistently and
 able mattress. The trampoline and mattress provide greater
regularly to obtain good results, and it may take 2 to 3
stability so that a single person can perform the stretches,
weeks to see noticeable improvement.
whereas two people are generally needed when a therapy
ball or roll is used. With the animal in a standing position,
 Prolonged Mechanical Stretching
 the animal is gently bounced up and down. Depending on
The most problematic joints that are affected with immo-
the situation, the dog may also be placed in a stemally
bilization of a limb in a cast or splint are the digits, carpus,
recumbent position on the device. Gentle bouncing of the
and tarsus, which may develop fexural contracture. This
dog will allow ballistic stretching of the joints in a fexed
may occur in either the front or the rear limb joints as a
 position. Ballistic stretching may also be performed with
result of fractures of the radius and ulna or tibia and fibula,
ajoint in extension using a therapy ball or roll. For example,
or in the digits with surgical fusion (arthrodesis) of the
a dog may have its forelimbs on the ground with the rear
carpus or tarsus. After 4 weeks in a coaptation device, the
limbs pulled back in extension over a therapy roll (Figure
joints are often contracted in a fexed position and are
25-12). Rapid, gentle rolling of the therapy roll back and
painful when attempts are made to place them in a func-
forth or gentle bouncing of the rear limbs on the roll results
tional walking position.
in ballistic stretching of the hip and stife joints. Similar
Normal static stretching of the affected joints should be
principles may also be used for ballistic stretching of the
performed. It is usually only practical to stretch all of the
forelimb joints in extension.
digits at the same time. Between stretching sessions, a
dorsal fiberglass splint, molded to the normal contralateral
side, is placed on the affected limb to help maintain a
Summary
 prolonged mechanical stretch. The splint may be manufac-
tured using fiberglass casting material folded back and
ROM and stretching exercises are basic parts of a complete
forth on itself, using the normal limb as a template. Several
physical rehabilitation program. The goals of ROM and
layers of cotton cast padding are placed over the affected
stretching should be to lengthen muscles, improve joint
Chapter 25
Range-of-Motion and Stretching Exercises
445
7. Nade S, Newbold PJ: Pressure-volume relationships and
elastance in the knee joint of the dog, J Physiot 357:417-439,
1984.
8. Schollmeier G et al: Structural and functional changes in
the canine shoulder after cessation of immobilization, Clin
Orthop 323:310-315, 1996.
9. Olson VL: Evaluation of joint mobilization treatment. A
method, Phys Ther 67:351-356, 1987.
10. Salter RB et al: The biologic effect of continuous passive
motion on the healing of full-thickness defects in articular
cartilage. An experimental investigation in the rabbit, J Bone
Joint Surg 62A:1232-1251, 1980.
11. Salter RB, Bell RS, Keeley FW: The protective effect of
continuous passive motion in living articular cartilage in
acute septic arthritis: an experimental investigation in the
rabbit, Clin Orthop 159:223-247, 1981.
12. Mooney V, Stills M: Continuous passive motion with joint
fractures and infections, Orthop Clin North Am 18:1-9, 1987.
13. Shimizu T et al: Experimental study on the repair of full
Figure 25-12
2 A physioball is used to increase hip extension by
thickness articular catilage defects: effects of varying periods
gradually rolling the ball forward to the point of a stretch on the
anial aspect of the hip joint and the periarticular tissues.
 of continuous passive motion, cage activity, and immobiliza-
tion, J 0rthop Res 5:187-197, 1987.
14. Gebhard JS, Kabo JM, Meals RA: Passive motion: the
dose effects on joint stiffness, muscle mass, bone density,
and regional swelling, J Bone Joint Surg 75A:1636-1647,
ROM, increase tissue mobility, and improve functional use
1993.
of the affected joints and limb.
15. Ferretti M, Srinivasan A, Deschner J et al: Anti-inflammatory
The therapist must be patient and be satisfied with small
effects of continuous passive motion on meniscal fbrocarti-
lage, J Orthop Res 23:1165-1171, 2005.
gains and slow improvement. To properly monitor patients,
frequent measurement of ROM should be obtained using
16. Grauer D et al: The effects of intermittent passive exercise
on joint stiffness following periarticular fracture in rabbits,
goniometry, and the results should be recorded to chart the
Clin Orthop 220:259-265, 1987.
17. Dhert WJ et al: Effects of immobilization and continuous
may ultimately slow improvement and may actually reduce
passive motion on postoperative muscle atrophy in mature
joint motion and worsen contracture of soft tissues. This is
rabbits, Can J Surg 31:185-188, 1988.
because tissue damage and pain may delay the active use
18. Noyes, FR, Mangine, RE, Barber SD: The early treatment of
of a limb through the available ROM, resulting in increased 
moti on complications after reconstruction of the anterior cru-
fibrosis of tissues and decreased fexibility.
ciate ligament, Clin Orthop 217:217-228, 1992.
19. Stoloy WC, Weilepp TG, Riddell WM: Passive length-
tension relationship and hydroxyproline content of chroni-
REFERENCES
cally denervated skeletal muscle, Arch Phys Med Rehabil
1. Kisner C, Colby LA: Range of motion. In Kisner C, Colby
51:517-525, 1970.
LA, editors: Therapeutic exercise: foundations and tech-
 20. Tabary JC et al: Physiological and structural changes in the
niques, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2002, FA Davis.
cat's soleus muscle due to immobilization at different lengths
2. Brody LT: Mobility impairment. In Hall CM, Brody LT,
by plaster casts, J Physiot 224:231-244, 1972.
editors: Therapeutic exercise: moving toward function, ed 1,
 21. Starring D et al: Comparison of cyclic and sustained
Philadelphia, 1999, Williams & Wilkins.
 passive stretching using a mechanical device to increase
3. Salter RB et al: Clinical application of basic research on
resting length of hamstring muscles, Phys Ther 68:314-320,
continuous passive motion for disorders and injuries of syno-
1988.
22. Madding SW et al: Effect of duration of passive stretch on
Orthop Res 1:325-342, 1984.
hip abduction range of motion, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
4. Bardet JF: Quadriceps contracture and fracture disease, Vet
8:409-416, 1987.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 17:957-973, 1987.
 23. Sapega AA et al: Biophysical factors in range of motion
 5. Milis DL et al: A preliminary study of early physical therapy
exercises, Phys Sports Med 9:57-63, 1981.
following surgery for cranial cruciate ligament surgery in
24. Light KE et al: Low-load prolonged stretch vs high-load brief
dogs, Vet Surg 26:434, 1997.
stretch in treating knee contractures, Phys Ther 64:330-333,
6. Jandi AS, Schulman AJ: Incidence of motion loss of the stife
1984.
joint in dogs with naturally occurring cranial cruciate liga-
25. Wilkens BE, McDonald DE, Hulse DA: Utilization of a
ment rupture surgically treated with tibial plateau leveling
dynamic stifle fexion apparatus in preventing recurrence of
osteotomy: longitudinal clinical study of 412 cases, Vet Surg
quadriceps contracture, a clinical report, Vet Comp Orthop
36:114-121, 2007.
Traumatol 4:219-223, 1993.
446
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
26. Liptak JM, Simpson DJ: Successful management of quadri-
 38. Gersten JW: Effect of ultrasound on tendon extensibility, Am
ceps contracture in a cat using a dynamic fexion apparatus,
J Phys Med 34:368, 1955.
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot 13:44-48, 2000.
39. Loonam JE et al: The effect of therapeutic ultrasound on
27. Willi ams PE, Goldspink G: Changes in sarcomere length and 
tendon heating and extensibility. In Proc Vet Orthoped Soc,
physiological properties in immobilized muscle, J Anat 
Steamboat Springs, CO, March 2003.
127:459-468, 1978.
40. Wessling KC, DeVane DA, Hylton CR: Effects of static
 28. Walker SM: Delay of twitch relaxation induced by stress and
stretch versus static stretch and ultrasound combined on
stress relax ation, J Appt Physiot 16:801, 1961.
triceps surae muscle extensibility in healthy women, Phys
29. Crook T, McGowan C, Pead M: Effect of passive stretching
Ther 67:674-679, 1987.
on the range of motion of osteoarthritic joints in 10 Labrador
41. Draper DO et al: Immediate and residual changes in dorsi-
retrievers, Vet Rec 60(16):545-547, 2007.
fexion range of motion using an ultrasound heat and stretch
30. Magnusson SP: Passive properties of human skeletal muscle
Toutine, J Athtetic Train 33:141-144, 1998.
during stretch maneuvers: a review, Scand J Med Sci Sports
42. Reed BV et al: Effects of ultrasound and stretch on knee
8:65-77, 1998.
ligament extensibility, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 30:341-
 31. Ben M, Harvey LA: Regular stretch does not increase muscle
347, 2000.
extensibility: a randomized controlled trial, Scand J Med Sci
43. Behm DG, Button DC, Butt JC: Factors affecting force loss
Sports 20:136-144, 2010.
with prolonged stretching, Can J Appt Physiot 26(3): 261-
32. Halbertsma JP, van-Bolhuis AI, Goeken LN: Sport stretch-
272, 2001.
ing: effect on passive muscle stiffness of short hamstrings,
44. Nelson AG, Allen JD, Cornwell A et al: Inhibition of maximal
Arch Phys Med Rehabil 77:688-692, 1996.
 yoluntary isometric torque production by acute stretching
33. Feland JB, Myrer JW, Merrill RM: Acute changes in ham-
is joint-angle specific, Res Ω Exerc Sport 72(1):68-70,
string fexibility: PNF versus static stretch in senior athletes,
2001.
Phys Ther Sport 2:186-193, 2001.
45. Evetovich TK, Nauman NJ, Conley DS et al: Effect of static
34. Taylor DC et al: Viscoelastic properties of muscle-tendon
stretching of the biceps brachii on torque, electromyography,
units: the biomechanical effects of stretching, Am J Sports 
and mechanomyography during concentric isokinetic muscle
Med 18:300-309, 1990.
actions, J Strength Cond Res 17(3):484-488, 2003.
35.(
 Guissard N, Duchateau J, Hainaut K: Le stretching muscu-
46. Avela J, Kyrolainen H, Komi PV: Altered reflex sensitivity
laire: aspects neurophy siologiques et biomecaniques (Muscle
after repeated and prolonged muscle stretching, J Appt
stretching exercises: neurophysiological and biomechanical
Physiol 86(4):1283-1291, 1999.
aspects), Ann Kinesither 15:469-474, 1988.
 47. McBride JM, Deane R, Nimphius S: Effect of stretching on
36. Willi ams PE: Use of intermittent stretch in the prevention of
agonist-antagonist muscle activity and muscle force output
serial sarcomere loss in immobilised muscle, Ann Rheumat
during single and multiple joint isometric contractions,
Dis 49:316-317, 1990.
Scand J Med Sci Sports 17:54-60, 2007
37. Warren CG, Lehmann JF, Koblanski JN: Heat and stretch 
48. McHugh MP, Cosgrave CH: To stretch or not to stretch: the
procedures: an evaluation using rat tail tendon, Arch Phys
role of stretching in injury prevention and performance,
Med Rehabil 57:122-126, 1976.
Scand J Med Sci Sports 20:169-181, 2010.
26
Joint Mobilization
Deborah Gross Saunders, J. Randy Walker, and David Levine
 anual therapy techniques are skilled hand move-
 properly apply these techniques is higher than with tradi-
ments intended to improve tissue extensibility,
tional therapies such as exercise or modalities. Rationales
Lincrease range of motion (ROM), induce relax-
for the reasons manual therapies may work have been
ation, mobilize or manipulate soft tissue and joints, modu-
investigated and include reducing muscle inhibition,16
late pain, and reduce soft tissue swelling, inflammation, or
 decreasing pain,7.18 improving intervertebral disk hydra-
restriction.' The primary techniques included in manual
 tion,'9 correcting joint displacement, adjusting joint sub-
therapy are mobilization and manipulation of joints and
luxations, restoring bony alignment, reducing nuclear
associated soft tissues. Mobilizations are passive move-
 protrusion,2021 and placebo effect.8 More recent theories
ments that are either oscillatory or sustained stretch per-
include evidence supporting the need for adequate stresses
formed in such a manner that the patient can prevent the
and normal movement as being critical to maintain the
motion if so desired. These motions are performed any-
integrity of collagenous tissues, muscles, and bones.22
where within the available ROM. The intent of this chapter
Evidence of the effectiveness of manual therapy must be
is to provide an overview of the principles of manual
established in small animals. Although many anatomic
therapy, followed by selected treatment techniques for the
similarities exist between humans and small animals,
hip, stife, elbow, shoulder, carpus, and the thoracic and
we cannot assume the techniques will yield the same
lumbar spine. The techniques of GD Maitland,23 an Aus-
results.
tralian physical therapist who developed a clinically based
approach in the 1960s and 1970s, are emphasized in this
chapter. Maitland described four grades of mobilization
(I-IV) (Figure 26-1) and manipulation. Manipulation, a
Manual therapy is indicated for pain and loss of motion
grade V mobilization, is a high velocity, low amplitude
that occur secondary to neuromusculoskeletal dysfunction.
 passive movement that cannot be prevented by the patient
The patient may have pain with motion or rest; pain in
and is typically performed near the end of the available
the midst of available ROM or at the end of available
ROM.
ROM; or pain or stiffness resulting from postural changes.
There have been numerous randomized controlled trials
Specifc examples include dogs with limited motion sec-
(RCTs) in humans that have demonstrated the efficacy
 Ondary to canine hip dysplasia, elbow dysplasia, interver-
of manual therapy for treating patients with a variety of 
tebral disk disease, and osteoarthritis. Manual therapy
disorders in the spine and peripheral joints. Many of
differs from stretching in that when a stretch is applied, a
these studies have compared "traditional treatments,”’ such
low load is placed on the tissues for a specifed amount of
 as exercise, pharmaceutical interventions, rest, and placebo,
time (usually 10 to 30 seconds) to help elongate them. In
with manual therapy. Other RCTs have compared these
 manual therapy the force is applied in an oscillatory mamner
traditional forms of therapy to groups receiving both the
rather than in a sustained manner.
traditional therapies plus manual therapy. The majority of
these studies have found that manual therapy is as effective
Contraindications and Precautions for
if not superior to traditional therapies.415 Common outcome 
Manual Therapy
measures assessed have been pain, functional scales, dis-
ability levels, ROM, number of treatments needed, length
The list of contraindications presented by Dutton?3 includes
of time in treatment, and cost effectiveness of treatment.
 spinal instability, bacterial infection, malignancy, systemic
 Despite the growing body of evidence for manual therapy.
localized infections, sutures over the area, recent fracture,
-aut uuny ui Aderau Aiuaduon e se pamaia si a
cellulitis, febrile state, hematoma, acute circulatory condi-
cine by many, even though its effectiveness seems well
tion, an open wound at the treatment site, osteomyelitis.
substantiated and the risks are low. The most likely reason
 advanced diabetes, hypersensitivity of the skin, inappropri-
for its slow acceptance is that the skill level required to
 ate end feel (spasm, empty, bony), constant severe pain,
447
448
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
R1
R2
Grade Il
Limited
 Beginning
motion of
 Normal limit 
of motion
pathologic
of motion
joint
Grade I
Grade III
Grade IV
Figure 26-1   Graphic description of grades of joint mobilization.
extensive radiation of pain, pain unrelieved by rest, any
Concave and Convex Relationship of Joints
undiagnosed lesion, and severe irritability (pain that is
All synovial joints have a convex-concave relationship.
   o      
When the examiner is passively moving a joint, caution
few hours). Additional contraindications specific to dogs
should be made to move the joint in a manner similar
include contractures such as fibrotic myopathy and quadri-
to how it moves when the joint is being actively moved
ceps contracture, or in other circumstances in which
by the dog. Osteokinematics is defined by how the bone
    a   s  
is being moved through space (i.e., fexion, abduction).
be painful. An overly aggressive or fearful dog that
Arthrokinematics is defined by how the joint surfaces
may bite the therapist or unrelaxed dogs are also contrain-
are moving as the bone is being moved (i.e., rolling.
dications. Total elbow and hip replacements should be
sliding, and spinning). When the joint surface is convex
considered a contraindication for grades III-V accessory
with respect to the other concave side of the joint, the
mobilizations until the appropriateness of joint mobiliza-
articular surface moves in the opposite direction of the
tion techniques are further evaluated for these procedures.
shaft of the bone. When the shoulder joint is being fexed
Precautions (proceed with caution) identifed by
(as in the swing phase of gait) by moving the humerus
Dutton?3 include joint effusion or inflammation, rheuma-
on the scapula, the convex surface of the proximal
toid arthritis, presence of neurologic signs, osteoporosis,
humerus is sliding and spinning on the concave glenoid
hypermobility, pregnancy (if the tec hnique is to be applied 
of the scapula. When the joint surface is concave, the
to the spine), and steroid or anticoagulant therapy.
articular surface moves in the same direction of the shaft
of the bone. When the distal radius is being moved on
Basic Principles of Manual Therapy
the stationary carpal bones (as in the stance portion of
gait), the concave surface of the radius is rolling and
There are a number of approaches to manual therapy,
sliding on the convex proximal row of carpal bones.
including those developed by physicians2426 and by physi-
Manual therapists strive to move joint surfaces physio-
logically to avoid injuries such as joint subluxations and
several principles that should be considered as the patient
sprains.
is examined and treated. Maitland stresses the importance
of communicating with the patient to fully "understand
what the patient is enduring: Of course, in the case of
Relationship of Pain and Range of Motion
animals, the examiner must communicate with two
 Maitland states, “During examination and assessment, pain
constituents—the dog and the owner. Body postures, pain
should never be considered without relation to range nor
 pattems, and respiratory patterms should be closely moni-
amu ay uo supuadaa z ued on uogeau gnoum auni
tored in the patient.
of the injury or disease, joints are affected by the presence
 Of pain and stiffness. If pain is the primary problem, it may
Physiologic and Accessory Motion
limit motion, as in hip dysplasia. When the pain dimin-
Physiologic motion is the normal active motion that is
ishes, the ROM may improve. If the primary problem is
available at any synovial joint. Another way to describe
joint dysfunction or stiffness, pain will be most evident at
physiologic motion is the motion that occurs in the cardinal
or near the end of available ROM. As the available ROM
planes. Examples include fexion, extension, abduction,
increases, pain will be less of a factor. In those cases in
and intermal rotation. Accessory motions are movements
which both pain and loss of motion occur simultaneously.
that cannot be performed actively, but can be performed
the examiner must decide which is the primary problem.
passively. Examples are distraction, glides, spins, and rota-
 These relationships are the basis of deciding which grade
tions of a joint. Accessory motions must be present for full
of passive movement and other therapies should be used
physiologic motion to be present.
to treat the problem.
Chapter 26
 Joint Mobilization
449
Table 26-1
 Joint End Feel Characteristics
Name
Description
Example
Bony or hard
 Bone approximates bone, resulting in an abrupt.
 Loss of fexion with end-stage elbow
hard stop.
osteoarthritis; loss of stife motion as a
result of quadriceps contracture
following fracture of the distal femoral
physis
Soft tissue
 Motion is stopped by compression of soft tissues.
Normal stifle fexion
approximation
 Abnormal if occurs too early in the range as
the result of edema.
Capsular or finm
A finm but slightly yielding stop occurs as a
Normal carpal extension
result of tension in the joint capsule or
ligaments. Abnormal if occurs too early in the
ROM.
Springy block
A rebound is felt at the limit of motion—motion
Entrapped torm medial meniscus.
 stops and then rebounds. Abnormal; may
indicate joint effusion or a joint mouse.
Empty
No end point is felt because the patient stops the
Sciatic nerve entrapment as a result of a
motion because of pain; no resistance felt.
migrating intramedullary pin; fracture
 Abnormal; indicates presence of sharp pain.
of the lateral humeral condyle
ROM, Range of motion.
If pain occurs before the examiner feels resistance, the
described the quality of normal and abnormal end feels,
primary problem is pain; if the pain occurs when resistance
which are defined in Table 26-1.
is felt, or after, the primary problem is limitation of motion
with joint involvement. In addition, if active and passive
Assessment
motions are limited or painful in the same direction, the
 The therapist participates in three activities while manag-
lesion is in the noncontractile tissues. For example, if the
ing a patient problem: ex amination, treatment, and assess-
cranial joint capsule of the stife is tight, fexion of the stifle
ment. Although each is important to the provision of
is limited with active and passive fexion of the joint.
a complete and quality program, assessment is the key-
Conversely, if active and passive motions are limited or
stone. Assessment involves "open-mindedness, mental
painful in opposite directions, the lesion is in the contrac-
agility and mental discipline, linked with a logical and
tile tissues—muscle and associated tendon. For example,
methodical process of assessing cause and effect:'? The
if the biceps tendon is affected, active fexion of the elbow
therapist is thinking and assessing to make certain that the
 and passive extension of the elbow are painful with a pos-
right task is being performed and that the task is being
sible reduction in ROM. These presentations affect which
 performed correctly. The therapist must continually assess 
grade and type of mobilization should be used to treat the
problem.
ment procedures. Assessment is implemented at three
The dog exhibits a capsular pattern if the entire capsule
 points of the patient interaction. The first assessment is
of the joint is infamed or involved. Cyriax?4 described a
implemented during the initial ex amination of the patient,
 capsular patterm as a joint-specific pattem of loss of motion
making certain that clinical signs are examined and evalu-
with arthritis. These have not been described for dogs,
 ated to reach the best diagnosis and formulate an appropri-
but limitations in movement accompany certain disorders.
ate plan of care. The second assessment occurs during the
An example is that hip extension and hip abduction
treatment session. The therapist assesses the appropriate-
are typically the most limited motions in a dog with hip
ness of the treatment techniques while the patient response
dy splasia.
is evaluated. The third assessment is an analytic process
End feel is the sensation imparted to the ex aminer when
to consider the entire treatment program to determine
the end of passive ROM is encountered. The passive
whether the patient is progressing as a result of the treat-
motion must be performed with a relatively quick move-
ment and to determine the prognosis for resolution of the
ment and the end of range is bumped briskly. Cyriax?
current problem.
450
Section V
Therapeutie Exercise and Manual Therapy
The Clinical Environment
R represents resistance. Rl is the point in passive ROM
at which the therapist senses resistance from a stretch on
The clinical setting should be safe for both the patient
the noncontractile structures of a joint. R2 is the resistance
and the therapist so that the desired outcome of the
felt at the end of available passive ROM.
examination and treatment session will more likely be
Grade I
the dog facilitates relaxation and cooperation. The area
Grade I mobilizations are small amplitude movements per-
should also be safe for the dog and therapist. It may be
formed with three to four oscillations per second. There
necessary to muzzle the dog initially, especially with a
should be no pain during the oscillations; this is a very
fearful or apprehensive dog. Second, the therapist should
relaxing treatment technique for the dog. The therapist
make certain he or she is using proper body mechanics to
should be working in the range opposite of that which
prevent undue stress on the spine and joints of both the dog
causes pain and avoid end range (R2). For example, if pain
and the therapist. Third, the therapist should approach the
occurs during extension, then a grade I mobilization is
dog from a position where the dog can see the therapist,
performed in fexion, away from any area of the range of
and he or she should touch the dog with finm, but not
motion that could be painful.
aggressive hands. Touch the dog at a place that is not
Grade II
painful and gradually move toward the involved area.
Finally, the affected part should be cradled or held with a
 Grade I mobilizations are large-amplitude movements that
firm but gentle supporting grip to encourage relaxation and
are performed with three to four oscillations per second. A
trust by the dog. If at any time the dog or therapist is not
grade II mobilization should not cause pain during the
relaxed, the activity should be discontinued and further
 Oscillations. The mobilization should be in the range oppo-
assessment and correction of the situation should be
site that of the pain and the therapist should avoid either
pursued.
end range (R2).
Evaluation
Grade III
 The basic components of the initial examination for mus-
Grade Ill mobilizations are large-amplitude movements
culoskeletal dysfunction are observation, history of the
performed with three to four oscillations per second at the
 present episode, relevant past history, active and passive
end of range of the restricted motion (bumping R2 but then
ROM, functional tasks, strength assessment, and palpation.
moving off of any tightness). This amplitude of motion
After the interview and examination are complete, all data
 may cause slight discomfort to the patient.
should be evaluated to determine a rehabilitation diagnosis
and a plan of care. The primary problem should be assessed
Grade IV
to determine if it is primarily a painful (acute) or stiffness
A grade IV mobilization is a small-amplitude movement
problem. After these decisions are made, only then should
that is performed with three to four oscillations per second
joint mobilizations be considered as a part of the plan
between R1 and R2. This amplitude of motion may cause
of care.
slight discomfort for the patient. A grade IV joint mobiliza-
tion is indicated when a grade MI is too painful or not toler-
Treatment with Mobilization
ated by the patient. Even though the grade IV may be more
 The effectiveness of the manual therapy treatment program
vigorous, it is sometimes better tolerated because the joint
is affected by the environment and the skills of the thera-
 motion is very small and it does not completely progress
pist. Efforts must be made to facilitate relaxation of the
to R2.
dog to avoid excessive pain and stress to the animal. The
therapist's grip should be finm enough to support the limb,
How to Choose the Appropriate Mobilization Grade
but not excessive. Good body mechanics and positioning
When ROM is decreased due to pain:
by the therapist will help to make the movements con-
· If the pain is treated, then ROM should increase.
trolled and in the desired patterm.
·Grade I and I mobilizations should be performed.
° Grade I and II mobilizations should be performed in the 
Grades
pain-free range for 30 seconds or longer. Function
 Joint mobilization should be planned with a specific grade
should be assessed after mobilization to determine
of mobilization in mind. Grades are assigned to the mobi-
whether any change has been achieved.
lizations depending on the range through which the mobi-
When ROM is decreased due to stiffness:
lization is applied and the point in the range where it is
· Grade lI and IV mobilizations should be used.
applied. Figure 26-1 shows a modification of Maitland's 
· Grade MI and IV mobilizations should be performed in
graded mobilizations.?
the direction of the stiffness for 60 seconds if possible.
Chapter 26
 Joint Mobilization
451
Function should be assessed after mobilization to deter-
Examples of an open kinetic chain activity in a dog include
mine whether any change has been achieved.
when a paw is swinging forward in the gait cycle or when
 If both pain and stiffness are present, the therapist must 
 the dog is moving a forelimb while in lateral recumbency.
decide what the primary problem is. Does the pain limit 
On the other hand, closed kinetic chain activity occurs
ROM or does the stiffness cause the pain? The sequence
when the distal segment of an extremity is in contact with
of pain and resistance can contribute to the treatment plan.
a surface and the limb is weight bearing.2 Examples of a
For example:
closed kinetic chain activity include the stance phase of
· If pain occurs before resistance, use techniques to
gait. It is of value to note whether a limb is being exercised
 control the pain before progressing to more aggressive
in the open versus closed kinetic chain. Closed kinetic
treatment.
chain activities facilitate proprioception, muscles working
· If pain occurs with resistance, mobilizations may be
in groups, and coordination of joint function. On the other
used with caution. However, it is customary to treat the
hand, it is easier to achieve isolated joint motion in the
pain and then the stiffness.
 Open kinetic chain.
· If pain occurs after the resistance, vigorous mobiliza-
Dogs perform a large array of movements to maintain
tion may be used to treat the stiffness followed by tech-
function. The restoration of normal movement plays a sig-
niques for pain.
nificant role in the treatment of the dog. Joint mobilization
 There are two types of mobilizations:
 offers one method of obtaining the motion required for the
· Physiologic mobilizations are done in the same patterm
restoration of function through manual therapy skills.
of movement that is produced by voluntary muscle
Prior to beginning mobilization on the dog, it is essen-
contraction
tial that the therapist be completely familiar with the bony
·  Accessory mobilizations are performed in a patterm of
landmarks associated with the joint. The joint should be
movement that must be done passively and cannot be
evaluated to be certain that pathologic joint luxation or
produced by voluntary muscle contraction. These
subluxation is not present. Hair may need to be pulled out
should be done in the midrange of the joint motion
 of the way or clipped to expose the joint. Active and passive
(open pack position) because this allows for more joint
ROM should be functionally assessed and measured by
play or motion.
goniometry prior to beginning the treatment. The assess-
There are additional guidelines to help the therapist
ment of passive and active ROM is an important aspect
 decide which type of mobilization to perform.
of the treatment process. The comparison of ROM before
· If pain is being treated and physiologic mobilization 
 and after treatment demonstrates the effectiveness of the
grades I and II cause pain, then accessory grades I and
treatment.
II should be performed.
The initial treatment of a dog's joint depends largely on
· If 50% of physiologic active ROM is not available sec-
the nature of the problem, in particular, pain or stiffness.
ondary to pain, then use accessory grades I and II to
 If the primary problem is pain, a relaxation technique, such
treat the pain (50/50 rule).
 as light massage, may be used to calm the dog and to gain
· If treating stiffness (Grades MI and IV), the therapist
trust. If the animal is not in pain, but has stiffness, the joint
should perform 60 seconds of an accessory mobiliza-
or joints to be mobilized should be prepared for treatment
tion followed by 60 seconds of a physiologic mobiliza-
with a warming modality or light exercise. Moist heat,
tion and then assess the effect. During any mobilization
 massage, or therapeutic ultrasound may be used prior to
treatment, an assessment should be made after each set
treatment. Active exercise, including aquatic therapy, may
of oscillations, whether for pain or stiffness, to deter-
also be used. The joint mobilization treatment should then
mine the effect of the mobilization. This sequence
be followed with passive and active ROM accentuating the
should be performed three times.
motion addressed. Therapeutic exercises prescribed should
also address the motion. Ice may then be applied after the
Oscillation versus Sustained Stretch
session to help prevent soreness from the mobilization and
Mobilization for joint restrictions should be oscillations.
other activities.
Mobilization for muscle, tendon, and skin restrictions
 Forelimb injuries are common in dogs. Elbow dysplasia
should be sustained. Repetitive low-intensity stretches are
and resultant osteoarthritis of the elbow occurs quite fre-
beneficial to stimulate tissue elongation. Contracted tissues
quently in dogs. In agility and jumping events, problems
respond positively to sustained stretch.30
in the shoulder, elbow, and carpus are common secondary
to the stresses placed on the forelimbs. Functional ROM at
Open versus Closed Kinetic Chain
the carpus and elbow is essential to perform activities. For
Dutton defines open kinetic chain activities as when the
example, full elbow ROM is required for normal function.
"involved end segment of an extremity [is] moving freely
ROM demands in working and athletic dogs are greater
through space, resulting in isolated movement of a joint.:'23
than in pet dogs. For example, full shoulder extension is
452
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
required for dogs participating in agility activities such as
Mobilization: A lateral distraction is applied with the
jumping.
mobilizing hand while the stabilizing hand maintains
The hindlimb is responsible for generating propulsion
 the position of the scapula. The distraction is held for
of the dog. Decreased ROM may result in a loss of power
up to 15 seconds and then released. This may be repeated
and function, especially loss of joint extension. Decreased 
up to 10 times. This is a sustained mobilization.
joint motion in the hindlimb is common with hip dysplasia,
Objective: Stretch the capsule, relax the surrounding tissues,
cruciate disease, muscle injuries, and osteoarthritis.
 and prepare the joint for additional mobilizations.
This technique can be performed as a grade II mobiliza-
The Shoulder Joint
tion to diminish pain in the shoulder joint. The mobilizing
hand should be oscillated at a rate of two to three repeti-
The shoulder, or glenohumeral joint, is a ball-and-socket
tions per second. The head of the humerus should be
joint and follows the convex on concave rule of motion
moved laterally only a minimal amoumt, making certain
(Box 26-1). Impairment of shoulder ROM may be seen
that no joint resistance is felt by the therapist and no pain
after a fracture of the humerus, bicipital tenosynovitis,
is experienced by the dog. The oscillations are maintained
osteochondritis dissec ans, infraspinatus contracture, scap-
for approximately 30 seconds, at which time the dog
ular fracture, surgical repair of shoulder instability, and
should be assessed to determine whether there has been
other conditions. Compensations in the shoulder complex
 any change in function. The technique may be repeated up
may also be seen as a result of hindlimb or spinal problems
to three times if the dog's pain improves.
such as intervertebral disk disease, canine hip dysplasia,
 In addition to a lateral distraction, a grade MI oscillation
cruciate disease, or neurologic problems. It is believed that
can be performed to improve joint restriction. In this case.
dogs increase the amount of weight placed on their fore-
pain is not a major factor and should only be present when
limbs to compensate for a problem affecting the spine or
the joint is moved to the point of joint motion limitation.
hindlimb. Over time, problems may develop in the fore-
To perform a grade III mobilization, the head of the
limbs secondary to the increased forces placed on the joint.
humerus is oscillated to the point of end feel of the capsule,
where the bone cannot be moved any further and the thera-
Lateral Distraction of the Glenohumeral
pist feels a distinct stop in the available motion. These
Joint (Figure 26-2)
 oscillations are maintained for up to 60 seconds, assuming
Dog position: The dog is in lateral recumbency with the
the dog remains relaxed and allows this motion to occur.
shoulder to be treated facing the therapist.
This mobilization can be followed with a physiologic
Therapist position: The therapist is ventral to the dog's
motion to improve shoulder fexion, extension, or rotation.
shoulder, facing the shoulder to be mobilized.
For ex ample, the dog's shoulder should be passively moved
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is placed on the proxi
through physiologic, or the normal range, of fexion. This
mal scapula. The web space and fingers of the mobiliz-
may be followed with a movement of physiologic exten-
ing hand are placed under the axilla, as close to the
sion and then intermal and extermal rotation. This technique
proximal humerus as possible.
is contraindicated if medial shoulder instability is present
at the shoulder. A lateral distraction may cause pain and
increase instability.
Box 26-1
Brief Overview of the Mechanics
of the Shoulder Joint
As the glenohumeral joint extends, the humeral head moves
in a caudal direction. Therefore to increase extension, a
caudal glide or mobilizing force should be applied.
As the glenohumeral joint fexes, the humeral head moves in
a cranial direction. Therefore to increase fexion, a cranial
glide or mobilizing force should be applied.
As the glenohumeral joint abducts, the humeral head moves
in a medial and ventral direction. Therefore to increase
abduction, a medial and ventral glide or mobilizing force
should be applied.
· As the glenohumeral joint adducts, the humeral head moves
in a lateral and dorsal direction. Therefore to increase
adduction, a lateral and dorsal glide or mobilizing force
should be applied.
Figure 26-2 Lateral distraction of the glenohumeral joint. The
 arrow indicates the direction of the mobilization.
Chapter 26
 Joint Mobilization
453
Caudal Mobilization: Accessory Glide
Hand position: The mobilizing hand should grip the mid-
(Figure 26-3)
shaft of the humerus.
Dog position: The dog is in lateral recumbency with the
Mobilization: With the scapula stabilized, the humerus is
shoulder to be mobilized facing toward the therapist.
pushed into extension to the end of available ROM,
Therapist position: The therapist is cranioventral to the
bumping end feel of the joint. The humerus is moved
shoulder, facing the shoulder.
back to near midposition of the joint. An oscillatory
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is placed over the
movement is performed by moving the humerus to end
scapula; the dog's forelimb may rest on the forearm of
feel and back to midposition at a rate of three or four
the stabilizing hand. The thenar eminence or the web
repetitions per second. The end feel should be felt by
space of the mobilizing hand is placed over the greater
the therapist with each oscillation. The mobilization is
tubercle of the humerus.
performed for up to 60 seconds.
Mobilization: A gentle lateral distraction should be per-
The dog's shoulder extension should be assessed for
formed prior to the caudal glide to facilitate movement.
 improvement in ROM. If motion is improved, the grade III
A caudal glide is applied to move the humerus in rela-
accessory mobilization and the grade IlI physiologic mobi-
tion to the scapula. This glide should be sustained 3 t0
lization can be repeated up to three times in one treatment
5 seconds.
session.
Objective: Increase shoulder extension.
A grade Ill accessory mobilization may be performed
from the same grips by adding a oscillating movements 
Cranial Mobilization: Accessory Glide
with the mobilizing hand. The caudal oscillations are per-
(Figure 26-4)
formed with the joint held in the loose packed position,
Dog position: The dog is in lateral recumbency with the
and the oscillations should bump against the end of the
shoulder to be mobilized facing toward the therapist.
 available joint motion. The oscillations are performed at a
Therapist position: The therapist is on the ventral side of
rate of three or four repetitions per second and are contin-
the dog, caudal to the forelimb.
ued for up to 60 seconds. The caudal glide is typically
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is placed over the
followed with a grade Ml physiologic shoulder extension
scapula; the dog's forelimb may rest on the forearm of
mobilization, oscillating for an additional 60 seconds.
the stabilizing hand. The thenar eminence or web space
of the mobilizing hand is placed on the caudal portion
Physiologic Shoulder Extension
of the humerus as close to the joint as possible.
To perform a grade Ml physiologic shoulder extension
Mobilization: A cranial glide is applied to the humerus.
mobilization, the mobilizing hand and the stabilizing hand 
Objective: Increase shoulder fexion.
should exchange positions so that the therapist's mobiliz-
The cranial glide is typically followed with a grade III
ing hand moves the humerus cranially into shoulder exten-
physiologic shoulder fexion mobilization, oscillating for
sion while the stabilizing hand holds the scapula stable.
an additional 60 seconds.
Figure 26-3   Caudal mobilization of the humerus to increase shoul-
Figure 26-4  Cranial mobilization of the humerus to increase shoul-
der extension. The arrow indicates the direction of the mobilization.
der flexion. The arrow indicates the direction of mobilization.
454
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Physiologic Shoulder Flexion
To perform a grade Ml physiologic shoulder fexion mobi-
lization, the mobilizing hand and the stabilizing hand
should exchange positions so that the therapist's mobiliz-
ing hand moves the humerus caudally into shoulder fexion
while the stabilizing hand holds the scapula stable.
Hand position: The mobilizing hand should grip the mid-
shaft of the humerus.
Mobilization: With the scapula stabilized, the humerus is
pushed into fexion to the end of available ROM,
bumping end feel of the joint. The humerus is moved
back to near midposition of the joint. An oscillatory
movement is performed by moving the humerus to end
Figure 26-5 Humeroulnar distraction for the elbow. The arrow
feel and back to midposition at a rate of three or four
indicates the direction of mobilization.
repetitions per second. The end feel should be felt by
the therapist with each oscillation. The mobilization is
performed for up to 60 seconds.
humerus. Therefore in an open kinetic chain, the concave
The dog's shoulder fexion should be assessed for
ulna moves on the convex humerus.
improvement in ROM. If motion is improved, the grade III
Humeroulnar Distraction (Figure 26-5)
accessory mobilization and the grade IMl physiologic mobi-
lization can be repeated up to three times in one treatment
Dog position: The dog is in lateral recumbency or in a
session.
sitting position with the elbow flexed to 90 degrees, and
Other motions about the shoulder joint in the dog.
the radioulnar joint in slight supination. Approximately
including rotation, abduction, and circumduction, are
45 degrees of fexion allows the anconeal process to
important, but less crucial to the overall function of the
move more freely in relation to the humerus without
dog. Both physiologic and accessory mobilizations to
engaging the olecranon fossa.
improve these motions can be performed, but are not
Therapist position: The therapist is on the ventral side of
included in this chapter.
the dog, facing the elbow to be mobilized.
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is located over the
The Elbow Joint
distal humerus. The mobilizing hand cradles the dog's
forearm to maintain fexion and slight supination while
The elbow is a joint that is frequently problematic, with
 grasping the proximal radius and ulna.
stiffness and pain secondary to degenerative joint disease.
 Mobilization: A longitudinal distraction is applied and
It is complex and consists of three joints—the humerora-
maintained. In addition, the elbow may be moved into
 dial joint, the humeroulnar joint, and the radioulnar joint.29
fexion as the distraction occurs.
Clinically, stiffness in the elbow appears to respond well
Objective: Decrease joint stiffness for elbow fexion or
to distraction of the elbow joint. Pain and stiffness of the
ex tension.
elbow may respond well to physiologic fexion and exten-
Grade IlI physiologic elbow fexion or extension mobi-
sion mobilizations. Full ROM of the elbow joint is neces-
lizations may be performed following humeroulnar distrac-
sary for proper function of the forelimb. Full elbow
tion, oscillating for an additional 60 seconds. Elbow ROM
 extension is necessary in the dog's nonmal gait cycle and
should be reassessed after the mobilization. If there is an
a significant amount of fexion is necessary to engage in
 improvement, three additional sets of the mobilization may
functional activities such as stair climbing, stepping over
be performed in a treatment session.
obstacles, and jumping 31.32
Physiologic Elbow Extension
The proximal portion of the radius is positioned later-
ally at the elbow, and the distal portion of the radius is
Dog position: Lateral recumbency is preferred, although
positioned medially at the carpus. The articulation between
the mobilization may be performed while the dog is in
the radius and ulna allows approximately 45 degrees of
a sitting position.
rotational movement of the antebrachium. The articulation
Therapist position: The therapist is ventral, facing the
between the humerus and ulna provides the hinge motion
cranial aspect of the elbow to be mobilized.
responsible for elbow fexion and extension. The proximal
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is wrapped around the
ulna is positioned medially at the elbow. The trochlear
distal portion of the humerus, placing the thenar and
notch is a deep, half moon-shaped concavity that faces
hypothenar eminences on the caudal aspect of the
cranially and articulates with the convex trochlea of the
humerus, taking care to avoid the olecranon. The index
Chapter 26
 Joint Mobilization
455
finger, third finger, and thumb of the mobilizing hand
Box 26-2
Overview of Kinematics of the
gently grasp the proximal radius and ulna.
Antebrachiocarpal Joint
Mobilization: To perform a grade Ill physiologic elbow
extension mobilization, the therapist's mobilizing hand 
 As the antebrachiocarpal joint ex tends in an open kinetic
pushes the radius and ulna caudally into elbow exten-
chain, the convex articular surface of the radial and ulnar
sion while the stabilizing hand holds the distal humerus.
carpal bones moves in a caudal direction on the concave
With the humerus stabilized, the radius and ulna are
articular surface of the distal radius and ulna. Therefore to
pushed into extension to the end of available ROM,
increase carpal extension, a caudal glide of the radial and
bumping the end feel of the joint. The radius and ulna
ulnar carpal bones on the distal radius and ulna should be
are moved back to near midposition of the joint. An
applied.
As the joint extends in a closed kinetic chain, the concave
oscillatory movement is performed by moving the
surface of the radius and ulna moves in a cranial direction
radius and ulna to end feel and back to midposition at
on the proximal row of carpals.
 a rate of three or four repetitions per second. End feel
As the antebrachiocarpal joint fexes in an open kinetic
should be felt by the therapist with each oscillation. The
chain, the convex articular surface of the radial and ulnar
mobilization is performed for up to 60 seconds.
carpal bones moves in a cranial direction on the concave
Objective: Increase elbow extension.
articular surface of the distal radius and ulna. Therefore to
Elbow ROM should be reassessed after the mobiliza-
increase carpal fexion, a cranial glide should be applied.
tion. If there is an improvement, three additional sets of
As the joint fexes in a closed kinetic chain, the concave
the mobilization may be performed in a treatment session.
radius and ulna moves in a caudal direction on the convex
surface of the proximal row of carpals
Physiologic Elbow Flexion
Dog position: Lateral recumbency is preferred, although
the mobilization may be perfonmed while the dog is in
a sitting position.
Therapist position: The therapist is ventral to the elbow
and faces the cranial aspect of the elbow to be
mobilized.
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is placed on the cranial
aspect of the distal humerus. The web space of the
mobilizing hand is placed over the proximal radius
and ulna.
Mobilization: To perform a grade Ml physiologic elbow
fexion mobilization, the therapist's mobilizing hand
pushes the radius and ulna cranially into elbow fexion
while the stabilizing hand holds the distal humerus.
With the humerus stabilized, the radius and ulna are
pushed into fexion to the end of available ROM,
bumping end feel of the joint. The radius and ulna are
Figure 26-6  A caudal accessory glide of the antebrachiocarpal
moved back to near midposition of the joint. An oscil-
joint. The arrow indicates the direction of mobilization.
latory movement is performed by moving the radius and
ulna to end feel and back to midposition at a rate of
three or four repetitions per second. End feel should be
and the radial and ulnar carpal bones. The distal radius and
felt by the therapist with each oscillation. The mobiliza-
ulna offer a concave surface for the convex radial and ulnar
tion is performed for up to 60 seconds.
carpal bones to move within.
Objective: To increase elbow fexion.
Caudal Glide of the Antebrachiocarpal Joint:
Elbow ROM should be reassessed after the mobiliza-
Accessory Glide (Figure 26-6)
tion. If there is an improvement, three additional sets of
the mobilization may be performed in a treatment session.
Dog position: The dog is either in lateral recumbency Or
in a sitting or stermal position.
The Carpus
Therapist position: The therapist is ventral, facing the
carpus to be mobilized.
Despite its intricacy, the carpus functions primarily as
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is placed over the
a hinge joint, permiting fexion and extension.9 The
 caudal surface of the distal radius and ulna, just proxi-
main movement occurs at the antebrachiocarpal joint
mal to the joint. The mobilizing hand is placed on the
(Box 26-2), which consists of the distal radius and ulna,
dorsal portion of the radial and ulnar carpal bones.
456
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Mobilization: A caudal mobilization is applied by directing
the radial and ulnar carpal bones in a palmar direction
while stabilizing the distal radius and ulna. This glide
should be held for 3 to 5 seconds.
Objective: Increase carpal extension.
A grade Ill accessory mobilization may be performed
with the same hand position by adding an oscillation with
the mobilizing hand. The caudal glide mobilizations are
performed with the carpus held in a loose packed position,
or slight fexion, and the caudal glide oscillations should
bump against the end of the available motion. The oscilla-
tions are performed at a rate of three or four repetitions per
second and are continued for up to 60 seconds. The acces-
sory glide is typically followed by a grade Ml physiologic
carpal extension mobilization for up to 60 seconds.
Physiologic Carpal Extension Mobilization
Figure 26-7  Cranial antebrachiocarpal glide. The arrow indicates
the direction of mobilization.
To perform a grade IMl physiologic carpal extension mobi-
lization, the mobilizing hand is placed over the palmar
portion of the radial and ulnar carpal bones and the stabiliz-
performed with the joint held in a slight amount of fexion,
ing hand is placed on the cranial surface of the distal
 or the loose packed position. The oscillations should bump
radius. The mobilizing hand pushes the distal radial and
against the end of the available motion. The oscillations
ulnar carpal bones dorsally into carpal extension. The
are performed at a rate of three to four repetitions per
distal radius and ulna are stabilized while the mobilizing
second, and are continued for up to 60 seconds. The cranial
hand moves the distal radial and ulnar carpal bones to the
glide is then typically followed with a grade MI physiologic
end of the available ROM and then back to the mid position
carpal fexion mobilization for an additional 60 seconds.
of the joint. This oscillation between the available end
range and the mid range should be performed at a rate of
Physiologic Carpal Flexion Mobilization
three to four oscillations per second for up to 60 seconds.
 To perform a physiologic carpal fexion mobilization, the
As always, the ROM should be assessed for an improve-
mobilizing hand is placed on the dorsal aspect of the radial
ment. Further mobilizations may be repeated up to three
and ulnar carpal bones and the stabilizing hand is placed
times in one treatment session. Functional activities may
on the palmar surface of the distal radius and ulna. With
then be prescribed to the dog to assist in maintaining the
the distal radius and ulna stabilized, the mobilizing hand
improved ROM, such as walking and wheelbarrowing, to
moves the radial and ulna carpal bones in a palmar direc-
encourage carpal extension while in a weight-bearing
tion into fexion. The radial and ulnar carpal bones are
position.
moved from the end feel of the joint back to the midposi-
tion of the joint at a rate of three or four repetitions per
Cranial Glide of the Antebrachiocarpal Joint
 second for up to 60 seconds.
(Figure 26-7)
Carpal fexion should be assessed after the mobilization
Dog position: The dog is either in lateral recumbency or
for an improvement. If the motion is improved, the grade
in a sitting or stermal position.
III accessory and physiologic mobilizations may be
Therapist position: The therapist is ventral, facing the
repeated up to three times in one treatment session. Activi-
carpus to be mobilized.
ties to be performed after mobilizations to maintain motion
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is placed over the
include high stepping over objects to encourage active
cranial aspect of the distal radius and ulna. The mobiliz.
fexion, or walking in water, sand, snow, or tall grass.
ing hand is placed on the palmar portion of the radial
and ulnar carpal bones, just distal to the accessory
The Hip Joint
carpal pad.
Mobilization: A cranial glide mobilization is applied by
The hip or the coxofemoral joint is a ball-and-socket joint
directing the radial and carpal bones dorsally while
(Box 26-3). The convex-on-concave mobilization princi-
stabilizing the distal radius and ulna.
 ples apply to this joint, similar to other joints.
Objective: Increase carpal fexion.
A grade IMl accessory mobilization may be performed
Caudal Glide: Accessory Glide (Figure 26-8)
using the same hand positions by adding an oscillation of
Dog position: The dog is in lateral recumbency with hip
the mobilizing hand. The cranial glide mobilizations are
in slight abduction and slight fexion.
Chapter 26
 Joint Mobilization
457
Box 26-3
Brief Overview of the Mechanics
of the Hip Joint
As the hip moves into fexion, the femoral head moves
caudally with respect to the acetabulum. Therefore to
increase hip fexion, a caudal glide is applied to the femoral
head.
·As the hip moves into extension, the femoral head moves
cranially with respect to the acetabulum. Therefore to
increase hip extension, a cranial glide is applied to the
femoral head.
As the hip moves into abduction, the femoral head moves
 medially and ventrally in a rolling manner with respect to
the acetabulum. Therefore to increase hip abduction, a
 medial and ventral glide is applied to the femoral head.
As the hip moves into adduction, the femoral head moves
laterally and dorsally in a rolling manner with respect to the
acetabulum. Therefore to increase adduction, a lateral and
dorsal glide is applied to the femoral head.
Figure 26-9  Physiologic hip flexion. The arrow indicates the direc-
tion of mobilization.
an oscillation of the mobilizing hand. The caudal glide
oscillations are performed with the joint held in slight
fexion and slight abduction, or the loose packed position.
The oscillations should bump against the end of the avail-
able motion at a rate of three or four repetitions per second
and be continued for up to 60 seconds. The caudal glide is
typically followed by a grade Ml physiologic hip fexion
mobilization for an additional 60 seconds.
Physiologic Hip Flexion (Figure 26-9)
To perform a grade Ml physiologic hip fexion mobiliza-
tion, the mobilizing hand should be moved to the caudal
portion of the prox imal femur, just below the ischial tuber-
osity. The stabilizing hand should remain on the sacrum
Figure 26-8  Caudal glide to increase hip flexion. The arrow indi-
and cradle the distal portion of the hindlimb if possible.
cates the direction of mobilization.
With the pelvis stabilized, the femur is moved to the end
of the available ROM and then back to near midposition
of the joint. An oscillatory movement is performed by
Therapist position: The therapist faces the hip to be mobi-
 moving the femur to end feel and back to midposition at a
lized on the ventral surface.
rate of two to three repetitions per second for up to 60
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is placed over the
seconds. With the physiologic mobilization, it is important
sacrum. The forearm of the mobilizing hand may be
that the therapist move the limb with his or her body
placed under the hindlimb to assist in guiding the limb.
 instead of with arm movements only because this is a larger
The web space of the mobilizing hand is placed at the
Ainjui pioan on sojueuoau Apoq iadoid saujnbau pue quio
cranial portion of the proximal femur, as close to the
to the therapist.
 joint line as possible.
Hip fexion should then be assessed after the mobiliza-
 Mobilization: A caudal glide is applied with the mobilizing
tion to determine if there has been an improvement. If the
hand. The forearm may assist the hindlimb into fexion
motion is improved, the grade IMI accessory mobilization
as the guide is applied.
and the grade IlI physiologic mobilization may be repeated
Objective: Increase hip fexion.
up to three times in one treatment session. Active move-
A grade Ml accessory mobilization may be performed
ment after treatment includes high stepping, swimming. or
from the same described hand position by adding
walking in deep water to encourage active hip fexion.
458
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 26-10  Cranial mobilization to increase hip extension. The
Figure 26-11  Physiologic hip extension. The arrow indicates the
arrow indicates the direction of mobilization.
direction of mobilization.
applies a caudal force to the proximal femur to encourage
Cranial Glide: Accessory Glide (Figure 26-10)
hip extension. With the pelvis stabilized, the proximal
Dog position: The dog is in lateral recumbency with hip
femur is pushed into the available amount of extension,
in slight abduction and slight fexion.
bumping the end feel of the joint. The femur is then moved
Therapist position: The therapist is caudal and ventral to
 back to the near midposition of the joint. Oscillatory move-
the dog, facing the hip to be mobilized.
ments are performed by moving the femur to the end feel
Hand position: One hand may be placed at the distal femur
and back to midposition at a rate of three to four repetitions
to assist with control or placed at the sacroiliac region.
per second for 60 seconds.
Because this is a large joint to mobilize with a long lever
Hip extension should then be assessed after the mobili-
arm, it is often easiest to place the hand not performing
zation for an improvement in ROM. If the motion is
the mobilization at the distal femur. The pelvis is stabi-
improved, the grade IMI accessory and physiologic mobili-
lized by the dog's weight in a lateral recumbent posi-
zation should be repeated up to three times in one treatment
tion. The forearm of the stabilizing hand may be used
session. Active hip extension should also be encouraged
to assist the positioning of the hindlimb. The web space
through resisted walking by having the dog pull against a
of the mobilizing hand is placed under the ischial tuber-
leash or climbing stairs.
osity, on the proximal and caudal aspect of the femur.
Mobilization: A cranial mobilization is applied by direct-
The Stifle Joint
ing the proximal femur cranially, with a slight dorsal
 an gulation.
The femoral condyles are a convex surface that articulate
Objective: Increase hip extension.
with the concave tibial plateau.?9 The stife is a ginglymus
A grade Ml accessory mobilization may be performed
joint, or a hinge joint, and fexion and extension are the
with the same hand positions as described previously. The
primary motions at the joint (Box 26-4). The concave tibia
cranial glide oscillation is performed with the hip in a loose
moves on the convex femur and is therefore following the
packed position, or in slight fexion and abduction. The
concave on convex rule. Therefore with stife extension,
oscillations should bump up against the end of the available
the tibia glides cranially on the femur. With stifle fexion,
motion. The oscillations are performed at a rate of three to
the tibia glides caudally on the femur.
four repetitions per second and are continued for up to 60
Restoration of both stifle flexion and extension is essen-
seconds. The cranial glide of the femur is typically fol-
tial to normal ambulation and function in the dog. The dog
Jowed by a grade IlI physiologic hip extension mobiliza-
requires full stife flexion to obtain a normal sitting posture
tion for an additional 60 seconds.
and full stife extension for proper ambulation.
Physiologic Hip Extension (Figure 26-11)
Femorotibial Cranial Glide (Figure 26-12)
To perforn the physiologic mobilization for hip extension,
Dog position: The dog is in lateral recumbency with the
the mobilizing hand should be placed on the cranial and
stifle in a resting position.
most proximal portion of the femur and the stabilizing
Therapist position: The therapist faces the ventral aspect
hand should remain on the sacrum. The mobilizing hand
of the dog and the stife to be mobilized.
Chapter 26
 Joint Mobilization
459
Box 26-4
Overview of Kinematics of the
Stifle Joint
As the stife joint flexes in the open kinetic chain, the
concave plateau of the tibia moves in a caudal direction on
the convex femoral condyles. Therefore to increase stife
fexion, a cranial glide mobilization of the proximal tibia on
the femur should be applied.
As the stife fexes in the closed kinetic chain, the convex
femoral condyles roll caudally on the concave tibial
pl ateaus.
 As the stife joint extends in the open kinetic chain, the
concave plateau of the tibia moves in a cranial direction on
the convex femoral condyles. Therefore to increase stifle
extension, a caudal glide mobilization of the proximal tibia
should be applied.
As the stife extends in the closed kinetic chain, the convex
femoral condyles roll cranially and glide caudally on the
concave tibial plateaus.
Figure 26-13 Physiologic stifle flexion. The arrow indicates the
 direction of mobilization.
caudal cruciate ligaments, the value of cranial glide and
accessory joint mobilizations in the stable joint are
uncertain.
Physiologic Stifle Flexion (Figure 26-13)
To perfonm a grade MI physiologic stife fexion mobiliza-
tion, the hand positions may remain the same or the mobi-
lizing hand may be placed on the cranial aspect of the distal
tibia while the stabilizing hand is placed on the caudal
aspect of the distal femur. With the femur stabilized, the
tibia is moved to the end of the available range of fexion
Figure 26-12 Cranial glide to increase stifle flexion. The arrow
and then back to near midposition of the joint. An oscilla-
 indicates the direction of mobilization.
tory movement is performed by moving the tibia to end
feel and back to midposition at a rate of three or four rep
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is on the cranial
 etitions per sec ond for up to 60 seconds.
surface of the distal femur. The mobilizing hand is
Stife fexion should then be assessed after the mobiliza-
placed on the caudal surface of the proximal tibia.
tion to ascertain if there has been an improvement. If the
Mobilization: A cranial glide is applied to the tibia while
motion is improved, the grade Ml accessory mobilization
the distal femur is stabilized.
and the grade Ill physiologic mobilization may be repeated
Objective: Increase stifle joint fexion.
up to three times in one treatment session. Active move-
 A grade IIl accessory mobilization may be perfonmed
ment after treatment includes high stepping, sit-to-stand
from the same described hand position by adding an oscil-
exercises, and swimming to encourage active stife fexion.
lation of the mobilizing hand. The cranial oscillations are
Femorotibial Caudal Glide (Figure 26-14)
performed with the joint held in slight fexion or the loose
packed position. The oscillations should bump against the
 Dog position: The dog is in lateral recumbency with the
end of the available motion at a rate of three to four repeti-
 stife in a resting position.
tions per second for up to 60 seconds. The cranial glide is
Therapist position: The therapist faces the caudal aspect of
typically followed by a grade III physiologic stife fexion
the stife to be mobilized.
mobilization for an additional 60 seconds.
Hand position: The stabilizing hand is placed on the caudal
Because there is virtually no cranial or caudal glide
aspect of the distal femur. The mobilizing hand is placed
motion in the normal stife joint with intact cranial and
on the cranial aspect of the proximal tibia.
460
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 26-14  Caudal glide to increase stifle extension. The arrow
indicates the direction of mobilization.
Mobilization: A caudal glide is performed by the mobiliz-
Figure 26-15  Physiologic stifle extension. The arrow indicates the
ing hand while the distal femur is stabilized.
direction of mobilization.
Objective: Increase stife joint extension.
A grade Ill accessory mobilization may be performed
from the same described hand position by adding an oscil-
The Spine
lation of the mobilizing hand. The caudal glide oscillations
are performed with the joint held in slight fexion or the
The spinal region of the dog is complex in that it allows a
loose packed position. The oscillations should bump
significant amount of movement as it absorbs and distrib-
against the end of the available motion at a rate of three or
utes the forces from the four limbs. Each area of the spine
four repetitions per second for up to 60 seconds. The
(cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and coccygeal) possesses
caudal glide is typically followed by a grade Ml physio-
varying amounts of motion. The cervical region permits
logic stife extension mobilization for an additional 60
enough movement so that the dog may be able to touch
seconds.
 any part of its body with its nose except between the scapu-
Because there is virtually no cranial or caudal glide
las. Observation of a running dog demonstrates the amount
motion in the normal stife joint with intact cranial and
 of thoracic and lumbar fexion and extension that may be
caudal cruciate ligaments, the value of caudal glide and
present.29
accessory joint mobilizations in the stable joint are
 Movements of the spine include extension, fexion, side
uncertain.
fexion, and rotation. The motions of each component of
the spine contribute to the total movement of the entire
Physiologic Stifle Extension (Figure 26-15)
spine. The movement at the spinal level takes place between
To perform a grade IMI physiologic stifle extension mobi-
two vertebrae. Some regions of the spine demonstrate more
lization, the hand positions may remain the same, or the
mobility than other areas. For ex ample, the thoracolumbar
mobilizing hand may be placed on the caudal aspect of
and the lumbosacral regions are two of the most mobile
the distal tibia while the stabilizing hand is placed on the
areas of the spine. These are also the areas in which there
cranial aspect of the distal femur. With the femur stabi-
are a significant number of issues.
lized, the tibia is moved to the end of the available motion
Mobilization techniques of the canine spine must be
of extension and then back to near midposition of the joint.
 approached with extreme caution and knowledge of canine
An oscillatory movement is performed by moving the tibia
anatomy, medical conditions of the nervous system, the
to end feel and back to mid-position at a rate of three to
diagnosis, and the anatomy of the individual breed of dog.
four repetitions per second for up to 60 seconds.
For example, the angulation of the thoracic spine differs
Stife extension should then be assessed after the mobi-
 according to the breed of the dog and the topline.293 A
lization to ascertain if there has been an improvement. If
Labrador retriever has a level topline. This differs from the
the motion is improved, the grade IMI accessory mobiliza-
 arched topline of a greyhound or a whippet 9.34 The differ-
tion and the grade Ml physiologic mobilization may be
ences in angulation of toplines alters the direction of the
repeated up to three times in one treatment session.
mobilization.
Chapter 26
 Joint Mobilization
461
Because specialized training and clinical experience are
necessary to safely perform spinal mobilizations, a limited
number of basic mobilization techniques for the thoracic
and lumbar regions are described. The cervical region is
very complex and there are many contraindications associ-
ated with cervical mobilizations. It is essential that mobi-
lization not be attempted without a clear comprehension of
cervical anatomy, the nature of the dog's problem, and the
contraindications of the region. Cervical ROM may become
reduced secondary to arthritic conditions of the cervical
spine, after surgery for a cervical disc, or conditions related
to overuse of the forelimb muscles. It is common to see
restrictions in the adjacent vertebrae after a ventral slot
procedure. Changes in functional characteristics may result
in decreased cervical extension while walking, lifting the
head up from drinking or eating from a bowl on the foor,
Figure 26-16 Dorsal to ventral glide to thoracic spine. The arrow
 Or fexing the head and neck as the dog ascends stairs. It
indicates the direction of mobilization.
is important to wait until after the surgical site has healed
and is stable prior to performing any manual therapy
Thoracic Central Dorsal to Ventral Glides
techniques.
(Figure 26-16)
Spinal mobilizations are applied in the dog when there
is loss of motion related to pain or dysfunction. For
Dog position: The dog is standing or in a sitting position
example, a decrease in passive thoracic dorsal to ventral
with the spine in neutral, with no rotation or side fexion.
movements produces decreased thoracic extension. This
Therapist position: The therapist should stand or kneel at
results in a relative lack of active thoracic extension—the
the dog's side, with the shoulders directly over the dog.
dog will not be able to "dance" backward or jump up
 Kneeling may be necessary if the dog is on the foor or
onto a piece of fumiture. Of course, the spinal area must
a mat.
be identifed as the problem and other areas of concerm
Hand position: The thumb of the mobilizing hand is placed
should be ruled out. For example, the practitioner should 
Over the spinous process of the vertebra to be mobilized.
assess if hip disease or lumbar disease is restricting
The remaining part of the mobilizing hand may be
extension.
draped over the region. The stabilizing hand may be
placed under the ventral position of the thoracic region.
Thoracic Region
This hand helps to detect any changes in tension of the
 The dorsal spinous processes of the thoracic spine are very
abdominal region in response to pain or discomfort as
narrow and long. Some dogs object to direct pressure over
well as provide light counterforce stabilization. The
the spinous process. The lower thoracic region is one of
therapist's elbows should be slightly fexed to facilitate
the more common areas where problems secondary to
a smooth oscillation of the vertebra.
increased mobility occur. Intervertebral disc disease, com-
 Mobilization: Depending on the angulation of the thoracic
pensatory problems from canine hip dysplasia, and arthritic
region of the dog, a dorsal-to-ventral glide is applied at
changes are common in this area. As described earlier,
an angle from approximately 90 to 75 degrees. Oscilla-
dogs place more weight on the forelimbs with hip and
tions for a grade II mobilization should be performed
stifle disease. From a clinical point of view, the thoracic
  ss p a  os  
area often exhibits restrictions as a result of these com-
resistance from joint structures and the dog does not
 pensations. Dogs experiencing signs of hip dysplasia
experience any pain. Grade II mobilizations should be
have decreased hip extension. Changes in the motion of
performed for up to 30 seconds. Oscillations for grade
the spinal column occur to compensate for the reduced
IlI mobilizations should be performed so that the thera-
extension.
pist senses the end feel of the segment. This grade of
There are thirteen thoracic vertebrae in the dog. The
mobilization should be performed for up to 60 seconds.
eleventh vertebra is called the anticlinal vertebrae." It is
After each mobilization, the dog should be assessed
a transition point along the thoracic vertebrae. The spinous
 to determine whether there has been a functional change.
processes cranial to Tll point caudally, and the spinous
Changes that may occur include an increase in func-
processes caudal to T1l point cranially. Therefore when
tional mobility, such as with side fexion of the spine
performing mobilizations to this area, it is essential to
while the dog lies down or reaches for a treat near the
understand the topline of the dog as well as the inclination
base of the tail. Additional changes in thoracic mobility
of the particular vertebral spinous process.
include the ability to ascend stairs with improved
462
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
the therapist senses the end feel for the segment. This
grade of mobilization should be performed for up to 60
seconds. After each mobilization, the dog should be
assessed to determine whether there has been a func-
tional change. If an increase in ROM and function has
been made, the mobilization may be repeated two more
times. Functional improvements include an improved
ability to ascend stairs, transition from a lying position
to a sitting position, and possibly jumping. A decrease
in pain and muscle spasms should be felt, as well as
increased comfort during palpation. Often, dogs con-
tract their abdominal muscles when pressure is placed
Figure 26-17  Dorsal to ventral glide to lumbar spine. The arrow
On a painful intervertebral segment.
 indicates the direction of mobilization.
Acknowledgments
extension. Pain and muscle spasms should also be
diminished.
Photographs by Shauna Miner and Brenda Walker. Thank
you to Ann and Champion Majessa Easy Rider "Tommy"
Lumbar Region
Fischer, Latte, Edsel, Cheryl, Max Brienza, and Fred for
The seven lumbar vertebrae possess blunt spinous pro-
their photographs.
cesses and the facet angles are positioned at an approxi-
mate 90-degree angle to the foor when the dog is in a
standing position. Therefore mobilizations will mostly be
REFERENCES
performed at a 90-degree angle or perpendicular to the
1. Guide to physical therapist practice, ed 2, Alexandria, VA,
foor.
 2003, American Physical Therapy Association.
The areas of greatest mobility in the lumbar spine
2. Hengeveld E, Banks K: Maittand's peripherat manipulation,
ed 4, London, 2005, Butter worth-Heinemann.
include the thoracolumbar region and the lumbosacral
region.29.30 This is also an area where intervertebral disk
3. Maitland GD, Hengeveld E, Banks K et al: Maittand's vertebrat
manipulation, ed 7, London, 2005, Butterworth-Heinemann.
 injuries are commonly seen.36
4. Blomberg S, Svardsudd K, Mildenberger F: A controlled,
Lumbar Dorsal to Ventral Glide
multicentre trial of manual therapy in low-back pain. Initial
status, sick-leave and pain score during follow-up, Scand J
(Figure 26-17)
Prim Heaith Care 10(3):170-178, 1992.
 Dog position: The dog stands with the spine in a neutral
5. Koes BW, Bouter LM, van Mameren H et al: A blinded
position.
randomized clinical trial of manual therapy and physiother-
Therapist position: The therapist stands or kneels directly
apy for chronic back and neck complaints: physical outcome
over the area to be mobilized. The therapist's shoulders
measures, J Maniputative Physiot Ther 15(1):16-23, 1992.
should be directly over the area to be mobilized.
6. Koes BW, Bouter LM, van Mameren H et al: The effective-
ness of manual therapy, physiotherapy, and treatment by the
Hand position: The dominant thumb should be placed
directly over the spinous process to be mobilized and
general practitioner for nonspecific back and neck com-
plaints. A randomized clinical trial, Spine 17(1):28-35, 1992.
then reinforced by the nondominant thumb. The remain-
7. Blomberg S, Svardsudd K, Tibblin G: Manual therapy with
der of the hand should be draped over the dog. If the
steroid injections in low-back pain. Improvement of quality
therapist feels comfortable with performing the mobili-
of life in a controlled trial with four months’ follow-up,
zation with one hand, the nondominant hand may be
Scand J Prim Health Care 11(2):83-90, 1993.
placed under the dog's abdomen to ascertain any signs
8. Koes Bw, Bouter LM, van Mameren H et al: A randomized 
of pain or discomfort. The shoulders should be directly
clinical trial of manual therapy and physiotherapy for persis-
over the area and the elbows and wrists slightly fexed
tent back and neck complaints: subgroup analysis and rela-
 to provide proper body mechanics.
tionship between outcome measures, J Manipulative Physio!
Mobilization: A dorsal to ventral glide is applied at approx-
Ther 16(4):211-219, 1993.
imately 90 degrees or perpendicular to the skin surface.
9. Blomberg S, Hallin G, Grann K et al: Manual therapy with
Oscillations for a grade II mobilization should be per-
steroid injections——a new approach to treatment of low back
pain. A controlled multicenter trial with an evaluation by
fommed very gently so that the therapist senses only
orthopedic surgeons, Spine 19(5):569-577, 1994.
minimal resistance from joint structures and the dog
10. Bang MD, Deyle GD: Comparison of supervised exercise
does not experience any pain. Grade I mobilizations 
with and without manual physical therapy for patients with
should be performed for up to 30 seconds. Oscillations
shoulder impingement syndrome, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
for grade IlI mobilizations should be performed so that
30(3):126-137, 2000.
Chapter 26
 Joint Mobilization
463
11. Deyle GD, Henderson NE, Matekel RL et al: Effectiveness 
 22. Bennell KL, Matthews B, Greig A et al: Effects of an exercise
of manual physical therapy and exercise in osteoarthritis of
and manual therapy program on physical impairments, func-
the knee. A randomized, controlled trial, Ann Intern Med
tion, and quality-of-life in people with osteoporotic vertebral
132(3):173-181, 2000.
fracture: a randomized, single-blind controlled pilot trial,
12. Allison GT, Nagy BM, Hall T: A randomized clinical trial of 
BMC Musculoskeletal Disord 17(11):36 doi 10.1186/
 manual therapy for cervico-brachial pain syndrome—a pilot 
1471-2474-11-36, 2010
study, Man Ther 7(2):95-102, 2002.
 23. Dutton M: Orthopaedic examination, evatuation, and inter-
 13. Aure OF, Nilsen JH, Vasseljen O: Manual therapy and exer-
vention, New York, 2008, McGraw-Hill.
cise therapy in patients with chronic low back pain: a ran-
 24. Cyriax J: Textbook of orthopaedic medicine, diagnosis of soft
domized, controlled trial with l-year follow-up, Spine 
tissue lesions, ed 8, London, 1982, Bailliere Tindall.
28(6):525-531, discussion 531-532, 2003.
 25. Mennell JM: Back pain. Diagnosis and treatment using
14. Korthals-de Bos IB, Hoving JL, van Tulder MW et al: Cost
manipulative technigues, Boston, 1960, Little, Brown.
 effectiveness of physiotherapy, manual therapy, and general 
 26. Greenmann PE: Principles of manual medicine, ed 2, Balti-
practitioner care for neck pain: economic evaluation along-
more, 1996, Williams and wilkins.
side a randomised controlled trial, BMJ 326(7395):911,
 27. Kaltenborn FM: Manuat mobilization of the extremity joints:
2003.
basic examination and treatment techniques, ed 4, Oslo,
15. Hoeksma HL, Dekker J, Ronday HK et al: Comparison of
1989, Olaf Norlis Bokhandel, Universitetsgaten.
manual therapy and exercise therapy in osteoarthritis of the
28. McKenzie R, May S: The fumbar spine, mechanicat diagno-
hip: a randomized clinical trial, Arthritis Rheum 51(5):722-
sis and therapy, ed 2, vols 1 and 2, Waikanae, NZ, 2003,
729,2004.
Spinal Publications New Zealand.
16. Cleland J, Selleck B, Stowell T et al: Short-term effects 
29. McKenzie R, May S: The human extremities, mechanical
 of thoracic manipulation on lower trapezius muscle strength,
diagnosis and therapy, Waikanae, NZ, 2000, Spinal Publica-
J Man Manip Ther 12(2):82-90, 2004.
tions New Zealand.
17. Johnson AJ, Godges JJ, Zimmerman GJ et al: The effect
 30. Kubo K, Kanehisa H, Fukunaga T: Effects of transient
of anterior versus posterior glide joint mobilization on
 muscle contractions and stretching on the tendon structures 
 external rotation range of motion in patients with shoulder 
in vivo, Acta Physiol Scand 175(2):157-164, 2002.
adhesive capsulitis, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 37(3):88-99,
 31. Millis DL, Carr J: Kinematic analysis of the forelimb of
2007.
normal dogs during stair and ramp ascent. Proc 7th Interna-
18. Green T, Refshauge K, Crosbie J et al: A randomized
tional Association of Veterinary Rehabilitation and Physical
controlled trial of a passive accessory joint mobilization on
 Therapy Meeting. Vienna, Austria, August 2013.
acute ankle inversion sprains, Phys Ther 81(4):984-994,
32. Evans HE: Miler's anatomy of the dog, ed 3, Philadelphia,
2001.
1983, WB Saunders.
19. Beattie PF, Donley JW, Arnot CF et al: the change in the
 33. Brown CM: Dog locomotion and gait anatysis, Wheat Ridge,
diffusion of water in normal and degenerative lumbar inter-
CO, 1986, Hoflin.
vertebral discs following joint mobilization compared to
34. Lyon M: The dog in action, New York, 1988, Howell Book
prone lying, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 39(1):4-11, 2009.
House.
 20. Grieve G: The rationale of manipulation, Physiotherapy
 35. Hauptman J, Prieur W, Butler H et al: The angle of the canine 
53(10):338-340, 1967.
femoral head and neck, Vet Surg 8:74, 1979.
21. Mennell JM: Rationale of joint manipulation, Phys Ther
 36. Blythe LL, Gannon JR, Craig AM: Care of the racing grey-
50(2):181-186, 1970.
hound, Abilene, KS, 1994, American Greyhound Council.
27
Massage
AmandaSutton andDanaWhitlock
Biologic Basis
molecules, giving stability at fibril levels, assisting in the
formation of collagen fibers. They allow the tissue to func-
Massage has many definitions and is employed by many
tion under mechanical stress.
 practitioners of various backgrounds. The working defini-
The orientation of the fibers depends on the stresses to
tion used in this chapter is that massage is the manipulation
which the fibers are subjected; connective tissue must be
of the soft tissues of the body. The use of massage has been
pliable, yet very strong. A stress-strain curve demonstrates
well received in the human feld and, despite a paucity of 
the behavior of biologic materials. When a longitudinal
research, it has continued to be developed and explored.
stress is applied to collagen, the tissue responds by elonga-
The word massage is derived from the Arabic word
tion, which occurs in the toe region of the curve (Figure
27-1). Elongation occurs as a result of straightening of the
developed a system of massage, which was used for
crimped fibers, and probably also as a result of some inter-
various medical conditions. Just Lucas Championnies
fibrillar sliding and shear of ground substance, which fows
(1843-1913) used it in the management of fractures in the
between the collagen fibers.
United States, and it was advanced by Mary McMillan,
Massage produces most of its effects in the toe region
director of physical therapy at Harvard Medical School.
of the stress-strain curve. Care should always be taken to
Dr. JB Mennell described physical treatment by move-
not overstretch the tissues and to avoid damage to the
ment, manipulation, and massage, which was frst pub-
intermal structure of connective tissue fibers. Therefore the
lished in 1917. There has been variable interest in massage
end feel of the tissues must be understood to avoid damage
by medical establishments in the twentieth century, but
to connective tissues.
interest in complementary medicine has grown in the
Permanent deformation is termed plastic deformation,
United States. The American Massage Therapy Associa-
which occurs with microfailure and disruption of collagen
tion was founded in 1943 and had grown to more than
cross-links. The undamaged fibers absorb a greater pro-
58,000 members by 2009.
portion of the load as a new length is established, which
Massage is now incorporated along with the medical
reflects the balance between elastic recoil and the resistance
 management of human patients for pain relief and cases of
of the water and glycosaminoglycans to compression.
 decreased mobility. It is used as a prevention measure and
 Biologic materials also have viscosity, a property of
in the management of competitive athletes. It is also incor-
fuids of resistance to fow, and elasticity, a property of
 porated into most chiropractic, physical therapy, and osteo-
solids. Together, these result in the viscoelastic properties
pathic manual therapy approaches.
of tissues. The response of tissues to loading depends on
how quickly the load is applied or removed. The faster the
Biomechanics of Connective Tissue
repetitive loading and unloading, the stiffer the material
 Massage must be directed toward a specific purpose and
behaves. With rapid loading, friction results and tissue
should be aimed at promoting physical and psychological
temperature rises. Energy is dissipated as heat when the
change.
tissue is returmed to its original length. This is referred to
The main constituent of connective tissue is collagen.
as hysteresis.
Its function is to resist axial tension, and it exhibits a stress-
 This is relevant in the application of massage because
strain behavior (Box 27-1). Microscopically, collagen
it is important to be sensitive to the stiffness of tissues. If
fibers are arranged in bundles and have a crimped appear-
a low constant or repetitive load is maintained over a long
ance. Type I collagen is in the dermis and fascia and gives
period, the elongation of tissues that occurs is by creep.
support and resistance to tension.
Conversely, if the tissue length is held constant, elongation
The basal lamina of epithelial tissue contains type IV
occurs by relaxation. Massage produces low, repetitive
collagen, which supports the epithelial cells. Hydrogen
loads over the medium tenm and may cause a nonperma-
cross-links are fonmed between chains and between
 nent creep response. Rapid loading of tissues during
464
Chapter 27
Massage
465
 Massage has been shown to increase lymph fow rate
Box 27-1
Characteristics of Stress-Strain
by 22-fold, lymph colloid concentration by 47 times, and
Behavior of Collagen
leukocyte counts by 8.5 times.' It is believed that when
Stress and strain are linear up to the yield point. Elongation
tissues and fuid are compressed against the outer surfaces
along this portion of the curve will not be permanent.
of the larger lymph vessels, lymph fow is impeded. This
Elastic limit is the point to which maximum stress may be
results in an increase in interstitial fuid pressure slightly
 applied without permanent deformation.
above atmospheric pressure. Massaging may increase
 Increased loading requires greater force to increase elongation
interstitial fuid pressure and help to move fuid into the
of collagen because the tissue becomes stiffer.
lymphatic system. By massaging in a distal to proximal
Microfailure begins to occur in some of the fiber bundles in the
direction, it is proposed that fuid is moved from the
linear region. However, the tissue retains its external
extremity toward the central body core. This supports the
appearance of continuity.
The end of the linear region is known as the yield point of the
 practice of applying massage in a distal to proximal direc.
tissue. At this point, elongation of collagen occurs with a
tion. Other controlled studies show that massage does not
minimal increase in load. Beyond this point, major fiber
improve lymph drainage in certain situations, such as
bundle failure occurs, the external appearance changes, and
cancer. A study of women with breast cancer-related
the smooth outline is lost.
lymphedema evaluated the effect of compression garments
When maximum load point is reached (Pmax), complete rupture
with or without manual lymph drainage (massage). It was
OCCUrs.
concluded that compression  garments improved lym-
 phedema, but there was no additional benefit of massage
in relieving limb edema in women with breast cancer.?
Elastic limit/
Circulatory Effects
 yield point 
The pressure of the massage itself increases pressure
within the tissues. Pressure gradients are created between
the tissue spaces and vessels. As the hands are moved,
'ess
changes in tissue pressure occur, creating fuctuating pres-
sure differences between one area of tissue and another. It
Toe
is believed that fuid moves constantly from tissues to
region
vessels and back again, as it flows from areas of high pres-
sure to areas of low pressure.
Microfailure
 Progressive failure
During an actual massage session, various massage
manipulations are employed that are complex and involve
Elongation
a combination of squeezing, stretching, pulling, and trac-
Figure 27-1  Typical stress-strain curve for connective tissue. Stress,
tion forces, with movement occurring in different direc-
Force applied per unit area; strain, proportional elongation; Pmaxy
tions and in different tissue planes. Therefore there will be
maximum load point.
 complex repetitive pressure changes occurring in varying
directions and at different tissue depths. This is likely to
have an effect on fuid interchange, whereby fuid is pushed
massage is undesirable because of increased tissue stiff-
from the tissue spaces into the vessels, toward the lymph
ness as a result of their viscoelastic properties. Also, dry
nodes and heart, and new fuid is pushed or drawn into the
tissue results in less compliance and elongates less readily.
 spaces. Massage is believed to replenish the fuid in the
These are important facts for deciding the rate of massage
spaces, producing a fushing effect, which brings in addi-
application.
tional nutrients. There is evidence in humans that chemical
irritants in the tissues (e.g., substance P, prostaglandins)
Lymphatics
and waste products of metabolism may decrease pain
In humans, one tenth of the tissue fuid is removed by the
 threshold by sensitizing free nerve endings. Replenishing
lymphatics. Understanding lymphatic anatomy, physiol-
tissue fuid and removing infammatory products may
 Ogy, and function is necessary for successful massage. The 
reduce this effect, preventing or reducing some types of
rate of flow is detenmined by the interstitial fuid pressure
chronic pain. By removing metabolites and chemicals from
and lymphatic pump activity.
muscles and "fushing"’ the muscle tissue with new circula-
Increased lymphatic fow is caused by the following:
tion, muscle soreness following exercise may be reduced.
 Increased capillary pressure
 However, controlled studies have not been able to demon-
 Increased plasma osmotic pressure
strate that massage reduces metabolites following exer-
· Increased interstitial fuid pressure
cise.34 Studies involving Doppler ultrasound have failed to
· Increased capillary permeability
 demonstrate an effect of massage on muscle blood fow.6
466
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Tissue Movement
meridians. These are used in acupuncture and refex
 As the hands move along the superficial tissues, pressure
therapy treatments.
to the tissues increases, and layers of tissue are moved. A
Most of the research on the effects of massage has been
light glide causes movement of the epidermis. If friction is
done in humans. Most studies have evaluated healthy indi-
maintained between the therapist's hand and the patient's
viduals, which may be misleading because physiologic
skin, the epidermis moves with the hand and is gently
compensatory mechanisms are extremely efficient in
stretched. There will also be some movement of the dermis
 healthy tissues and any alterations in local blood fow may
because of the traction between the two layers. More pres-
be compensated for by autoregulatory processes. Most of
sure with friction, although still very light, results in trac-
the research studies have also been performed on small
tion between the dermis and the subcutaneous tissues. The
 groups and often without control groups. One study by
end-feel of the stroke is when this traction reaches its limit
Hansen and Kirstensen'’ gave little detail concerming the
and all layers are stretched.
massage itself, such as the amount of pressure applied.
Massage involves the interaction of energy between the
Although the research supported the concept that massage
 person applying the massage and the dog, and the effects
increases blood fow in muscles, the lack of information
of touch to induce relaxation, communication, and a sense
regarding the type of massage and length of treatment
of general well-being. It may also produce movement of
 make interpretation of the results difficult.
the tissues in subsequent layers as a result of traction of
 Changes in blood constituents following massage have
the tissue interfaces. Sensory and autonomic nerves may
provided information regarding the mechanism of action
be stimulated, inducing changes in the nervous and circula-
of massage.? Ermst'3 found that a standard 20-minute
tory systems, and movement may be affected in abnormal
 massage treatment reduced the hematocrit and blood and
tissue, such as scar tissue or layers of adherent tissues.
plasma viscosity. It is believed that the fuid immediately
Reed and Held? found no consistent systemic effect on
surrounding poorly perfused vessels has low viscosity
autonomic nervous system parameters either acutely or
because of decreased cellularity and that the vasodilatation
cumulatively when comparing connective tissue massage
caused by massage aids in the recruitment of dormant
and a placebo treatment (sham ultrasound) in healthy
vessels. It is desirable to increase local circulation to
middle-aged and geriatric humans.
promote healing. The mechanical effect of the massage
helps to remove low-viscosity tissue fuid into the circula-
tion. The changes in blood detected within the vessels in
Therapeutic Effects
this study support the belief that massage produces a fush-
 Massage is generally enjoyed by small animal patients and
ing and mechanical effect on the circulation. In a more
helps to relieve distress, anxiety, and discomfort. There are
recent study, Hinds and colleagues showed no difference
many postulated effects of massage reported in the litera-
in femoral arterial blood fow, quadriceps muscle tempera-
ture. Unfortunately, many of these have not been substanti-
ture, blood lactate levels, heart rate, or blood pressure when
ated by systematic scientific investigations.
comparing post quadriceps exercise and massage to exer-
Stroking young animals results in a reduction in the
cise and rest. They did show that skin blood flow and skin
animal's physiologic response to stress, demonstrated by a
 temperature were both significantly elevated in the massage
 decreased output of adrenocorticotropic hormone. Young
 group. They hypothesized that this potential diversion of
animals that are handled also show greater development of
blood fow away from the muscle could have a deleterious
the cortex and the subcortex of the brain. They learm faster
effect to recovering muscle tissue. They did not demon-
and have a more advanced stage of neural development
strate a decrease in muscle blood fow, however, so this
than nonhandled animals.? Resistance to infection later in
hypothesis is not supported by their work.
 life may also be beneficially infuenced by cutaneous stim-
 In a Cochrane database review, Furlan and collagues14
ulation experienced by the infant animal.0
critiqued 13 randomized trials and concluded that massage
If a hand is placed over the surface of a dog's skin,
might be beneficial in the treatment of low back pain in
heat is felt between the two surfaces. If the hand is placed
acute and chronic cases, especially when combined with
on the skin and held still, this heat increases. Rubbing
exercise and education.
Over the surface of the skin causes friction, and this results
Effects on Muscle
in an even greater increase in heat. Heat is a form of
energy, and some schools of massage, particularly those
 Massage may also affect skeletal muscles. Muscles have a
grounded in Eastem practices, use the energy feld that 
natural resting tone that may be increased in postural
exists aroumd the body. This is sometimes referred to as
muscles by extermal infuences, such as cold or stress. This
an electromagnetic radiation around the entire body. It is
occurs because of the interaction of the muscle spindle
felt as heat and can be felt a small distance from the body.
and the central nervous system. Stretching a muscle may
Some also believe that other forms of energy fields run
stimulate the muscle spindle and cause a refex muscle
through the body, along specific pathways known as
contraction while reflex inhibition of the antagonist occurs.
Chapter 27
Massage
467
Pain
 soreness and a feeling of stiffness. Jones and Round'9
explained this by identifying swelling in muscles and
 inflammation of the connective tissue. Massage may help
 Muscle shortening
Muscle spasm
reduce or prevent the initial tendermess. It is also believed
pain. Regular massages may make the muscles softer
 and more pliable, and the stretching manipulations may
Adhesions
Reduced circulation/
increase extensibility and strength  in the connective
toxin accumulation
tissues.1' Willems and colleagues?0 demonstrated decreased
muscle soreness in portions of the quadriceps muscle
(vastus lateralis and rectus femoris), but not in the vastus
Edema‘
medialis after massage following eccentric exercise-
Figure 27-2  Self-perpetuating muscle spasm cycle.
induced muscle soreness. They also demonstrated improved
vertical jumping performance in the massaged leg 48 hours
Massage may add an extermal stimulus to sensory organs
and either increases muscle tone by stimulation or reduces
leg. Mancinelli and colleagues?l showed significant effects
it, probably by facilitating an accommodation of the
of massage versus control in vertical jump displacement,
spindle, causing it to reset at a lower threshold of
 perceived muscle soreness, and algometer muscle pain
excitability.
readings, but not timed shuttle run in women collegiate
It is believed that the circulatory effect of massage may
athletes.
reduce muscle soreness and therefore aid clinical signs
 Pain experienced after exercising with the muscles in a
associated with muscle injury or postexercise recovery.
lengthened position may also be due to inflammation of
 Danneskiold-Samsoe and colleagues's studied the effects
the connective tissue rather than muscle damage. Massage
of massage for shoulder and back pain in humans. Blood
may assist by increasing pliability in the connective tissue
samples were evaluated for myoglobin concentrations.
around the muscle fasciculi. Massage assists mobility
There was a statistically significant effect, with peak myo-
between the interfaces within the muscle and also stretches
globin concentrations occurring within 3 hours of the
 any fibrous adhesions or scarring in the tissue.
massage. Myoglobin concentrations gradually decreased;
The effects of massage on the Hoffman (H) reflex, which
after seven treatments, there was no difference. In a sys-
indicates the excitability in c-motoneurons or anterior hom
tematic review of the literature published in 1998, Emst'6
cells, has also generated interest. Goldberg and colleagues?2
concluded that most studies evaluating the effect of
studied the effects of massage on healthy people and
massage on delayed-onset muscle soreness were method-
patients with spinal cord injuries. They applied one-handed
ologically fawed, findings were inconsistent between
petrissage to deep and superficial tissues. There was a 49%
studies, and, although there appeared to be some potential
reduction in H refex activity with deep massage, and a
for a positive effect, the evidence was not convincing and
39% reduction with light massage. From this study, it was
warranted further controlled investigation.
concluded that stimulating cutaneous mechanoreceptors
 Jacobs'7 advocated the use of massage for the relief of 
 and pressure receptors reduces H reflex activity. Sullivan
spasm of unknown cause but which resulted in a self-
and colleagues?3 also demonstrated a reduction in
perpetuating muscle spasm cycle (Figure 27-2). Massage
C-motoneuron excitability of massaged muscles.
is also said to reduce tone in muscles that are tense or in
Effects on Pain and Sensation
spasm and to reduce the soreness and tendemess of exer-
cised muscles. It is also used to prepare muscles for exer-
The effects of massage on connective tissues, which helps
cise. Hermandez-Reif and colleagues' found that children
to reduce muscle spasm and soft tissue discomfort, have
with cerebral palsy who received 30 minutes of massage
already been discussed. However, Ueda and colleagues?4
twice weekly for 12 weeks had decreased muscle spasticity
 demonstrated that postsurgical massage may facilitate the
of the arms, decreased anm muscle and overall tone,
regression of sensory analgesia following an epidural
increased hip extension range of motion (ROM), and
block.
improved fine and gross motor function when compared
 Carreck?5 evaluated the effect of massage on levels of
with children with cerebral palsy who received 30 minutes
pain perception in humans. She found that pain threshold
of reading twice weekly.
ass an un saaal ra iis on psii sm
Jones and Round' discussed the process by which an
group and this work suggests that massage may be used to
analgesic substance, possibly potassium, is released when
 help manage pain and reduce treatment soreness.
muscles maintain excessive tone or static contraction for
 Massage may cause traction at tissue interfaces. Hori-
prolonged periods. Eccentric exercise of muscles, which
zontal plexi lie at interfaces in the tissues and gentle
generates high forces in muscles, produces delayed-onset
 pulling on these vessels may stimulate the accompanying
468
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
sympathetic nerves, which supply the mechanoreceptors.
Although many theoretical effects of massage have been
These receptors may be distorted by the massage, possibly
put forth, there is little high-quality research evidence to
Jowering mechanoreceptor sensitivity and reducing pain
support these claims. A Cochrane review evaluating the
and tendermess. If delayed-onset pain in the muscle is
effect of deep transverse friction massage for treating ten-
caused by connective tissue inflammation, the fushing
dinitis found no evidence of benefit with its use and con-
effect in the surrounding fuids and removal of infamma-
cluded that there was the need for a high-quality randomized
tory mediators may increase the speed at which the inflam-
study using validated outcome measures to further evaluate
mation resolves.
its usefulness.29
Effects of Massage on Connective Tissue
How Massage Works
Following injury or disease, inflammation causes increased
vascular permeability. The resulting edema contains fibrin
Massage may have immediate benefits to a patient, but it
Ogen, which may result in formation of fbrous tissue.
usually takes regular treatments to bring about significant
Adhesions form within the tissues, binding tissue inter-
 improvements in a particular condition. Initially, massage
faces. These adhesions prevent normal sliding of tissues on
 may provide relief from pain, reduce tension, and help
each other and also reduce the ability of the fibers to spread
to sedate the nervous system. When pain has subsided,
apart. Massage is described as being able to stretch tissues
 attempts to correct the underlying cause of the problem
that have become short, tight, or adhered. Petrissage
may begin. Healing is stimulated by both mechanical and
massage stretches and pulls the tissues in various direc-
reflex actions.
tions and mobilizes the adjacent connective tissue fbrils.
The mechanical effect of massage to the soft tissues
The molecular cross-bridges between fibrils may be infu-
may help to relieve tense muscles through relaxation,
enced and plastic changes may occur; their length may be
decreased pain, and increased mobility, and it may improve
maintained or increased because of elongation or creep.
the circulation and lymphatic fow. The body, mind, and
Mobility may also be increased at the fibrous cross-bridges
emotions all interact with the nervous system. It is possible
between fibers and areas of adhesions by stretching con-
that touching the skin sends messages, including refex
nections between the fibers. This facilitates spreading and
actions as the involuntary reaction of one part of the body
sliding at tissue interfaces, and longitudinal elongation
to the stimulation of another part, to reduce the amount of
 helps to increase fexibility.
stress hormones, which may lower blood pressure, slow
Following surgery, scars may form with adhesions of
breathing, improve digestion, and generate a sense of well-
various tissue layers to the underlying tissues. Massage
aai on sia o aess  aaq si a n
 helps mobilize and soften adhesions by elongation, creep.
endorphins, the body's natural pain relievers, and to acti-
and increased fuid exchange of tissues. Collagen fibers
vate neuropeptides, the intercellular messages within the
align themselves along lines of stress. Techniques that
 nervous system. These link the skin to the nervous system
stretch the fibers and adhesions in different directions
and the entire body, including the immune system. These
eventually restore their mobility, promoting remodeling
 actions as a result of massage are thought to have tremen-
along the lines of normal stresses.
dous benefits.
Following injury, it is important to maintain local fex-
ibility of the involved structures to assist overall suppleness
Indications for Massage
and to reduce the possibility of reinjury resulting from
decreased extensibility of nonmal and scar tissues. Massage
Mechanical
should be used to promote the functional recovery of struc-
tures and prevent reinjury by maintaining mobility at the
 If a dog has a chronic musculoskeletal problem, it may
interfaces, both inside and outside the affected structures.
develop secondary problems, which lead to postural and
Massage should be combined with controlled longitudinal
 gait adaptations. In time, these may also become primary
stretching exercises.
 problems in themselves as a result of changes in the soft
 One technique to mobilize scar tissue is deep-friction
tissues, which lead to unprotected joints, possible damage
massage.?6 It is applied at 90 degrees to the fibers and
to the joints, and a painful response.
delivers a stretch and separation between individual fibers.
Surgical
Deep friction is believed to create movement and induce
reactive hyperemia,27 stretch cross-bridges between fibers,
 If a dog has had surgery, massage may help to maintain
and stretch adhesions within the structure. Fibrous scarring
mobility. If the dog must be confined for a period of rest
in tendons and their interfaces may become more pliable
or is on restricted exercise, it helps to maintain tone and
with massage. Although one researcher has suggested that
muscle condition. Massage also helps psychologically by
 s s n sa    
maintaining contact between the dog and the owner, and
the area,' there is little evidence to support this claim.
it may ease pain and discomfort. After resolution of the
Chapter 27
Massage
469
surgical condition, massage is indicated to maintain fexi-
Fatigue
bility of all joints and soft tissues, and to prevent further
When a dog trains very hard, it may not fully recover
 loss of function.
 between sessions, which may lead to general muscle sore-
ness and increased likelihood of injury. Massage is used to
Disease
decrease muscle tone and tension, thereby reducing mus-
 For dogs suffering a permanent low-grade condition, such
cular discomfort and promoting relaxation. There is also
as osteoarthritis, massage before exercise helps to encour-
evidence to suggest that it helps recovery from fatigue,
age blood fow, delivery of nutrients, and maintenance of
as compared with rest alone. It would therefore be very
soft tissue extensibility. For those that suffer chronic imbal-
appropriate to use massage after competition, training.
ances, which have caused structural changes of the soft
 traveling, or any particularly stressful situation.
tissues, massage helps to relax and ease discomfort and
Muscle Soreness
 may have a significant effect on tension and muscular effort.
Dogs may suffer soreness in their muscles as a result of
Massage for the Competitive Dog
extreme exertion and adverse environmental conditions.
Proper massage applied to competitive dogs may help to
establish or reestablish full tissue function. Massage may
weather conditions or in extreme heat and humidity are
be employed during the training period for treatment and
examples of extreme conditions. This form of soreness
rehabilitation, and to enhance athletic performance. It may
normally begins after completion of the event, and
also help to prepare the dog for competition or exercise,
sometimes not until the next day. Less ft animals may
and to reduce stress and aid relaxation. After hard exercise
also suffer discomfort during such exercises, but as a
or competition, it aids recovery.
result of metabolic insufficiency. Well-conditioned muscles
At an amateur level, training may sometimes be some
generally do not suffer from this problem because they
what neglected, and massage can play a significant role in
have a well-functioning capillary bed and adequate oxy-
maintaining tissue pliability, in hopes of preventing injury.
 genation of the blood supply. Obviously, a dog will be at
At the other end of the scale, top canine athletes are more
Aiiny on Aqunuoddo ue peu pou seu i! J! aequeapesip p
likely to be overtrained, and massage can assist in recovery
recover from the previous competitive efforts. An inade-
from fatigue. In this case, 2 hours should be allowed to
quate rest period may result in very severe discomfort
elapse after competition before massage is started for
caused by connective tissue inflammation, tendemess, and
 maximum effects. Care must be exercised to not massage
stiffness. Massage may delay the onset of soreness and
too deep and induce mechanical trauma, which may be
reduce it.
detrimental to fatigued muscles.
 Experience and some studies suggest that the ideal time
to massage is 1 to 3 hours after exercise to enhance athletic
Massage for Performance
performance and for the best therapeutic benefit. Also, for
To perform properly, the body must be able to adapt to the
certain muscles, massage may enhance tissue lengthening
extra stresses placed on it. Requirements for excellence are
more than stretching alone.
power, agility, and coordination of the dog, and to attain
There are also contraindications to massage (Box 27-2).
this level of performance, the dog must cope with activity
at the extremes of joint movement and muscle length. This
Planning a Massage
places heavy demands on the strength and the endurance
of the muscle, and the ability of the joints to move freely
When planning a massage for a competitive animal, the
in all directions. The dog also needs freely mobile connec-
stage of training, the fitness of the animal, and the purpose 
tive tissues. Inevitably, excess or repetitive stresses, or
of the massage must be considered. The various purposes
overwork, may increase the likelihood of other injuries,
of massage include relaxation, toning. precompetition
such as muscle strain. In all cases, this results in replace-
warm up, intercompetition treatment, aiding muscle sore-
ment of connective tissue with scar tissue, resulting in loss
 ness 1 to 3 hours after competition, improving healing.
of power, fexibility, and movement in the tissues. More-
relief of acute or chronic injury and fatigue, muscle sore-
over, if the tissue is not rehabilitated before normal full
ness, and preventing adhesion formation. A thorough
activity is resumed, then it may never fully recover and
patient evaluation is necessary to assess areas that might
returm to normal limits. This in turm may overload the
benefit the most from proper massage techniques.
surrounding tissues, causing fatigue and hypertrophy of
muscle groups.
Patient Evaluation
 Massage can be used to stretch and free this inelastic
scar tissue and returm tissue mobility to normal. It also
During the initial observation period, care should be taken
helps to remodel and promote resorption of the scar and to
to ensure that the dog is standing on a fat, even surface in
reestablish full function of the tissues.
 an area with adequate lighting.
470
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Box 27-2
 Contraindications to Massage
Do not massage if the dog is suffering from the following
conditions:
·Shock (lowers blood pressure)
·Fever
Acute infammation (do not address area directly, but it
would be acceptable to work elsewhere on the body)
 Skin problems (ringworm)
Infectious diseases
Acute stages of viral disease (herpes)
Figure 27-4  Cranial view of patient.
Figure 27-3  Caudal view of patient.
Caudal View
The patient is evaluated from a caudal view while standing.
Figure 27-5  Lateral view of patient.
 From this angle, the general posture is evaluated, looking
for any skeletal abnormalities (e.g., scoliosis), areas of
atrophy or hypertrophy, natural foot placement, weight-
Lateral View
bearing tendencies of the limbs, head carriage, and the
 general appearance of the hindquarters and tail. The patient
It is important to observe both sides of the patient. Impor-
in Figure 27-3 has arthritis. Note that the dog has a clamped
tant points to note are the general posture, appearance of
tail and decreased weight bearing on the left hindlimb, with
the muscles, head carriage, tail position, and limb joint 
the limb held in slight fexion.
angles. In the dog in Figure 27-5, note the roached back
and clamped tail. Also note that the limb angles cannot be
Cranial View
 truly assessed because the dog is not standing squarely and
From the cranial view it is important to note the symmetry
symmetrically.
of the head, eyes, ears, and paws, head carriage, forelimb
Gait Assessment
weight-bearing tendencies, and the natural position of the
forelimbs (e.g., neutral, rotation, adduction, abduction).
Walk: Caudal View
Note in Figure 27-4 the deviation of the head to the left
   sss n n t  s sn 
with slight rotation to the left and extermal rotation of the
ness. The ability of the dog to walk in a straight line should
forelimbs. Also, the right paw is more splayed than the left.
be assessed, along with the fuency of hindlimb movement
Chapter 27
Massage
471
Figure 27-6 Gait assessment at a walk—caudal view.
Figure 27-7  Gait assessment at a walk—cranial view.
(i.e., does the dog move forward in a straight line, or does
it circumduct, abduct, adduct, and so forth). It is important
that the dog handler moves in a straight line and is educated
in handling of dogs for evaluation purposes. Observations
should be made of the lumbosacral rhythm, or the rise and
fall of the tuber coxae and tuber sacrale, and the presence
of any protective muscle splinting that may be occurring.
In the dog in Figure 27-6, the tail is held low, the hindlimb
toe-off phase initiates in an adducted position, the dog
appears to move toward the left, and the dog appears to be
dragging the left hind toe.
Walk: Cranial View
The cranial view should evaluate forelimb lameness and
fuency of movement along with natural head carriage and
foot placement. The nose, head, and neck deviate to the
left, and foot placement appears close in the forelimbs in
the dog depicted in Figure 27-7.
Trot: Caudal View
话5934
Similar to assessing walking from a caudal position, it is
Figure 27-8  Gait assessment at a trot—caudal view.
also important to note any hindlimb lameness, symmetry.
fuency of movement, protective splinting of muscle groups
(e.g., hamstrings or gluteals), tail carriage, and limb car-
Side View
riage and placement at a trot (Figure 27-8).
Both sides of the animal should be assessed. From this
Trot: Cranial View
angle it is important to note the equality of the hindlimb
As with observation at a walk, observe the dog for any
and forelimb stride lengths, the ability of all limbs to
retract and protract, head and tail carriage, protective
foot placement, and symmetry and fuency of movement.
 muscle splinting, and general muscle interaction. In Figure
In Figure 27-9, note the low head carriage and the adducted
27-10, note the clamped appearance of the tail and possible
 position of the right forelimb.
 guarding of the epaxial muscles.
472
Section V
Therapeutie Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 27-11   Turning short in small circles.
Figure 27-9 Gait assessment at a trot—-cranial view.
Figure 27-12  Palpation of the dog.
Figure 27-10 Gait assessment—side view.
Turning
It is important to evaluate the dog while tuming in small
circles in both directions, noting whether the bend follows
through from nose to tail, whether the limbs cross over,
and whether any areas look restricted. It is also important
to recognize whether the dog actually understands what is
being asked of it. In Figure 27-11 note the reluctance of
the dog to perfonm the task: the dog appears to be braced
from neck to tail, and the dog is also not crossing his legs.
Palpation
Figure 27-13  Palpation of dorsal spinous processes.
The dog's skeletal structure and muscle tone should be
assessed after evaluation of the dog's gait. This is per-
By palpating on either side of the dorsal spinous pro-
formed by palpating along the dog, from the wings of
cesses with the thumbs, sensitive areas may be assessed
the atlas, along the spine and limbs, to the tail (Figure
(Figure 27-13). The surrounding areas are also palpated for
 27-12). Areas of irritability, spasm, atrophy, hypertrophy,
any evidence of any other sensitive areas in the region,
and asymmetry are noted, along with any skeletal
such as the withers and triceps region (Figure 27-14). Limb
abnonmalities.
musculature is also assessed independently (e.g., shoulder
Chapter 27
Massage
473
Figure 27-14  Palpation of the scapular and triceps region.
Figure 27-16  Flexion of the cervical spine.
Figure 27-15 Palpation of the tuber sacrale and tuber coxae.
girdle and pelvic girdle musculature), noting whether any
Figure 27-17  Extension of the cervical spine.
tone or spasm are present. Bony landmarks are palpated
bilaterally, noting the symmetry of position and surround-
ing musculature, for example, the tuber sacrale and tuber
coxae (Figure 27-15).
 Passive Movements of the Cervical Spine
supporting hand, guide the head dorsally into extension.
Note the quality and range of movement, the end feel, and
Flexion
the characteristics of the muscles and joints under the pal-
While standing above the dog. place one hand over the
pating hand. The dog in Figure 27-17 appears to resist this
cervical spine to enable assessment of the muscles and
maneuver.
joints as they move through a ROM, then place the other
Side Flexion
hand over the dog's nose and guide the head down toward
the forelimbs. Note the quality and range of movement and
While placing one hand over one side of the dog's nose,
end feel, as well as the feel of the muscles and joints under
use the other hand to stabilize the dog while palpating
the palpating hand. Although it is difficult to appreciate in
the cervical spine. First guide the dog's head to one direc-
the photograph, the dog in Figure 27-16 has restriction in
tion, and then after changing positions of the hands,
fexion.
guide the head in the other direction. Note the range and
quality of movement, end feel, and so forth for both sides.
Extension
In Figure 27-18, left-side fexion appears restricted, and
Support the dog's head under its chin with one hand and
increased tone is palpated by the evaluator in the cervical
palpate the cervical spine with the other. Using the
musculature.
474
Section V
Therapeutie Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 27-20 Protraction of a forelimb.
Figure 27-18  Side flexion of the cervical spine.
Figure 27-21  Retraction of a forelimb.
tone should be identified. Moving the limb across the
midline into adduction tests the latissimus dorsi muscle. In
this dog, protraction of the limb appears to be adequate
(Figure 27-20).
Figure 27-19 Flexion of a forelimb.
Retraction
From the protracted position, guide the limb back into
Forelimb
retraction, ensuring that the dog's neck is not tilted from
midline. The range, quality, and end feel of movement are
Flexion
 noted. The dog in Figure 27-21 appears to have restricted
While ensuring that the dog is standing supported with the
movement, possibly because of increased tone in the bra-
head pointing forward, fex the carpus and elbow. Note the
 chiocephalicus muscle, and the dog does not appear to be 
range of movement, quality of movement, end feel, and
comfortable.
scapular elevation. The dog in Figure 27-19 has good
Cervical Spine Side Flexion with
fexion in these joints.
Forelimb Retraction
Protraction
Support the dog between your legs and with one hand, fex
After evaluating fexion, continue to guide the limb forward
the neck to the side. Hold this position, and use the other
into full protraction. Again, note the range and quality of
hand to gently retract the opposite forelimb to assess the
 movement and the end feel. Any areas of increased muscle
range of movement (Figure 27-22).
Chapter 27
Massage
475
Figure 27-22 Side flexion of the cervical spine with retraction of
Figure 27-24Flexion of a hindlimb.
the opposite forelimb.
Figure 27-25 Protraction of a hindlimb.
Figure 27-23 Adduction of a forelimb.
Retraction
Adduction
With the dog in a standing position, use one hand to support
From the neutral position, guide the limb across the chest
the limb and guide it into retraction. Use the other hand to
toward the opposite leg. Note the range, quality, and end
palpate the quadriceps and caudal thigh muscles. Again,
feel of the movement (Figure 27-23).
note the range and quality of movement, end feel, and any
fasciculation of the muscle. The dog in Figure 27-26 has
Hindlimb
very restricted retraction.
Flexion
 Note: All of the passive limb movements described pre.
With the dog supported, fex the hindlimb, obtaining
viously can also be performed with the dog in lateral
full fexion of the hock and stife. Assess the range and
recumbency.
quality of movement, end feel, and the muscles. The dog
Tail
in Figure 27-24 appears to have decreased limb fexion.
Also note the dog's stance in the other limbs and overall
Tail movements may also be assessed, noting range of
level of comfort.
movement, quality of movement, and end feel. Elevation,
depression, side fexion, and rotation movement of the tail
Protraction
can all be assessed (Figure 27-27).
With one hand palpating the hindquarters and caudal
thigh muscles, allow the other hand to guide the limb
Practical Application of Massage
forward into protraction. Assess the range and quality of
Body Position and Comfort of the Clinician
movement, end feel, and muscles. The dog in Figure 27-25
appears to have full protraction, but may also have com-
 Performing a massage can be quite tiring initially because
pensatory fexion of the lumbosacral area.
you are concentrating on a new task and your body is
476
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
 massage may be appropriate on a regular basis. General
 and biomechanical changes.
Massage may be performed to isolated areas or to the
entire limb and body. It may be used in conjunction with
other therapies and veterinary treatments. It is also useful
to be applied by the owner and may be successfully taught
to the owner by the therapist.
Massage Techniques
Massage has many benefits for dogs, and there are many
techniques that may be employed. Massage involves the
use of a series of movements using the hands, which have
an effect on the tissues. It is important to comfortably posi-
Figure 27-26  Retraction of a hindlimb.
tion the dog in lateral recumbency. It is also important to
position yourself comfortably. The person performing the
 massage should be beside the dog on the foor, or place the
dog on a raised surface, which may prevent you from
 stooping over or compromising your posture. It is best to
start at one end, such as the head, and work along the dog
 im a sequenced manner (e.g., head, neck, shoulders, fore-
limbs, back, hindquarters, and tail). The following are tech-
niques that may be used at any stage and over any muscle
 group.
Stroking
 Stroking is a good technique to start the treatment (Box
27-3). When the dog is positioned, run your hand over the
dog from neck to tail and down the limbs with medium
pressure. This technique aids relaxation of the dog and
Figure 27-27 Assessment of tail motion.
gives further opportunity to assess the tissues while the dog
is not bearing weight. Note the muscle tone and any swell-
ing, masses, or temperature differences between body
areas (Figure 27-28).
leaming new movements. If the clinician is not careful, this
Effleurage
may lead to tension and fatigue. To prevent this from
Occurring, try to work in a systematic way. Also, be careful
 Effeurage is often performed to begin a massage, and is
to maintain proper body posture and relax while learming
useful for relaxation, and to decrease swelling (Box 27-4).
the moves to help minimize these risks. Using your larger
Beginning at a distal area, such as the paws, the hands
muscles such as the shoulder muscles instead of your
move proximally, using medium pressure. This helps to
hands helps to minimize fatigue. It is important that the
move any toxins in the body toward the lymph nodes and
dog feel confident in you, too. Dogs appear to be very good 
aids drainage (Figure 27-29).
 at picking up tension and any lack of confidence.
Petrissage
Maintaining good posture means greater comfort, and
the clinician will not fatigue as quickly. As a result, the
 Petrissage is a type of massage with applied pressures
massage will be more enjoyable for the clinician, resulting
which are deep and compress the underlying tissues.
in greater relaxation for both parties. Altogether, the 
Kneading, wringing, skin rolling and pick-up-and-squeeze
massage will be more effective, and a better result will be
are petrissage movements.
achieved.
Compressions
Identification of Massage Areas and
When performing effeurage, an increase in muscle tone in
Application of Massage
certain muscles may be identified. The triceps and deltoi-
When massaging, you may work on the entire dog. or
deus muscles are commonly affected. Compressions to the
selected areas. If the dog has a diagnosed condition, local
affected muscles may be easily administered and are often
Chapter 27
Massage
477
Box 27-3
Stroking
Box 27-4
Effleurage
Stroking is often used initially in a massage and on most areas.
Some consider this a form of effleurage.
areas of the body, particularly on the limbs and when swelling
Uses
is present. It is the most common type of massage used, and 
 often it is used in an evaluative manner to assess for tissue
Relax the dog.
tightness, presence of muscle spasm, and so forth.
Introduce touch.
Sedate (slow stroking) the dog.
Uses
Stimulate (brisk stroking) the dog.
 Increase venous and lymphatic return.
Decrease muscle tone (slow).
Aid removal of chemical irritants.
 Improve mobility between tissues.
When to Use
Stretch muscle fbers.
 At the beginning or end of massage
 Decrease muscle tone.
When only limited time is available, on a daily basis
 Note: If used deeply, it may be used to increase muscle tone.
To calm and relax in a stressful situation
Any time
When to Use
 At the start and end of a session, and often in between various
Application
techniques
 Stroking is usually applied from the proximal limb toward the
 Should be performed toward the lymph nodes
distal limb
 May be performed using one or both hands, fingers or thumbs
 Begin at the top of the area to be worked.
 Place the entire hand in contact with the skin.
Application
Maintain a gentle but firm pressure.
 Begin at the distal part to be effleuraged.
 Make contact with the skin and apply even pressure to sink into
the super ficial tissues.
 Make a sweeping movement to the top of the area, molding to
the contours and maintaining the same depth of pressure
throughout the stroke.
 Finish the stroke over the lymph node, then remove the hands
and reposition at the start of the next stroke. If the stroke is
not to the lymph nodes, continue to the nearest body part.
Bring the hands toward you as you work, using the heel of
your hand.
Watch that the fingers and palm of the hand do not lose contact
with the patient.
 Maintain an even depth of pressure while the hands mold to the
body.
 Overlapping strokes are used, continuing until the entire body
Tegion is covered.
 Note: In a small area, use only one hand, finger or thumb.
Figure 27-28 Stroking.
very effective (Box 27-5). The palm or heel of the hand
is placed over the muscle and pressure is applied. This
pressure is maintained for 15 seconds before moving on to
another area. This maneuver should be repeated several
times. By restricting blood fow and then releasing pres-
sure, the circulation increases, and this is thought to help
to decrease tone (Figure 27-30).
Holding and Placing
An area of increased tone or spasm may be relaxed by
placing a hand over the area. This technique traps heat in
the area, increasing the local circulation and promoting
local relaxation (Figure 27-31).
Percussion (Clapping, Hacking. Pounding)
If there is a general area of increased tone, such as in
Figure 27-29 Efleurage.
the caudal thigh or gluteal muscles, clapping or hacking
478
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Box 27-5
 Compression and Wringing
Compressions can be used all over and are very effective on
large muscles. Wringing is often very relaxing and has a great
sedative effect.
Uses
Aid venous and lymphatic return.
Help with removal of chemical irritants.
Increase the mobility and length of fibrous tissue.
 Restore mobility between tissue surfaces.
Aid tissue fluid mobility.
Increase extensibility and strength of connective tissue.
May also trigger skin refexes and others linked to it.
Features
 These techniques compress the soft tissues, then they squeeze
 Or roll them (wringing), working to the tissue end.
Figure 27-30  Compressions applied to tissues.
When to Use
 Use on superficial tissue, ligaments, or muscles to soften up
large areas.
Application of Compressions
Use one hand or both, or pads, fingers or thumbs.
Begin at the proximal end of the tissue and move distally.
Contact the skin and compress the tissue.
Skin is moved on the underlying tissue; there is no glide.
The hands or digits or back of fist are used in a circular
motion; this will initiate a slight stretch behind, and skin
wrinkling ahead.
If using right and left hand, the right moves clockwise and the
left counterclockwise.
re senss uye senssn redeep on pedde s sinssds
compressed. It is a similar movement to that used to open a
childproof medicine bottle: press down initially, twisting as
Figure 27-31  Placing technique over tissue.
you do so, then release.
To go from one completed compression to the next, slide the
hands across.
Application of Wringing
Wringing is applied using two hands.
 One brings the tissue toward you, the other moves it away.
Hold for 2-5 seconds, then slowly release.
 The hand then moves to take up position on the adjacent
tissue.
techniques may be employed (Box 27-6). This technique
may also be used in areas of muscle weakness.
Clapping is performed by using a cupped hand. Gently
but firmly, a clap is applied to the area (Figure 27-32). As
Figure 27-32  Clapping of tissue.
the hands fall onto the muscle mass, a hollow sound should 
be heard. Hacking is performed by altermately using open
Trigger Point Therapy
hands, with the ulnar border of the hands falling vertically
on the muscle mass (Figure 27-33). In both cases the tech-
Often small areas of spasm may be felt within a muscle
niques are performed with light pressure initially, progress-
belly. Such nodules may be treated using trigger point
ing to medium pressure. Both clapping and hacking
therapy. The nodules are located and ischemic compression
improve general circulation in the areas treated, promoting
is applied using one or two fingers. The compression is
relaxation.
held for approximately 20 seconds and released for 10
Chapter 27
Massage
479
Box 27-6
Percussion
Percussion consists of several techniques, the three most
important being hacking, pounding, and clapping.
Uses
Stimulate local circulation.
 Provoke muscle and tendon reflexes.
Provoke a general stimulatory effect.
Stimulate muscle tone.
Assistance in clearing airways (coupage).
Features
 Light percussion has an effect on the superficial tissues; heavier 
application affects deeper layers and must not be used over
organs.
Figure 27-33  Hacking of tissue.
Application of Clapping (see Figure 27-32)
Hold the fingers and thumbs closed together to form a relaxed,
cup shape. The elbows should be fexed and the arms
abducted. The arms should be alternately fexed and
extended so that the borders of the hands and fingers stroke
the skin. The strokes are rapid, light, and brisk. Air is
trapped between the hands and the skin, producing a hollow
sound as contact is made. The entire treatment area should
be covered.
Application of Hacking (see Figure 27-33)
Hold the arms away from your sides, and fex the elbows
approximately 90 degrees, with the wrists fully stretched
backward (extended) and fingers relaxed. The shoulders,
where possible, should be over the area.
The border of the little finger and hand strike the skin
alternately, lightly and rapidly. The movement comes from 
Figure 27-34  Compression of trigger point.
the wrist, and it involves a full side-to-side movement of the
wrist in this position.
 u  s   i a  
the skin.
Application of Pounding
The arms should be held out, with elbows fexed to near 90
degrees. The wrists are extended with fingers flexed loosely
into fists. The hips should be fexed to enable the shoulders
to be over the area being treated. The medial borders of
the fifth fingers strike the skin alternately and rapidly. The
movement is at the radioulnar joint, which pronates and
supinates.
seconds before compression is reapplied. Generally three
Figure 27-35 Deep transverse friction massage.
or four repetitions may be required (Figure 27-34).
Deep Transverse Friction
complete this technique with some gentle massage and
Scar tissue forms within muscles as a result of injury. Deep
 stretching to relax the dog, as deep transverse friction may
transverse frictions may be applied to help reduce the scar-
be uncomfortable (Figure 27-35).
ring (Box 27-7). These techniques were developed by
Cyriax.26 Using the index and middle fingers at a 90-degree
Passive Movements
angle to the muscle fibers, pressure is applied perpendicu-
To conclude the treatment session, when all the muscles
lar to the direction of the fibers. This is repeated 10 times
are warm and relaxed, passive movements similar to those
and performed in sets of 3 to 10. It is a good practice to
done in the weight-bearing position to evaluate the patient 
480
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Box 27-7
Friction Massage
Traditional Friction Massage
Deep Transverse Friction
Uses
Uses
Stimulate local circulation.
 Stimulate local circulation.
Aid in removal of chemical irritants.
Promote reactive hyperemia.
Restore mobility between tissue interfaces.
 Restore mobility between tissue interfaces.
Restore mobility to specific anatomic structures.
 Restore mobility to specific anatomic structures.
Features
Features
 Performed with the tip of the thumb or fingers making small
 Performed with the tip of the thumb or fingers making small
rotary movements, the pressure being appropriate to the 
rotary movements, the pressure being appropriate to the
desired tissue interface. Lubricants are not used as there is
desired tissue interface. Lubricants are not used as there is
no glide on the skin.
no glide on the skin.
Application of the Friction
Application of Friction (see Figure 27-35)
The tip of the thumb or fingers should be placed on the skin, over
The tip of the thumb or fingers should be placed on the skin, over
the structure to be treated. The tissues are compressed to the
the structure to be treated. The tissues are compressed to the
depth of the structures being treated. Small rotary movements
depth of the structures being treated. Small rotary movements
are performed on the structures while maintaining constant
are performed on the structures while maintaining constant
pressure, but there is no glide on the skin. The superficial
pressure, but there is no glide on the skin. The superficial
tissues are moved on the underlying structures.
tissues are moved on the underlying structures.
B
Figure 27-36 A, Forelimb mobilization with limb fully protracted. B, Forelimb mobilization with limb fully retracted.
Figure 27-37  A, Hindlimb mobilization with limb fully protracted. B, Hindlimb mobilization with limb fully retracted.
Chapter 27
Massage
481
A
B
Figure 27-38 A, Isolating muscle spasm while placing rear limb through a range of motion. B, Isolating muscle spasm while placing forelimb
 through a range of motion.
are performed. Again it is best to work in a sequence, such
 2. Andersen L et al: Treatment of breast-cancer-related lym-
 as from forelimbs to hindlimbs.
phedema with or without manual lymphatic drainage, Acta
Oncologica 39(3):399-405, 2000.
Forelimb and Scapular Mobilizations
3. Martin NA, Zoeller RF, Robertson RJ et al: The comparative
 Place one hand over the scapula and support the forelimb
effects of sports massage, active recovery, and rest in promot-
ing blood lactate clearance after supramaximal leg exercise,
with the other. The scapula is mobilized from elevation to
J Ath Train 33:30-35, 1998.
protraction, depression, and retraction. The limb is fully
 4. Hemmings B, Smith M, Graydon J et al: Effects of massage
protracted and retracted (Figure 27-36).
on physiological restoration, perceived recovery, and repeated
sports performance, Br J Sport Med 34:109-114, 2000.
Hindlimb
5. Shoemaker JK et al: Failure of manual massage to alter limb
Similar movements are performed on the hindlimb. With
blood How: measures by Doppler ultrasound, Med Sci Sports
 one hand supporting the hindlimb and the other resting
Exerc 29(5):610-614, 1997.
Over the hip, the leg is elevated and depressed before it is
6. Hinds T et al: Effects of massage on limb and skin blood
protracted and retracted (Figure 27-37).
fow after quadriceps exercise, Med Sci Sports Exerc
In some cases when passive movements are performed,
36(8):1308-1313, 2004.
7. Reed BV, Held JM: Effects of sequential connective tissue
areas of spasm may remain within the muscles, restricting
full available range of movement. In these situations it is
massage on autonomic nervous system of middle-aged and
elderly adults, Phys Ther 68(8):1231-1234, 1988.
 often useful to combine passive movements with trigger
8. Seyle H: Stress and the general adaptation, Synn Dme, Jr J
point therapy. The isolated muscle spasm is held by the
Med 1:1383, 1950.
therapist's finger and thumb while the other hand guides
9. Ruegammer WR et al: Growth food utilisation and thyroid
the limb through a ROM (Figure 27-38). If restriction
activity in the albino rat as a function of extra handling.
 Occurs again, the position should be held for a minimum
Science 120:134, 1954.
of 15 seconds, then released before repeating. Following
10. Soloman GF, Moos RH: Emotions, immunity and disease,
treatment, the dog should be very relaxed. The dog should
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2:657-674, 1964.
be turmed over and the massage should be repeated on the
11. Hansen TI, Kristensen JH: Effect of massage, shortwave
diathermy and ultrasound upon Xe disappearance rate fom
other side.
muscle and subcutaneous tissue in the human calf, Scand J
Rehab Med 5:179-182, 1973.
Alternative Methods
12. Arkko PJ et al: Effects of whole body massage on serum
protein, electrolyte and hormone concentrations, enzyme
Several methods may be used as an altermative or adjunct
activities and haematological parameters, Int J Sports Med
to massage, including mechanical massagers, grooming
4:265-267, 1983.
the dog with a massager, and using commercially available
13. Ernst E et al: Massage cause changes in blood Huidity, Phys-
massage lubricant.
iotherapy 73:43-45, 1987.
14. Furlan AD, Imamura M, Dryden T et al: Massage for low-
back pain, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews Issue
REFERENCES
4. Art. No.: CD001929, 2008.
1. Ikomi F et al: Interstitial fuid, plasma protein, colloid, and
15. Danneskiold-Samsoe B et al: Regional muscle tension and
leukocyte uptake into initial lymphatics, J Appl Physiot
pain (fibrositis); effect of massage on myoglobin in plasma,
81:2060-2067, 1996.
Scand J Rehab Med 15:17-20, 1982.
482
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
16. Ernst E: Does post-exercise massage treatment reduce
Field TM et al: Tactile/kinesthetic stimulation effects on preterm
delayed onset muscle soreness? A systematic review, Br J
neonates, Pediatrics 77:654-658, 1986.
Sports Med 32:212-214, 1998.
Flowers KR: String wrapping versus massage for reducing di gital
17. Jacobs M: Massage for the relief of pain: anatomical and
yolume, Phys Ther 68:57-59, 1988.
physiological considerations, Phys Ther Rev 40:93-98, 1960.
 Frank LK: Tactile communication, Genet Psychot Monogr 211-
18. Hernandez-Reif M et al: Cerebral palsy symptoms in chil-
251, 1957.
dren decreased following massage therapy, Early Child Dev
Goodhall-Copestake BM: The theory and practice of massage,
Care 175(5):445-456, 2005.
London, 1926, Lewis.
 19. Jones DA, Round JM: Skeletat muscle in heath and disease,
Graham D: Practicat treatise on massage, New York, 1884, Wood.
Manchester, England, 1990, Manchester University Press.
Guyton AC: Textbook of medical physiology, Philadelphia, 1991,
20. Willems ME, Hale T, Wilkinson CS: Effects of manual
WB Saunders.
dunf sal elauss pue ssousos oyioeds-alosnu uo saesse 
Hack GD et al: Previously undescribed relation between muscle
performance after downhill treadmill walking, Med Sport
and dura, In Proceedings of the Congress of Neurologicat
13(2):61-66, 2009.
Surgeons, Phoenix, Anizona, February 14-18, 1995.
 21. Mancinelli CA et al: The effects of massage on delayed onset
Hartelius I et al: How little you are? Neonatal Netw 2(8):33-37,
muscle soreness and physical performance in female colle-
1992.
giate athletes, Phys Ther Sport 7:5-13, 2006.
Hoffa A: Technik der Massage, Stuttgart, 1897, Verlag Von Fer-
22.(
 Goldberg J et al: The effect of two intensities of massage on
dinand Ernke
H-refex amplitude, Phys Ther 72:449-457, 1992.
Holey EA: Therapeutic massage, Philadelphia, 1997, WB
23. Sullivan SJ et al: Reduction of H-refex amplitude during
Saunders.
the application of effeurage to the triceps surae in neurologi-
Hourdeboight JP: Canine massage, New York, 1999, Howell
cally healthy subjects, Physiother Theory Pract 9:25-31,
Book House. Macmillan.
1993.
Hovind H, Nielson SL: Effect of massage on blood fow in skel-
24. Ueda W et al: Effect of gentle massage on regression of
etal muscle, Scand J Rehab Med 6:74-77, 1974.
sensory analgesia during epidural block, Anesth Anaig
Knight MTN, Dawson R: Effect of intermittent compression of
76:783-785, 1993.
the arms on deep vein thrombosis of the legs, Lancet 2:1265-
25. Calreck A: The effect of massage on pain perception thresh-
1267, 1976
old, Manipulative Physiother 26: 10-16, 1994.
Kubik ST, Manneston M: Anatomie der Lymphkapillaren and
26.(
Cyriax J: Textbook of orthopaedic medicine, vol 2, London,
Prakollektoren der Haut. In Bonniger A, Partsch H, editors:
1984, Balliere Tindall.
Intiale Lymphstrombahn, Internat. Symp. Zurich, Stuttgat,
27.0
Chamberlain GJ: Cyriax's friction massage: a review,
1984, G. Thieme.
J Orthop Sports Phy Ther 4:16-22, 1982.
Marin I et al: Postoperative pain after thoracotomy: a study of
 28. Ombregt L et al: A system of orthopaedic medicine, London,
116 patients, Rev Matadies Resp 8:213-218, 1991.
1995, WB Saunders 
Mason A: Something to do with touch, Physiotherapy 71:167-
 29. Brosseau L et al: Deep transverse friction massage for treat-
169, 1985.
ing tendinitis, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Mennell JB: Physicat treatment by movement, manipulation and
(online) (4):CD003528, 2002.
massage, ed 5, Philadelphia, 1945, Blakiston.
Montagu A: Touching, New York, 1978, Harper and Row.
SUGGESTED READINGS
 Morelli M et al: Changes in H-refex amplitude during massage
 Barnett K: A theoretical construct of the concepts of touch as they
of triceps surae in healthy subjects, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
relate to nursing, Nursing Res 21:102-110, 1972.
12:55-59, 1990
 Boigey M: Manuel de massage, 1955. In Licht S, editor: Massage,
 Nordschow M, Bierman W: The infuence of manual massage on
manipulation and traction, Baltimore, 1960, Waverly Press.
muscle relaxation: effect on trunk fexion, J Am Phys Ther
 Boni A, Walthard K: Massage et cinesterapie des rheumatismes 
Assoc 42:653-657, 1962.
abarticulaires, 1956. In Licht S, editor: Massage, manipula-
 Pellechia GL et al: Treatment of infrapatella tendinitis: a combi-
tion and traction, Baltimore, 1960, Waverly Press.
nation of modalities and transverse friction massage versus
 Bork K et al: Serum enzyme levels after a whole body massage,
iontophoresis, J Sport Rehab 3:135-145, 1994.
Arch Dermatol Forsch 240:342-348, 1971.
 Poznick-Palewitz E: Cephalic spasm of head and neck muscles,
Camier EB: Studies on the physiology of capillaries: reaction
Headache 15:261-266, 1976.
of human skin capillaries to drugs and other stimuli, Am J
 Prosser EM: A manual of massage and movements, ed 2, London,
Physiot 2:528-547, 1922.
1941, Faber and Faber.
Cassar MP: Handbook of massage therapy Comptete guide for
 Puustjarvi K et al: The effect of massage in patients with chronic
the student and professional massage therapist, Oxford, 1999,
tension headache, Int J Acupuncture Electrotherapeut Res
 Butterworth Heinemann.
15:159-162, 1990.
Charman RA, editor: Complementary therapies for physicat
 Sabri S et al: Prevention of early deep vein thrombosis by inter-
therapists, Oxford, 2000, Butterworth Heinemann.
mittent compression of the leg during surgery, Br Med J
 De Bruijn R: Deep transverse friction; its analgesic effect, Int J
4:394, 1971.
Sports Med 5:35-36, 1984
 Severini V, Venerando A: Effect of massage on peripheral circula-
 Ernst E, Fialka V: The clinical effectiveness of massage therapy:
tion and physiological effects of massage, Eur Medicophys
a critical review, Forsch Komptementarmed 1:226-232, 1994.
3:165-183, 1967.
Chapter 27
Massage
483
Troisier O: Les tendinities epicondyliennes, Rev Prat 4l:1651-
Westland G: Massage as a therapeutic tool, Br J Occupat Ther
1655, 1991.
Part 1(56):129-134; Part 2 56:177-180, 1993
Wakim KG et al: Effects of massage on the circulation in normal
Williams PL et al, editors: Gray's anatomy, ed 37, Edinburgh,
 and paralysed extremities, Arch Phys Med 30:135-144, 1949.
1989, Churchill Livingstone.
Walker JM: Deep transverse friction in ligament healing, J
Wood EC, Beckers PD: Beard's massage, Philadelphia, 1981,
Orthop Sports Phys Ther 62:89-94, 1984.
WB Saunders.
Weber AS: Traite de la massotherapie, Paris, 1891.
Yates I: A physician's guide to massage therapy: its physiologi-
Weerapong P et al: The mechanisms of massage and effects on
cal effects and their application to treatment, Vancouver,
performance, muscle recovery and injury prevention, Sports
British Columbia, Canada, 1990, The Massage Therapist 
Med 35(3):235-256, 2005.
Association.
Weinrich SP, Weinrich MC: The effect of massage on pain in
Yinen J, Cash M: Sports massage, London, 1988, Stanley
cancer patients, Appt Nursing Res 3:140-145, 1990.
Paul.
Exercises for Proprioception
and Balance
Darryl L.Millis and David Levine
any conditions affect proprioception of small
greater number of receptors.4 The cranial cruciate ligament
animals. The most obvious of these are neuro-
is capable of sending afferent input to the central nervous
Llogic conditions. However, recent evidence sug-
system, and it is important to the biomechanical and pro-
gests that musculoskeletal conditions and injuries also
 prioceptive functions of the stife joint, including charac-
affect proprioception, especially of joints.
teristics of movements and position-related stretches of
 Exercise enhances balance and proprioception, and
these ligaments. The effects of the gamma-muscle-spindle
a well-designed balance training program can improve
system in the muscles around the knee are so potent that
balance in normal individuals.
stretching of the cruciate ligaments at relatively moderate
Balance is the ability to adjust equilibrium at a stance, or
 loads may induce major changes in responses of the muscle
during locomotion to adjust to a change in direction or ground
spindle afferents. These changes may result in changes in
surfaces, whereas proprioception is the perception of stimuli
the muscular stiffness around the knee joint, helping to
 produced by the body in relation to movement and changes 
 affect functional stability of the knee joint.
in body position. Proprioceptive training includes activities
 Mechanoreceptors have been studied in tom and recon-
that may be performed at low or high speed and require an
structed anterior cruciate ligaments (ACL) in animals and
awareness of limb position in space. Example of activities
humans.6 In humans with untreated ACL lesions, normal
include walking in circles or a figure eight and walking across
mechanoreceptors remain in the ligament 3 months after
obstacles of various shape, height, and spacing. Balance exer-
injury. The number then gradually decreases, and by the
cises are exercises requiring rapid responses to changes in a
 ninth month, few free nerve endings are present.
surface, such as walking on a trampoline, or standing on a
 The correlation between the number of mechanorecep-
balance or wobble board. Other balance and agility exercises
tors in ACL remnants and joint position sense just before
include cavaletti rails, exercise balls, rapid changes of direc-
an ACL reconstruction in human patients has been studied.?
tion while trotting and galloping, ball playing, tug of war,
A positive correlation between the number of mechanore-
dancing, and wheelbarrowing. This chapter discusses current
ceptors and accuracy of the joint position sense was found,
knowledge regarding proprioception and balance and exer-
suggesting that proprioceptive function of the ACL is
 cises to enhance patient function.
related to the number of mechanoreceptors. Therefore con-
sideration should be given to preserving cruciate ligament
The Science of Proprioception
remnants during stabilization surgery if the ligament is
relatively normal. However, a study in cats that evaluated
The proprioceptive system is responsible for detecting
joint capsule afferent neuron stimulation before and after
changes in the position of the trunk, limbs, and head. The
 transection of the cranial cruciate ligament suggested that
system is distributed widely throughout all of the spinal
capsule afferents continue to behave normally after liga-
nerves, and general proprioception receptors are located in
ment transection, despite the increased joint laxity.
the muscles, tendons, and joints deep to the surface of the
Proprioceptive ability declines with aging in humans.?
body. The receptors respond to changes in the length and
 A randomized clinical trial evaluated the effects of an
position of the structures where they are located, giving the
 8-week balance program on proprioception compared with
normal individual a precise feeling of where their body
only a fall-prevention program in healthy older adults
parts are located. The postural control system consists of
(mean age = 73.9)."° Each group was assessed before and
three functional components, including biomechanical,
after the study, and a control group also underwent
motor coordination, and sensory organization components.
follow-up testing 8 weeks after intervention. Additionally.
this study compared the intervention group to a younger,
Joint Proprioception
healthy population who were only assessed once for com-
Ruffini and Pacinian receptors have been identified in
 parison. Interventions included typical balance and pro-
canine cruciate ligaments and are innervated by axons pen-
prioceptive exercises such as activities on foam, foam
etrating from the peripheral synovium surrounding the
balance beams, wobble board activities, and others. Sub-
ligament. The proximal third of the ligament contains a
jects underwent 1-hour sessions three times per week, for
484
Chapter 28
Exercises for Proprioception and Balance
485
a total of 8 weeks. The balance group showed significant
joint position sense in patients with patellofemoral pain
improvement within the group in velocity discrimination
syndrome that had poor proprioception to begin with, but
from before and after intervention. In addition, there were
cz undaoondond poo ym asou diay nou pi
significant differences after intervention between both
Neurologic Conditions
treatment groups. In fact, the balance group showed no
significant differences in velocity values after training
Proprioception is commonly affected by neurologic condi-
when compared with younger adults. However, no other
tions in animals and people. Proprioception and rehabilita-
differences in joint position sense or threshold to percep-
tion have been studied in people following a stroke. There
tion of movement were encountered. Because velocity,
regulated mainly by muscle spindles, is considered vital to
injury in people. One method of treatment, known as sup-
ported treadmill training, appears to have beneficial effects
training could decrease the risk for falls in older adult
 On proprioceptive function in people after a stroke.24.25 A
humans. However, these results were not maintained long
4-week period of body weight-supported treadmill train-
tenm, suggesting that continued training is necessary.10
ing with up to 40% of the patient's body weight supported
 Proprioception is further impaired in older adult patients
resulted  in  significantly improved  clinical outcomes,
with knee osteoarthritis (OA), which may contribute to
including functional balance, motor recovery, overground
additional functional impairment..91-13 On the other hand,
walking speed, and overground walking endurance.?6 The
the pain of osteoarthritis does not seem to have good asso-
effects lasted for at least 3 months after training. The sub-
jects with greater gait impainments benefited the most from
patients with arthritis have decreased joint position aware-
 training with body-weight support.
 ness, physical therapy may improve joint position sense
Another study evaluated the delayed effects of a balance
 and proprioception through participation in a carefully
training program compared with no training on patients
constructed sensorimotor rehabilitation program in which
following a hemiplegic stroke.27 Dynamic balance function
pain, effusion, and fatigue are minimized.
 Of patients in the visual feedback training group had sig-
In healthy individuals, muscle receptors are the primary
nificant improvements when compared with the control
determinants of joint position sense, and capsular receptors
group. Activities of daily living also had significant
have a secondary role. Studies have been performed in
improvements at 6 months of follow up in the trained
humans to test position sense of the knee joint before and
group. A study of older humans indicated that a short
after fatigue.15.16 With fatigue, there appears to be a change
individualized   exercise  program  improved   functional
in mechanism of appreciation of joint position, possibly
balance. This improvement was maintained for at least 1
 because of an increased role of capsular receptors regarding
month, but there was no effect 1 year after training ceased,
joint position sensitivity with muscle fatigue-induced laxity.
suggesting that continued training may be necessary.
Appreciation of joint position was also found to be sig-
 Strength training should also be considered as part of the
nificantly more sensitive after warming up by jogging and
rehabilitation program for patients. In one study, chronic
stretching for 4 minutes, demonstrating adequate warm-up
human stroke patients underwent a progressive resistance
prior to activity may be beneficial.17 Conversely, to test
strength training program to evaluate changes in muscle
whether cryotherapy affects position sense of the knee, a
strength, gait, and balance.?8 Subjects participated in a
cooling pad was applied to knees of humans.' Cooling for
12-week resistance training program. Lower limb strength
15 minutes resulted in increased knee joint stiffness and
 improved 68% on the affected side. Repeated chair stand time
decreased sensitivity of joint position sense. However,
mmproved 21%, motor performance improved 9%, and static
another study indicated that cryotherapy of the shoulder
and dynamic balance improved 12%. Other studies have con-
 does not affect joint position awareness. '* It may be possible
fmmed the benefts of strength training in human stroke
that differences exist in different joints, with more superfi-
 patients.?9 These results suggest that srength training should
cially located joints affected more by cryotherapy. These
be considered even in patients with chronic deficits.
findings should be considered in therapeutic programs that
 involve exercise immediately after applying cryotherapy.
 Proprioception and Activity
 Long-term effusions and the nature of the inflammatory
 In the past decade, research in humans has suggested that
fuid may be responsible for the seeming loss of proprio-
stretching prior to activity may reduce acute propriocep-
ception observed in some clinical conditions with chronic
tion, which might lead to injury. A recent study showed
joint effusion. However, infusion of saline to simulate
significant differences in detecting knee movement after
acute joint effusion apparently does not change proprio-
undergoing a  hold-relax proprioceptive neuromuscular
ceptive ability.?° An elastic bandage placed on the knee of
facilitation stretch routine on the hamstrings and quadri-
 humans had a positive effect on joint proprioception, and
ceps compared with a control group.3°0 The treated group
 may be recommended in those patients with joint proprio-
had a significantly slower reaction time from pretest to
ception problems 2122 Patella taping techniques improved
 posttest, whereas the control group did not. It is important
486
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
to note that this study suggests stretching in general may
Table 28-1
 Balance Score for Small Animals
promote decreased proprioception in certain joints imme
diately after stretching. This could hold implications for
BALANCE ITEM SCORE (0-5)
dogs in the late phases of rehabilitation, especially for
1. Sitting squarely and unsupported
sporting dogs, in which stretching prior to training could
2. Change of position: sitting to standing
alter coordination and motor function, considering that
 3. Change of position: standing to sitting
 proprioception is essential for skilled movements.
4. Position from lateral recumbency to
Proprioceptive training may help reduce injuries in ath-
stermal position
letes. In a recent randomized controlled trial of highly com-
 5. Standing unsupported 
petitive basketball players, a treated group (n = 81), who
6. Standing with feet together
received a proprioceptive training regimen along with
 7. Standing with one leg raised
normal workouts, was compared with athletes undergoing a
8. Tuming 360 degrees
normal training routine (n = 91).31 Proprioceptive training
9. Stair climbing
was performed once a week and consisted of six stations,
10. Balancing while standing and tuming
each performed twice each for 45 seconds, followed by 30
head
seconds of rest as they switched stations. All exercises were
TOTAL (0-50):
clearly illustrated and showed proper progression. Over the
Score each item from 0 to 5,
course of an entire season, 21 injuries occurred in the control
 0 - unable to perform the activity
 group compared with 7 in the treated group. The treated
1 - barely performs the activity with
 group also showed a more stable single limb stance in the
assistance
frontal plane and overall sway compared with the control
2 - performs activity to some extent with
group. Although this study was performed on humans, it
difficulty, with or without assistance
suggests that proprioceptive training may prevent injuries,
- perfonms activity reasonably well with
and this might also be applicable to animal rehabilitation.
 mild difficulty and no assistance
Finally, in a recent review to help guide clinical decisions
4
- performs activity well with minimal
on prevention of ACL injury with the use of proprioceptive
difficulty and no assistance
and balance training, the authors concluded that there is a
5 - performs the activity nonmally
lack of solid evidence to determine if this type of training
has beneficial effects. However, this was mainly a result of 
INTERPRETATION
poor experimental design of the studies (such as poor
 0-15: Generally needs full support
(sau gno-doip yiu pue suauaan sunuen jo uondos
16-40: Generally can walk with assistance
which at least determined no detrimental effects of proprio-
41-50: Generally independent activity
ceptive training.32 Others have agreed, stating that many
articles combine proprioceptive exercises with plyometrics,
Based on the following in people:
agility, and sport-specific exercises, making the specific
Berg K, Wood-Dauphinee S, Williams Jl, Maki, B: Measuring balance in the elderly:
 effects of each individual treatment difficult to ascertain.33
Validation of an instrument. Car J Pub Health July/August supplement 2:S7-S11,
1992.
Berg K, Wood-Dauphinee S, Williams JI, Gayton D: Measuring balance in the
 Proprioceptive and Balance Training
elderly: preliminary development of an instrument. Physiother Can 41:304-311,
1989.
When an animal is able to safely stand (independently or
 Provided by the Internet Stroke Center: www.strokecenter.org
with assistance), activities to improve balance may begin.
 Balance may be assessed using a scoring system based on
or harmess to provide support for standing (Figure 28-1 ). An
similar evaluation instruments in people (Table 28-1).
advantage of a sling is that the patient is able to maintain a
Static balance is the animal's ability to maintain balance
position with the limbs placed under the body in a standing
while standing, while dynamic balance is the ability to
position, which may provide an opportunity for limb
maintain balance while the body is moving. Static balance
strengthening and early proprioceptive training. Frequent
training is generally performed with the animal in a stand-
episodes of supported standing also help relieve pressure on
ing position, either independently or with support. The
bony prominences and may reduce the chances of decubital
following exercises may be performed to challenge the
ulcer formation. Excessive congestion of the lungs that may
animal's balance. These exercises should be conducted on
result from spending long periods in lateral recumbency
a nonslip surface to reduce the risk of falling.
may be prevented with early implementation of standing in
Body Slings
a sling. A body hamess might be used for patients with tet-
raparesis, but must be adjusted properly so that respiration
Patients with weakness, limited motor function or poor
is not compromised and the limbs are not compressed in the
 proprioception may benefit from placement in a body sling
openings of the harmess. Proper padding is also important
Chapter 28
Exercises for Proprioception and Balance
487
B
Figure 28-1  A, Patients with poor balance or proprioception may benefit from placement in a body sling or harness to provide support for
 standing. B, An elastic band may also be used for support and to provide a form of rhythmic stabilization while standing or walking.
Figure 28-2  Rubber bungee cords may be used to secure a harness
Figure 28-3 For weight shifting of the rear limbs, the therapist is 
 to the supporting frame.
positioned behind the patient, and the hands are placed on either 
side of the pelvis for support.
Weight Shifting
for comfort. The skin should be inspected after each session
in the sling or harmess to identify areas of potential skin
The therapist may begin gentle weight-shifting activities
irritation or breakdown. Rubber bungee cords may be used
 by supporting the animal on either side, and then gently
to secure a harmess to the supporting frame (Figure 28-2).
pushing on one side, then pushing back the other way in a
This may aid in the facilitation of weight bearing and move-
slow, rhythmic fashion. For example, for weight shifting
ment during the sessions. The elasticity of the cord permits
of the rear limbs, the therapist is positioned behind the
some gentle up-and-down movement that encourages the
patient, and the hands are placed on either side of the
animal to safely bear partial weight on its limbs. It also may
pelvis (Figure 28-3). The animal is slowly pushed to
allow some attempts to move forward, backward, and side
One side, while supporting the patient with the other hand.
to side. A gentle bouncing motion may be manually intro-
The animal is then slowly pushed back the other way. As
duced by the therapist to initiate rhythmic stabilization of
balance improves, the speed of the unbalancing move-
muscle groups throughout the trunk and limbs.
ments may increase. Additional challenges may be added
488
Section V
Therapeutie Exercise and Manual Therapy
Hs oi yoy pue yeq paaow s! laoi huoddns 4 tz aanai
the dog's weight ("shoe buff" maneuver).
Figure 28-6  A loaded weight shift is performed by placing force
over the dorsal aspect of the dog's body while shifting the weight to
the affected side.
side challenges the animal sufficiently to allow the activity
to have the desired effect.
In situations of reduced weight bearing on one side, a
loaded weight shift may be performed (Figure 28-6). Dogs
recovering from joint surgery or other conditions that have
reduced weight bearing may benefit from this exercise to
encourage some weight bearing, early muscle strengthen-
 ing. and joint position awareness. For this exercise the
therapist's forearm that is on the side of the injury is placed
across the animal's dorsal pelvis (hindlimbs) or shoulders
(forelimbs) and gentle downward pressure is applied. With
Figure 28-5  Perturbation exercises are performed to disturb the
the other hand, the weight is gently shifted toward the
animal's balance by gently pushing the animal at the hips or shoulder
affected side.
without supporting the opposite side.
Some dogs become conditioned to having the therapist
push on one side to shift the weight to the other side, and
shift their weight back toward the therapist to prevent being
by slowly moving a supporting towel or sling back and
pushed toward the affected side. In this case, a rebound
forth to shift the dog's weight ("shoe buff’ maneuver)
weight shift may be effective. For this maneuver, the thera-
(Figure 28-4).
pist gently pushes the animal toward the affected side as
As balance improves, the handler may perform pertur-
usual. When the animal shifts its weight to resist the move-
bation exercises to disturb the animal's balance by gently
ment, the therapist suddenly releases pressure, and simul-
pushing the animal at the hips or shoulder without support-
taneously pushes gently toward the unaffected side (Figure
ing the opposite side (Figure 28-5). The goal is to disturb
 28-7). This results in a sudden unbalancing; the animal
its balance just enough so the amimal can recover, being
initially shifts its weight toward the unaffected side, but to
careful not to push with a force that may cause the animal
keep from falling, it immediately shifts its weight back
to fall. Generally, pushing the animal to the more affected
toward the affected side.
Chapter 28
Exercises for Proprioception and Balance
489
Figure 28-7  Rebound weight shift to encourage an
 animal to bear weight on the affected limb. The dog's
n
 weight is initially shifted toward the normal (right limb.
 Pressure is suddenly released, resulting in a shift in
weight toward the affected (lef) limb to maintain
balance.
A
Figure 28-8 The therapist encourages weight shifting to help
develop improved proprioception by moving a treat side to side.
Figure 28-9  The therapist is ready to provide support to a patient 
 in the event of a loss of balance.
While the animal is standing, a treat or ball may be used
to encourage weight shifting. The dog will follow the treat
up and down and side to side (Figure 28-8). Start with
(Figure 28-9). As the patient improves, close-distance ball
small movements and progress to larger, more challenging 
 tossing may be performed with the patient on a trampoline
movements. The movement of the head causes the dog's
Or air mattress.
center of gravity (COG) to shift. As the COG shifts, the
Manual unloading of a limb during stance is another
dog must shift its weight to maintain its balance. To main-
 challenge to balance. Lifting and holding a single limb off
tain the unassisted standing position, the animal is required
the ground while the dog is standing cause a shift in the
to use strength, coordination, and balance. If the dog is
animal's COG (Figure 28-10). The animal shifts its body
motivated by ball play, a more challenging form of this
weight and COG to maintain the standing position. During
exercise is close-distance ball tossing from above and the
a session, the handler may lift each leg separately to see
sides. During early attempts at these exercises it may be
where the animal is the weakest and focus on that area in
necessary to have someone available for standby assistance
 successive sessions. If the animal is unable or unwilling to
as the dog may be overchallenged, lose its balance, and fall 
perform this exercise, it will not shift its weight properly,
490
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 28-10   Shifting an animal's center of gravity by lifting a limb 
Figure 28-12  Dynamic weight shifting may also be performed
 off the ground and forcing the patient to redistribute its weight.
while the animal is walked in circles.
After the animal has reasonable balance and proprio-
ception while standing and walking, more challenging
 balance and proprioception exercises may be initiated.
Balance Board
A board placed over a fulcrum, such as a length of pipe,
 may be used to rock the dog forward and backward or side
to side (Figure 28-13). Movement of the surface the dog is
standing on provides additional challenge to the patient. In
most cases, one person helps to support the dog while
standing on the board, while another person slowly rocks
the board back and forth. Initially, the movements are slow
and rhythmic. As the patient improves, the motions may
 be faster and less predictable to challenge the animal to
react quicker.
Figure 28-11  Dynamic balance and proprioception may be chal-
Wobble Board or Quadruped
lenged while gently shifting the dog's weight while walking. Caution
Balance Platform
should be used to avoid too much force so the patient does not fall.
A wobble board or human biomechanical ankle platform
system board may be used to help the animal practice
proprioceptive training on just the forelimbs or the
but instead will bear the weight on the handler's hand or
hindlimbs (Figure 28-14). If the goal is to challenge the
collapse to the ground. A technique to avoid bearing all of
 animal using all four limbs, a balance board large enough
the weight on the handler is to slowly abduct the raised
to accommodate all four limbs may be used (Figure 28-15).
limb, which allows transfer of weight from the handler to
It is important to provide support to allow the animal to
the desired limb to avoid falling.
shift its weight and exercise its proprioception and balance.
Weight shifts may also be performed during walking to
Again, the initial movements are slow and rhythmic, but
 provide challenges to dynamic stability. As the animal is
as the patient improves, the motions may be faster and less
walked in a straight line, the handler gently bumps or
predictable to further challenge the animal.
pushes the animal to one side to challenge the dog to
Exercise Balls and Rolls
maintain its balance (Figure 28-11). Caution should be
used to tailor the force of the push to the animal's stage of
Therapeutic exercise balls and rolls designed for human
recovery to avoid falls and injury. As the patient improves,
use may be employed to improve balance, coordination,
dynamic weight shifting may be performed while the
and strength. The forelimbs may be placed on the ball and
animal is walked in circles, figure eights, or while pole
the patient supported by the handler, requiring the dog to
weaving (Figure 28-12).
maintain static balance of the caudal trunk and rear limbs
Chapter 28
Exercises for Proprioception and Balance
491
A
B
 Figure 28-13  A balance board may be used to provide balance and proprioceptive training from the forelimbs to the hindlimbs (A) or side to
side (B).
Figure 28-15   Using a balance platform to help quadruped animals
 develop improved balance and proprioception.
Figure 28-14 Use of a wobble board or human biomechanical
ankle platform system board under a patient's hindlimbs to assist
with balance and proprioceptive taining. Similar training may be
Jnot lle ylis pueis Aew shop lews io 'sqwaiot ayt isn! ot padde
limbs on the board.
(Figure 28-16). Dynamic balance may also be challenged
as the ball or roll is slowly moved forward, backward, and
side to side, challenging the rear legs to maintain balance
while movement occurs. To address the cranial trunk and
forelimbs, the rear limbs are placed over the ball as the
forelimbs are asked to balance the body weight during both
stance and gentle movements (Figure 28-17).
 Further challenges may be instituted by having the dog
stand on a therapy ball or roll (Figure 28-18). This is
extremely challenging and uses multiple core stabilizing
muscles. Therefore the sessions should be relatively short
Figure 28-16  An exercise roll may be used to challenge balance
to avoid fatigue and possible injury. One person stabilizes
and proprioceptive function. The forelimbs may be placed on the ball
the ball, while one or two people, depending on the size
-ujew oi bop ayl bujnbal laipuey ayl Aq pajoddns juajied ayl pue
of the dog. support the patient. Further challenges are
tain static balance of the caudal trunk and rear limbs.
492
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 28-19 Standing or walking on foam rubber, mattresses, air
mattresses, or trampolines alters the texture of the ground and chal-
lenges the animal's functional balance and proprioceptive ability.
Figure 28-17 To address the canial trunk and forelimbs, the
rear limbs are placed over the exercise roll as the forelimbs are
asked to balance the body weight during both stance and gentle
movements.
Figure 28-20  Walking through vertical weave poles helps develop
 coordination and balance while learning to turn and pivot.
Animals must also develop balance and proprioception
while performing activities of daily living, including
tuming, walking over obstacles, and negotiating stairs.
 Initially, dogs may be walked in large circles, going in
both directions. The radius of the circle may be reduced as
Figure 28-18  A very challenging balance and proprioceptive exer-
the animal improves, and patients may then progress to
cise is to have the animal balance on an exercise roll with all four
walking in a figure-eight patterm. Animals may also benefit
alqissod pioae ot isdeiau aul Aq papiod aq isnw uoddns sqw
by walking through vertical weave poles (Figure 28-20).
injury.
 In addition to helping improve general proprioception,
patients also begin to leam how to contract their limb
 muscles to help stabilize joints while slowly pivoting and
 provided by slowly rocking the therapy ball back and forth
tuming.
or side to side.
 Some dogs must also perform certain activities in their
home environments, such as negotiating stairs or walking
 Functional Training Exercises for Balance
 Over obstacles. Therefore walking up and down stairs may
and Proprioception
be an important activity to challenge proprioception in
Standing or walking on foam rubber, mattresses, air mat-
 some patients. If possible, dogs may begin training on
tresses, or trampolines alters the texture of the ground and
stairs with a gradual rise, walking slowly, and then pro-
 challenges the animal's functional walking proprioceptive 
gress to steeper stairs. Dogs may also walk over cavaletti
ability (Figure 28-19). Animals may also be walked over
rails to begin to judge how high to lift their legs to step
different surfaces, such as grass, concrete, a mulched path,
Over an obstacle. The height of the rails may vary between
a curb, sand, or other surfaces.
different strides, or the rails may be crossed at different
Chapter 28
Exercises for Proprioception and Balance
493
Therapeutic exercises are undoubtedly the most impor-
tant aspects of rehabilitation. They may (and should) be
incorporated with other modalities to enhance recovery.
 but using exercises that help improve proprioception and
 balance are among the earliest aspects of canine rehabilita-
tion. In addition, most of these exercises help improve
muscle strength, joint mobility, and limb use. Although a
variety of techniques have been described, the ingenuity of
the rehabilitation team, including the owner, will allow
the development of other exercises that are specific to a
patient's recovery. The keys to a successful therapeutic
exercise program are to have site- and condition-specific
Figure 28-21  Walking over cavalletti rails helps dogs learn how to
exercises whenever possible, to use a variety of exercises
negotiate obstacles and walk over them by lifting their limbs to the
and techniques to keep the therapy team and patient from
 appropriate height.
becoming bored, and to allow the animal to appropriately
progress to the next phases of rehabilitation.
REFERENCES
1. Waddington GS, Adams RD: The effect of a 5-week wobble-
board exercise intervention on ability to discriminate differ-
ent degrees of ankle inversion, barefoot and wearing shoes:
a study in healthy elderly, J Am Geriatr Soc 52:573-576,
2004.
 2. DiStefano LJ, Clark MA, Padua DA: Evidence supporting
balance training in healthy individuals: a systemic review,
J Strength Cond Res 23(9):2718-2731, 2009.
 3. Yahia LH, Newman N: Mechanoreceptors in the canine ante-
rior cruciate ligaments, Anat Anz 173(4):233-238, 1991.
4. Arcand MA, Rhalmi S, Rivard CH: Quantification of mecha-
noreceptors in the canine anterior cruciate ligament, Int
Orthop 24(5):272-275, 2000.
5. Johansson H, Sjolander P, Sojka P: A sensory role for the
cruciate ligaments, Clin Orthop 268:161-178, 1991.
6. Denti M, Monteleone M, Berardi A et al: Anterior cruciate 
ligament mechanoreceptors. Histologic studies on lesions 
and reconstruction, Clin Orthop 308:29-32, 1994.
7. Adachi N, Ochi M, Uchio Y et al: Mechanoreceptors in the
Figure 28-22  Walking over cavalletti rails while negotiating verti-
anterior cruciate ligament contribute to the joint position
cal weave poles provides additional challenges to balance and
sense, Acta Orthop Scand 73(3):330-334, 2002.
 8. Khalsa Ps, Grigg P: Responses of mechanoreceptor neurons
proprioception.
in the cat knee joint capsule before and after anterior cruciate
ligament transection, J Orthop Res 14(1):1 14-122, 1996.
 angles to provide additional challenges (Figure 28-21).
9. Pai YC, Rymer WZ, Chang RW et al: Effect of age and
Finally, dogs may negotiate vertical weave poles while
osteoarthritis on knee proprioception, Arthritis Rheum 40:
stepping over cavaletti rails to provide additional chal-
2260-2265, 1997.
lenges (Figure 28-22).
10. Westlake KP, Wu Y, Culham EG: Sensory-specific balance
training in older adults: effect on position, movement, and
Summary
velocity sense at the ankle, Phys Ther 87(5):560-568, 2007.
11. Skinner HB, Barrack RL, Cook SD: Age-related decline in
 A rehabilitation program for a patient with proprioceptive
proprioception, Clin Orthop 184:208-211, 1984.
12. Brandt KD: Neuromuscular aspects of osteoarthritis: a per-
 and balance deficits does not need to be elaborate or costly.
spective, Novartis Found Symp 260:49-58, 2004.
Consideration should be given to patient, owner, and thera-
13. Marks R: Further evidence of impaired position sense in knee
pist needs. Although the willingness of the owners to help
osteoarthritis, Physiother Res Int 1(2):127-136, 1996.
with rehabilitation and the education level of the staff influ-
14. Bennell KL, Hinman RS, Metcalf BR et al: Relationship of
ence the rehabilitation program the most, some rehabilita-
 knee joint proprioception to pain and disability in individuals
tion is better than none at all.
with knee oste0arthritis, J Orthop Res 21(5):792-797, 2003.
494
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
15. Skinner HB, Wyatt MP, Hodgdon JA et al: Effect of fatigue
stroke subjects, Arch Phys Med Rehabil 84(10):1458-1465,
on joint position sense of the knee, J Orthop Res 4(1):112-
2003.
118, 1986.
 26. Visintin M, Barbeau H, Korner-Bitensky N et al: A new
16. Lattanzio PJ, Petrella RJ, Sproule JR et al: Effects of fatigue
approach to retrain gait in stroke patients through body
on knee proprioception, Clin J Sport Med 7(1):22-27, 1997.
 weight support and treadmill stimulation, Stroke 29(6):1 122-
 17. Bartlett MJ, Warten PJ: Effect of warming up on knee pro-
1128, 1998.
prioception before sporting activity, Br J Sports Med
 27. Chen IC, Cheng PT, Chen CL et al: Effects of balance train-
36(2):132-134, 2002.
ing on hemiplegic stroke patients, Chang Gung Med J
18. Uchio Y, Ochi M, Fujihara A et al: Cryotherapy infuences
25(9):583-590, 2002.
joint laxity and position sense of the healthy knee joint, Arch.
 28. Weiss A, Suzuki T, Bean J et al: High intensity strength
Phys Med Rehabil 84(1): 131-135, 2003.
training improves strength and functional performance after
19. Dover G, Powers ME: Cryotherapy does not impair shoulder
stroke, Am J Phys Med Rehabil 79(4):369-376, 2000.
joint position sense, Arch Phys Med Rehabit 85:1241-1246,
 29. Teixeira-Salmela LF, Olney SJ, Nadeau S et al: Muscle
2004.
strengthening and physical conditioning to reduce impair-
20. McNair PJ, Marshall RN, Maguire K et al: Knee joint effu-
 ment and disability in chronic stroke survivors, Arch Phys
sion and proprioception, Arch Phys Med Rehabil 76(6):566-
Med Rehabil 80(10):1211-1218, 1999.
568, 1995.
 30. Streepey JW, Mock MJ, Riskowski JL et al: Effects of quad-
21. Sell S, Zacher J, Lack S: Disorders of proprioception of the
riceps and hamstrings proprioceptive neuromuscular facilita-
arthrotic knee joint, Z Rheumato! 52(3):150-155, 1993.
tion stretching on knee movement sensation, J Strength Cond
22. Jerosch J, Prymka M: Proprioceptive capacities of the healthy
Res 24(4):1037-1042, 2010.
knee joint: modification by an elastic bandage, Sportverletz
 31. Eils E, Schroter R, Schroder M et al: Multistation proprio-
Sportschaden 9(3):72-76, 1995.
 ceptive exercise program prevents ankle injuries in basket-
23. Callaghan MJ, Selfe J, McHenry A et al: Effects of patellar
ball, Med Sei Sports Exerc 42(11):2098-2105, 2010.
taping on knee joint proprioception in patients with patello-
 32. Owen JL, Campbell S, Falkner SJ et al: Clinical question:
femoral pain syndrome, Manual Ther 13:192-199, 2008.
 Is there evidence that proprioception or balance training can
24. Hesse S, Bertelt C, Jahnke MT et al: Treadmill training with 
partial body weight support compared with physiotherapy in
without previous ACL injury? Phys Ther 86(10):1436-1440,
nonambulatory hemiparetic patients, Stroke 26(6):976-981,
2006.
1995.
 33. Zech A, Hibscher M, Vogt L et al: Neuromuscular training
25. Barbeau H, Visintin M: Optimal outcomes obtained with
for rehabilitation of sports injuries: a systematic review, Med
u huuen lupen yim peuguoo joddns uaea-apog
Sci Sports Exerc 41(10):1831-1841, 2009.
Therapeutic Exercises: Early
Limb Use Exercises
Darryl L. Millis, Marti Drum, and David Levine
herapeutic exercise is perhaps the most valuable
animal improves clinically and tissue healing progresses,
modalities used in canine physical rehabilitation.
the exercise plan should be altered to match the animal's
 Therapeutic exercise is an important method to
 progress and appropriately challenge the involved tissues.
assist an animal's returm to the best function possible. In
The intensity of an exercise may be increased or reduced
addition, the equipment needed is relatively inexpensive,
by changing the duration of time that an animal performs
and similar principles apply to a variety of individuals
 an exercise, the frequency with which an exercise is per-
and conditions. Therapeutic exercise programs designed
formed, and the rate or speed at which a particular exercise
for the home environment also provide an opportunity
is performed (Box 29-1). Any of these may be altered to
for owners to become actively involved in their pet's
rehabilitation.
outcome goals. In general, the frequency of the activity is
 Some of the common goals of early limb use exercises
increased frst if the patient is severely affected. For
 are to improve active pain-free range of motion; muscle
example, a realistic initial goal for a morbidly obese,
mass and muscle strength to allow weight bearing, balance,
 deconditioned patient with degenerative joint disease may
and performance of activities of daily living; lameness;
be to increase the amount of time the dog is able to com-
aerobic capacity; and weight loss and to help prevent
fortably tolerate walking by increasing the frequency of
further injury.14
leash walks from twice daily to three times daily and
When designing a therapeutic exercise program, several
finally to four times daily. This strategy helps to improve
factors must be considered. A problem list is developed
endurance and promote weight reduction, while limiting
 based on an initial evaluation of the rehabilitation patient,
fatigue or muscle soreness. Increasing the length or dura-
realistic outcome goals are established, and a treatment
tion of activity is usually the next phase of activity. For
plan is formulated to address the identified problems. Ther-
example, the dog may progress from walking 5 minutes
apeutic exercise is a significant component of the treatment
four times per day to 6 minutes four times per day the next
 plan. Appropriate exercises are those that can be performed
week. Increasing the speed at which the dog walks may
safely and effectively and accomplish the therapeutic
not be a realistic initial goal for this animal at this point.
goals. When prescribing therapeutic exercise, the therapist
A contrasting example may be an athletic animal recover-
should understand the diagnosis, identify the structure or
 ing from injury that must be challenged to improve speed
structures involved, and recognize the stage of tissue
and endurance to meet the goal to retum to performance
recovery with the resultant functional limitations. It is
activity. This type of patient may progress from jogging 20
important to remember that the force placed on the body
 minutes per session to playing ball in an enclosed run. It
with exercise should not exceed the strength of healing
is important for the therapist to have an understanding of
tissues.
 a e  si    s
The focus on patients that have serious affictions with
during rehabilitation treatment. Routine reevaluation of the
limited to no weight bearing on the affected limbs centers
patient is recommended to assess the adaptations that are
 On early limb use and is the topic of this chapter. As
occurring with the rehabilitation treatment plan and to
patients are able to bear weight and begin to use their
 determine the appropriate rate of progression.
limbs, the emphasis shifts to improving proprioception and
Common activities to encourage early limb use include
balance for patients with neurologic conditions or those
standing exercises, controlled leash activities, ground
recovering from joint injury or surgery, as described in
treadmill activity, taping a bottle or syringe cap to the
Chapter 28. Finally, as patients improve with an approach
 bottom of an unaffected foot to encourage weight bearing.
to maximal expected function, the emphasis should be on
slinging the contralateral good limb, and using balance
strength, speed, and joint motion exercises, which are the
 balls or rolls. The exercise plan should target the affected
focus of Chapter 30.
 muscles and other structures. The type of injury or repair
Treatment considerations and the choice of exercises
 must be considered when formulating a treatment plan. For
vary with each stage of tissue repair and endurance. As the
example, the postoperative treatment of hip dysplasia
495
496
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Box 29-1
Therapeutic Exercise Strategies
 Exercise is generally increased as the patient and healing
tissues allow:
1. Increase frequency of activity (e.g, from twice daily to
three times daily, and then to four times daily).
2. Increase the duration of activity (e.g., from 5 minutes to 6
minutes)
3. Increase the speed or intensity of activity (e.g., increasing
from a walk to a slow jog, and then from a slow jog to a
medium trot).
 In general, it is safe to increase the amount of activity 10-15%
 per week, as long as there is no increase in pain, decreases in
function, etc.
differs depending on whether a femoral head and neck
excision or a total hip replacement was performed. With
this knowledge and understanding, appropriate decisions 
can be made regarding therapeutic exercise choices.
Therapeutic exercise routines should be monitored at
regular intervals by a trained individual familiar with the
Figure 29-1  Support while standing is beneficial for patients with
patient and the exercise techniques. Inappropriate exercise
limited ability to stand and bear body weight. A sling may be used
or improper technique may result in inappropriate stresses,
to provide support for maximal assisted standing of a patient.
further injury, or exacerbation of an existing condition.
Certain exercises may not be safe for the strength, flexibil-
ity, or endurance level of the animal performing the exer-
unable to independently rise from a recumbent position
cise, or an exercise may not be the correct one to accomplish
or support their own body weight, and may begin in
the intended goal.
patients that are receiving adequate pain control following
injuries that are stable. Animals with unstable injuries or
Standing Exercises
in pain resist standing and may further injure themselves
 Or the therapist while struggling.
It is appropriate to begin assisted standing exercises in
Assisted Standing Exercises
patients with adequate muscle tone and some ability of the
Patients with severe injuries or debilitating conditions may
limbs to initiate motion and resist collapse of the body
not be able to stand and support their own body weight. A
(adequate upper motor neuron function). Patients with
period of standing, either completely or partially assisted,
lower motor neuron signs have little or no muscle tone
may strengthen the patient, aid in proprioceptive training.
and faccidity of the limbs. Although patients with lower
improve circulation and respiration, provide an opportu-
motor neuron conditions will likely benefit from standing
nity to eliminate, and enhance the patient's psychological
exercises, it is unlikely that they will be able to fully
well-being. The purposes of assisted standing exercises are
support their weight, and some additional assistance will
to encourage neuromuscular function, reeducate muscles,
be required.
develop strength and stamina of supporting postural
 Depending on animal size and weight, the handler can
muscles, and enhance proprioception.
manually lift or use an assistive device such as a pelvic
Maximal assisted standing is appropriate for patients
sling, abdominal sling, or thoracic sling to assist the animal
that are unable to support their body weight as a result of
from a recumbent to a supported standing position. To
paralysis, paresis, pain, trauma, postoperative precautions,
perform standing exercises, a sling is placed under the
Or general debilitation. Maximal assistance may be defined
cranial thorax, caudal abdomen, or both for conditions
as support of 75% to 100% of the patient's body weight
affecting the forelimbs, rear limbs, or both, respectively.
by the handler to maintain a standing posture. Animals
After the animal is in a supported standing position, the
with multiple orthopedic injuries (especially pelvic frac-
handler or a second person manually places the animal's
tures following repair or after a period of healing), neuro-
limbs in a normal stance position, with the feet positioned
logic conditions, or severe debilitation are excellent
squarely on the ground. Even distribution of the animal's
candidates for assisted standing exercises (Figure 29-1).
weight on the ground allows for greater stability and
Assisted standing exercises are among the first therapeutic
 may provide position sense, which provides proprioceptive
exercises prescribed for severely afflicted animals that are
input and facilitates the animal's awareness of its joints.
Chapter 29
Therapeutic Exercises: Early Limb Use Exercises
497
B
S'g bupueis ioy toddns apaoid day o bus e jo asn 'v 'sqw aldnw u ssauyea busnes supuos jayio io sisaiedenal Z-az aanb
'uoisod bupueis e ou! yoeq bop ayi shl isidelayi ayt 'ls oi sidwale pue anbiey oi sujbaq jualied au1
Additional limb awareness can be encouraged via proprio-
to active assisted standing occurs when the animal is able
ceptive neurosensory facilitation techniques such as tick-
to actively support some of its weight, requiring only
ling the paw or distal segments, ascending circular touching.
 partial assistance from the handler (less than 75% of body
or back brushing the hair of the limbs.
weight). The animal should be encouraged to support as
The animal should be encouraged to support its body
much of its weight as possible. The handler provides only
weight as it is able, and the therapist gives only the neces-
the additional assistance required to maintain a standing
sary assistance to maintain the standing position (Figure
position or prevent loss of balance. The amount of assis-
29-2, A). While supporting the animal, the handler slowly
tance required may be documented by recording the actual
releases tension on the assistive device, allowing the animal
weight the handler is required to support for the animal to
to continue weight bearing as much as it is able. Alterma-
maintain a standing position, as well as the length of time
tively, it may be easier for the therapist to support the
the animal can maintain a standing position. The animal
patient manually with a hand placed on the ventral pelvis
may require periodic rests during a treatment session. As
 to maintain the rear limbs in a normal position, preventing
the animal's strength and endurance improve, the duration
inappropriate crossing or a base narrow stance. Because
of each session may be increased, the number of rest
the animal is encouraged to accept and support a portion
 periods decreased, and the amount of assistance decreased.
of its weight, strength, balance, coordination, and proprio-
ception are challenged. If the dog begins to collapse, the
Standby Assisted Standing
sling is gently pulled up to assist the patient back into the
standing position and the exercise is repeated (Figure 29-2,
The next progression in standing activities is standby
B). It is important to place the limbs in a square standing
assisted standing. At this point of the recovery, the animal
position to give neuromuscular feedback and to also allow
has the strength and motor control necessary to support
the animal to stand in a stable fashion.
itself against gravity in a standing position. However, it 
 During a treatment session, the animal may need periods
may still experience ataxia or weakness and have an occa-
of rest. Although the duration of each session should match
sional loss of balance, requiring standby assistance. The
the animal's tolerance, an initial starting goal is 5 to 15
therapist should be behind the animal or at the animal's
repetitions two to three times daily, gradually increasing to
side, ready to guard against a fall caused by a loss of
standing 5 minutes per session. Individual patients pro-
balance (Figure 29-3). The therapist does not assist the dog
 gress at different rates. The therapist can keep track of and
unless support is needed to prevent a fall. As strength
document the amount of time the animal is able to stand
improves, the patient will be more willing to advance the
and how much assistance is needed.
limbs if motor function is present. In cases of hindlimb
Active Assisted Standing
paresis, the therapist may also challenge the patient further
by lifting a forelimb to encourage weight bearing on the
As the animal becomes stronger and regains neuromuscu-
hindlimbs. It is also beneficial to lift a forelimb in dogs
lar function, maximal assistance from the handler is not
with unilateral hindlimb weakness to shift the weight to
required. The progression from maximal assisted standing
the hindlimbs.
498
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 29-3  The therapist is ready to provide support to a patient
in the event of a loss of balance. The therapist does not assist the
dog unless support is needed to prevent a fall.
Aquatic Standing
Figure 29-4  A sling that may be used to assist standing. Standing
helps the patient develop stamina and endurance with minimal assis-
Standing in water may be a valuable activity for large
tance required from a therapist.
patients with generalized weakness, lower motor neuron
disease, or other conditions resulting in inability to stand
and support weight. The buoyancy of the water often
results in a patient's willingness to try to stand and bear
on dry ground. Supportive devices, such as life vests,
slings, or harmesses may be used to provide further assis-
tance and support. The reader is referred to Chapter 31 on
aquatic therapy for further details.
Aids for Assisted Standing
Body Slings
 Nonambulatory patients may beneft from placement in a
body sling or hamess to provide support for standing
(Figure 29-4). It may be easier to use a lift device in con-
 junction with a sling to help support larger patients (Figure
29-5). An advantage of a sling is that the patient is able to
maintain a body position with the limbs placed under the
body in a standing position with partial or complete support
Figure 29-5  A lift device may be used in conjunction with a sling
of body weight, which provides an opportunity for limb
to help support larger patients.
strengthening and early proprioceptive training. Frequent
episodes of supported standing also help to relieve pressure
on bony prominences and may reduce the chances of decu-
Rubber bungee cords may be used to secure the sling to
bital ulcer formation and pulmonary complications. Exces-
the supporting frame. This may aid in the facilitation of
sive congestion of the lungs that may result from spending
weight bearing and movement during the sling sessions.
m paaaid aq Arut uaqna [raei ui spad s
The elasticity of the cord permits some gentle up-and-
early implementation of standing in a sling. The body sling
down movement that encourages the animal to safely bear
must be adjusted properly so that respiration is not com-
partial weight on its limbs. It also may allow some attempts
promised and the limbs are not compressed in the openings
to move forward, backward, and side to side. A gentle
of the sling. Proper padding is also important for comfort.
bouncing motion may be manually introduced by the thera-
The skin should be inspected after each session in the sling
pist to initiate rhythmic stabilization of muscle groups
to identify areas of potential skin irritation or breakdown.
throughout the trunk and limbs.
Chapter 29
Therapeutic Exercises: Early Limb Use Exercises
499
Figure 29-6 A variety of exercise rolls exist so that the appropriate
size may be picked for nearly any size patient.
Figure 29-8  Patients with limited ability to bear their own weight
 may be placed over an exercise roll such that the body straddles the
roll with weight supported by the roll. The animal is placed in a
 standing position over an appropriately sized exercise roll that may
bueag lyhiam aseaoui jo sabualieup jeuonppe apiaoid oi pasn ag
on the front or rear limbs or to assist standing (the roll provides
greater lateral support and stability than a round exercise ball). The
size should allow the animal to touch the ground with all four feet.
should allow the animal to touch the ground with all four
feet (Figure 29-8). If the roll is too tall, it may be deflated
to meet the animal's height. Rolls that are slightly defated
Figure 29-7  It is sometimes helpful to have very small dogs strad-
 are softer, more stable, and easier to work with than those
-peiis s! bop e oioud siyi ul 'sjamoi jaded po loi jo lou weoy e alp
that are fully inflated and very finm. The softer roll con-
dling a foam roll to facilitate neuromuscular electrical stimulation.
forms to the animal's body better and is more comfortable.
After the animal is secure on the roll, one person stabilizes
the front of the animal and another, if needed, stabilizes
Exercise Rolls
the rear.
A properly fitted infatable exercise roll (physioroll,
While the animal is supported in a standing position
peanut) or a bolster may also be used to actively assist
with paws on the ground, the handler can generate a very
the animal with weight bearing, balance, coordination,
gentle up-and-down bouncing motion through the patient
strength, and weight shifting. The advantage of this form
 and the inflated roll. This provides proprioceptive input and
of assisted standing is that patients may stand indepen-
may stimulate contraction of the supporting limb muscles.
dently, stand for longer periods, and avoid the problems
Dynamic balance and weight bearing may also be chal-
inherent with long-term standing in a sling, such as com-
lenged in the thoracic or pelvic limbs as the therapists shift
pression of the upper limbs as they exit through the holes
the roll forward and backward. As the animal becomes
of a sling. A variety of exercise rolls exist so that the
stronger, these same techniques may be performed at faster
appropriate size may be picked for nearly any size patient
speeds to provide greater challenges to neuromuscular
(Figure 29-6). In very small dogs, it is sometimes helpful
function and balance. It is recommended to perform stand-
to have them straddle a foam roll or roll of paper towels
ing over a roll during mealtimes, to allow the patient to
(Figure 29-7). Using the roll as an assistive device also
focus on food and not on the therapist. This also provides
relieves stress on the handlers. Unless the animal is small,
positive reinforcement and relaxation for anxious patients
this technique may require two people to properly assist
and tends to decrease the extensor rigidity for brief periods
the patient into position.
in patients with upper motor neuron signs.
Patients with limited ability to bear their own weight
Carts
may be placed over an exercise roll such that the body
straddles the roll with weight supported by the roll. The
Mobility carts and their associated slings may be used as
animal is placed in a standing position over an appropri-
assistive devices for active assisted activities. Several man-
ately sized exercise roll (the roll provides greater lateral
ufacturers offer supportive carts for dogs, cats, and other
support and stability than a round exercise ball). The size
animals. These carts are designed to assist with ambulation
500
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 29-10 Commercial canine treadmills are available for
rehabilitation.
Figure 29-9   A four-wheeled cart may be used for assisted ambula-
 tion in patients with tetraparesis.
should begin with the use of a fabric or elastic band sling.
harmess, or canine cart. The handler should assess the ani-
 of animals that are unable to support adequate weight for
mal's needs before choosing the appropriate device.
ambulation. Common indications for cart use are paralysis,
Encourage the dog to move slowly, allowing time for the
paresis, severe arthritis, trauma in multiple limbs, and gen-
dog to advance the limbs as independently as possible.
eralized weakness affecting one or more limbs. Carts allow
Allow adequate time for the feet to come in contact with
the animal to have some degree of independence and
the ground with each step during the stance phase of gait.
reduce the lifting and support needed from a caregiver.
It may be necessary for the handler to manually assist the
Two-wheeled carts may be used for patients with active
dog in the sequencing and placement of the limbs as the
forelimb function, and four-wheeled carts are appropriate 
animal relearms the walking gait. If the animal moves too
for patients with all limbs affected (Figure 29-9).
quickly, it will often avoid bearing weight on a painful
It is important that the cart be properly sized and fitted
limb, adopting an abnormal gait, such as a three-legged
to ensure comfort and adequate function. Most manufac-
lameness, hopping, or dragging of a limb. The emphasis is 
turers provide specific instructions regarding proper mea-
m  s   oa  g  u
surements to provide a custom fit. The therapist can assist
slowly. It is important for each person handling the dog to
with the measuring and fitting process. In addition, the cart
be consistent and not allow the dog to move too quickly.
should have adequate padding for comfort and to prevent 
 For food-motivated dogs, choosing a highly desirable treat 
chafing or breakdown of skin, but it should not interfere
that is only used when encouraging movement can help
with the use of functional limbs.
positively associate movement or the active attempts at
If the animal has some functional use of the limbs, the
movement during a therapy session. In some cases, dogs
devices should be adjusted to the patient's height so the
may be stimulated to ambulate to a greater degree if other
feet may be placed (either manually by the therapist or
animals are present and a game of "assisted chasing"
 independently by the animal) in a normal weight-bearing
ensues.
position on the ground. The patient should not dangle
Treadmill Walking
above the ground in the cart because this may compromise
circulation and place undue pressure on soft tissues that
Walking on a treadmill is very useful in rehabilitation.
are in contact with the supporting structures of the cart.
Most dogs trained to a leash readily take to treadmill
Patients with poor motor or proprioceptive function may
walking in one or two sessions. A variety of treadmills are
benefit from foot protection (rubber booties or infant
available for use, including commercial canine treadmills
socks) to prevent trauma to the dorsum of the paws. Patients
(Figure 29-10). A number of models available for human
with no motor function will likely need to have their feet
use may be modifed for canine use by adding an overhead
 maintained in a non-weight-bearing position.
 bar with a support system to which a canine harmness can
attach. A harmess is useful to help support the dog in case
it stumbles or falls. Altermatively, a therapist may support
Dynamic Ambulation Activities
the dog with a sling while on the treadmill. Side rails or
fences placed on both sides of the treadmill are useful if a
Assisted Ambulation and Gait Training
dog tends to step off to the side. Other useful features
If a dog is unable to walk independently, an assistive device
include variable speed control, a timer, and the ability to
may be used to support the animal as needed. Gait training
change the incline or decline of the surface.
Chapter 29
Therapeutic Exercises: Early Limb Use Exercises
501
Treadmills are useful for patterming gait and encourag-
ing initial weight bearing following surgery. When the dog
stands with the foot carried near the ground, it will gener-
ally begin to bear weight when it is walked on a treadmill.
It is important that the treadmill not face toward a wall;
rather, it should face toward a hallway or the middle of a
room to encourage unimpeded walking. Having one person
standing in front of the dog with words of encouragement
or treats and one person straddling the dog behind is
 helpful in the early training stages to keep the dog walking
straight.
Walking on a treadmill for the frst time is a new and
sometimes awkward experience. Animals are not used to
the ground moving under them, so when they walk on a
mov ing belt, proprioception, coordination, and balance are
challenged. The ground moving undermeath the dog often
Figure 29-11 A syringe cap, rigid toe extension attached to a boot.
encourages a dog that is non-weight bearing on a limb as
or any mild irritant (such as a marble or bottle cap) placed on the
a result of an orthopedic condition to begin using the limb.
bottom of the contralateral, unaffected foot may encourage weight 
In many instances, the animal will continue to use the limb
 bearing in patients that are reluctant to place weight on a limb.
even after the treadmill session is over. For patients with
neurologic conditions, it may be necessary to support the
from neurologic conditions, such as intervertebral disk her-
dog with a sling or harmess. The therapist may stand or
niation surgery. Patients with little motor function may
squat beside a dog and manually advance a foot during the
simply kick the limbs in an uncoordinated fashion in the
normal gait sequence to correct abnormal foot placement,
beginning, but such activity results in muscle contraction
such as knuckling over, and encourage gait reeducation.
Assisted active advancement of a limb during the swing
lar coordination and function. It is important to provide
phase of gait can also be performed by using an elastic band.
assistance and support and not allow vigorous swimming
An animal with conscious proprioceptive deficits or muscle
 initially. As the patient improves, the assistance is gradu-
weakness may have difficulty advancing the limb during the
ally reduced.
swing phase of gait; these patients can be assisted by using
an elastic band to help advance the limb. After one end of
Aids for Dynamic Ambulation
the elastic band is attached to the foot or just above the hock,
the other end is secured to the body with the direction of
Wallang Slings
pull designed to assist active advancement of the limb during
Commercially available canine slings should be durable,
gait. The handler may also use the elastic band to advance
fexible, and washable and should conform to the body.
the limb and manually place the foot as the animal walks on
They are available for the forelimbs and hindlimbs and for
the treadmill. A rigid toe extension attached to a boot,
trunk support. When using rear limb slings it is important
syringe cap, or any mild irritant (such as a marble or bottle
that bowel and bladder function are not obstructed.
cap) placed on the bottom of the contralateral, umaffected
Adjustable-length handles for the therapist to grip make a
foot may encourage weight bearing in patients that are reluc-
sling a more ergonomic choice of assistive device than a
tant to place weight on a limb (Figure 29-11).
bath towel because the sling allows the handler to stand
erect without bending forward while carrying the weight
of the dog and reduces excessive stress to the handler's
Aquatic Therapy
forearm, wrist, shoulders, and back. This is an important
 In addition to standing in water, patients that have some
concerm, especially if the handler will be assisting a large
motor function may greatly benefit from walking in
dog several times a day for any length of time. It is impor-
water or on an underwater treadmill. The buoyancy of the
tant for persons handing the animal to practice proper
water, combined with ambulation, results in support while
body mechanics while assisting the canine patient to avoid
walking. Further support may be provided by using life
injuring themselves. The ideal sling length and position for
vests, slings, hamesses, or an assistant in the water. Elastic
 the handler is to simulate carrying a suitcase or large bag.
bands may be used to help advance limbs in the water.
and not bending over to stress the back, while making sure
After each aquatic use, the bands should be laid fat
the patient is able to position the paws in a weight-bearing
and allowed to thoroughly dry to prevent degradation
position without dragging the toes or dorsum of the paw
and tearing of the elastic. Assisted swimming is also pos-
on the ground. The sling may be used for both orthopedic
sible in patients, especially smaller patients recovering
and neurologic patients in need of assisted ambulation.
502
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Independent Ambulation
Towels
A long towel may be used as a last resort to support an animal
Leash Walking
that requires assistance with standing or ambulation. Towels
are readily available, inexpensive, and washable but can be
Slow leash walks are perhaps the most important exercise
problematic and are often more diffcult than slings with
 in the early rehabilitative period, and they are commonly
handles for the therapist or owner, especially in patients
performed incorrectly. Walking the animal slowly encour-
requiring long-term assistance. When assisting the dog's
ages the use of all limbs in a sequenced gait patterm. Walks
hindlimbs, the handler should place the towel around the
must be slow enough to allow weight bearing; if the dog
abdomen just in front of the hindlimbs in the inguinal region.
is walked too fast, the tendency is to simply hold the
Nylon straps are a highly recommended modification and
 intended limb up in a fexed position and not bear any
may be sewn onto the ends of the towel to provide added
weight on it. Slow leash walking is indicated when the
 length so the handler can maintain proper body mechanics.
animal is reluctant to use a limb as a result of pain, weak-
A disadvantage of towels on larger dogs with urinary
 ness, or proprioceptive deficits. Slow leash walks encour-
incontinence is that it puts pressure on the urinary bladder
 age placement of each limb on the ground, increasing
and may cause it to be expressed. This is less likely to
 stance time and weight bearing.
 happen with a properly fitted commercial pelvic sling.
If there are no contraindications to weight bearing, slow
leash walks may begin very soon after most orthopedic pro-
Elastic Bands
cedures. Behavior modification is important. The dog should
It is often beneficial to "graduate" a patient from a more
be praised when touching the limb to the ground, and not
supportive sling into a more dynamic sling. Elastic bands
praised when the leg is held up. As the animal regains use of
used for gait patterming or resistance exercises are an excel-
the affected limb and is consistently able to place the limb at
lent means to provide some support and concurrent
a slow leash walk, the pace of the walk may be increased.
dynamic feedback during weight bearing. There are several
Faster walks further challenge balance, coordination, proprio-
levels of resistance and thickness that should be matched
ception, and cardiorespiratory endurance, as well as func-
to the patients’ size and functional ability. Lighter weight
tional muscle strengthening and endurance. When an animal
 bands are ideal for smaller patients even as an initial sling.
is weight bearing well at slow and fast speeds, an additional
Heavier weight slings can be used in medium to large dogs
challenge is to focus on speed transitions while walking.
with moderate functional ability both as a support and a
 Often the patient will have difficulty increasing or decreasing
gait challenge. The elastic band in this stage can be used
speeds, which requires significant muscular control and coor-
to pull the patient off balance to one side, while providing
 dination in animals recovering from surgery, neurologic con-
enough support to “"catch" the patient so it doesn't fall
ditions, or significant musculoskeletal injuries. Animals
during walking or standing exercises. Bands may also be
recovering from neurologic conditions may be challenged by
 attached to hamesses to provide resistance during gait.
gently pushing the animal off-balance while walking, using
the handler's leg or an elastic band sling, thus encouraging
Carts
proprioceptive development. The therapist must be certain
 Mobility carts are appropriate for temporary use as the
that the animal is not unbalanced so much that it falls, however.
animal regains its ability to ambulate independently, as
When appropriate, the therapist may alter the exercise treat
well as for permanent use for animals that will not regain
ment plan to include fast walking, slow jogging, and running
full function. After a period of acclimation for both the
on a long lead.
animal and owner, a properly fitted cart may result in a
Treadmill Walking
positive change in the quality of life for both. When the
animal is mobile in a cart, that mobility fosters indepen-
 Treadmills may be useful during rehabilitation programs
dence that may have a profound positive effect on the
as a continuation of assisted ambulation or for conditions
animal's attitude. Carts with fabric sling supports can be
in which extension of the hip or stife is painful, such as
readily adjusted to allow preferential support or challenge
hip dysplasia or postoperative recovery from cranial cruci-
to individual limbs. Additionally, elastic bands tied to the
 ate ligament surgery. Normally, patients are reluctant to
cart can be used to provide additional resistance for indi-
perform activities such as climbing stairs, because exten-
vidual limbs or to help a weak limb advance, similar to
sion of these joints is painful. Treadmill walking is less
elastic band use on land treadmill exercises.
painful in some patients because the belt provides assis-
The home environment may need to be altered to allow
tance with hip and stife extension by helping to pull the
the animal to freely ambulate in the cart without encounter-
rear limb caudally. There is less need for active contraction
ing dangerous conditions. The animal's exercise area
of the gluteal and quadriceps muscles for joint extension
should be free of obstructions that could hinder the ani-
when walking on a treadmill than when walking on land.
mal's ability to safely ambulate in the cart. Particular
The treadmill may be angled up or down to reduce or
caution should be taken to prevent falls down stairs.
increase the forces placed on the forelimbs or hindlimbs.
Chapter 29
Therapeutic Exercises: Early Limb Use Exercises
503
conditions because it requires the dog to reach under the
body with the hindlimbs, requiring fexion of the hock,
stifle, and hip. Start with gently sloping, short declines and
progress to steeper ones as the dog is able. If an incline or
decline is too challenging, an easier introduction is to walk
on a gently sloped hill in a serpentine pattem or on the
diagonal up, down, or both until the patient is strong
enough to navigate the incline and decline in a straight line.
Additionally, diagonal climbing and descent can be used
to alter the challenge to an affected limb depending on if
the limb is uphill or downhill. For example, if the affected
limb is on the downhill side while ascending diagonally,
the joints and muscles perform with the limb in a more
Figure 29-12 walking or jogging the dog up inclines aids in
extended position. Conversely, if the affected limb is on
strengthening of the quadriceps, semitendinosus, semimembranosus,
the uphill side while ascending diagonally, the joints and
and gluteal muscles with relatively low-impact activity.
muscles perform with the limb in a more fexed position.
The speed and length of treadmill walking may be increased
Other Methods to Encourage
as the animal recovers and gains strength and stamina.
Weight Bearing
Also, varying intervals of high and low speeds within a
session may be introduced.
In some situations, a patient may be reluctant to use a limb
after injury or surgery, even though the stage of recovery
 Inclines and Declines
is such that limb use would normally be expected. It is
Walking or jogging the dog up inclines aids in strengthen-
important to always rule out any pathologic causes of poor
ing of the quadriceps, semitendinosus, semimembranosus,
limb use, such as failed implants, infection, other concur-
and gluteal muscles with relatively low-impact activity
rent conditions, and so on. If there is no pathologic cause
(Figure 29-12). Rear limb muscle strength is required for
of poor limb use, and pain is adequately controlled, other
the dog to propel itself up an incline, whereas forelimb
measures may be used to encourage limb use.
muscle strength and eccentric contraction of both forelimb
A syringe cap, coin, or marble may be placed on the
and hindlimb muscles are required for the dog to brake
bottom of the uninjured foot and held in place with adhesive
itself while going down a declined surface. Walking should
tape to encourage weight bearing on the affected limb (see
be done slowly and on leash; otherwise the dog may only
Figure 29-11). Also, creating limb length differences with
toe-touch with the limb or hop in a non-weight-bearing
rigid or semistiff toe extensions attached to the foot with
fashion. In addition, if the head is held up slightly while
an elastic wrap or attached to a boot may also be used for
walking up an incline, the weight will be shifted caudally,
gait perturbations. In many instances, weight bearing con-
requiring the animal to drive up the hill with the rear limbs
tinues on the affected limb even after the item is removed
and use the muscles to a greater extent. Conversely, if the
from the good foot. Some dogs will build up a tolerance
head is held in a downward position, the weight will be
to the item; therefore continuous application is not recom-
shifted cranially, requiring the forelimb muscles to engage 
mended. In some particularly difficult cases, a nonweight-
for braking. It is often easier to control the dog's head and
bearing sling may be placed on the nonaffected limb to
body position on inclines if wearing a halter and harmess 
force the animal to bear weight on the affected limb. In our 
rather than a neck lead.
experience, this technique is less effective because many
Weight bearing while climbing promotes strengthening
animals simply lie down and will not attempt to walk.
 of the quadriceps and gluteal muscles. When the limb is in
Side bending and vertical head movements to follow a
the stance phase of gait and the body is traveling forward,
 toy or treat are often useful to encourage affected limb use.
the stife and hip must extend to propel the animal forward.
The patient should be positioned in an even, square stance
If extension is painful, the dog's stance time on the limb
with all four limbs and slowly asked to bend to the left and
may be shortened and an altered gait may result. Inclines
right, with the goal being to touch the nose to the stife.
and declines should be introduced slowly, beginning with
For vertical movements, the dog should reach up slowly to
 gradual slopes. As the dog's range of motion and strength
a comfortable point and then down, with the goal being to
improve, the dog may be challenged by walking up longer,
 position the head between the forelimbs. This exercise not
steeper slopes and by increasing the duration and speed of
only enhances spinal flexibility but also redistributes body
the climbing exercise.
weight to encourage weight bearing and position aware-
Walking down declines is useful for strengthening the
ness of the affected limbs. Caution should be exercised in
triceps muscles, and is typically more difficult for hindlimb
patients with nonsurgical spinal injuries or postoperative
504
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
the length of playtime, how to use the toy to maximize
the rehabilitation process, and limits of play to reduce the
chance of fatigue and injury.
Progression of Exercises
Many variables must be considered in the design of a
therapeutic exercise program, including the type and sever-
ity of the condition; the stability of any surgical repairs;
the number of involved limbs and joints; the size of the
animal; the preexisting physical condition of the patient;
the available facilities; the skill and experience of the thera-
 pist; and whether the exercises will be administered by a
professional, the owner, or a combination of the owner and
a professional. Unfortunately, it is impossible to have a
Figure 29-13 Many cats will readily chase the spot of light from
single protocol for each specific condition. Some basic
a flashlight or laser pointer around a room. Care should be taken to
 guidelines may be applied, however.
have good footing, such as carpeting.
The goal of any therapeutic exercise program should be
to restore the animal to as full and active use as possible.
spinal cases, and movements should be minimal and well
The goal may need to be periodically adjusted if the patient 
within the voluntary range of comfort for the patient. This
progresses to a greater or lesser degree than expected. The
technique is contraindicated in animals with an unstable
initial goal should be to have the patient bear its full weight
spinal canal or those with unstable intervertebral disks.
while standing. The next step should be assisted active
Hemiwalking is sometimes useful to encourage weight
ambulation. Proprioceptive training should occur concur-
bearing on a particular limb. This exercise is performed by
rently with active ambulation, with the goal to have unas-
elevating the ipsilateral fore- and rear limbs off the ground
sisted active ambulation while maintaining balance. As the
and shifting the weight to the contralateral limbs. The
animal nears returm to house-pet function, strategies should
animal must move the contralateral fore- and rear limbs
laterally to avoid losing balance and falling. Although this
 muscle mass.
is generally more successful than placing a sling on a limb,
 It is very important to perform the exercises correctly
some animals may still resist and simply lie down.
 and to maintain a consistent level of activity daily or every
Many cats will readily chase the spot of light from a
other day. In most cases, several short sessions per day will
fashlight or laser pointer around a room. Care should be
be more effective than a single long session early in the
taken to have good footing, such as carpeting, and to move 
recovery period. Overdoing activity on the weekends with
the light at a speed appropriate for the animal's stage of
relatively little activity during the rest of the week will
recovery (Figure 29-13). Feathers and refective material
likely be detrimental to the animal's recovery; regular,
on a string or stick are also useful as a lure in feline
daily activity will avoid the "weekend warrior"' syndrome.
rehabilitation. In addition, stretching may be employed
A general rule of thumb is to increase the activity by
by moving the light or feather along a vertical surface,
10-15% each week. If pain or lameness increases during
such as a wall. Some dogs will also chase a laser pointer
or several hours after stepping up an activity, the level of
light. Caution is advised using this technique because
activity should be reduced by 50% for 3 to 7 days. If the
some animals, particularly dogs, may become obsessive-
lameness and pain resolve, the activity may be slowly
compulsive and develop chronic or permanent behavior
increased back to the pre-step-up activity level over 3 to 5
problems when encouraging light-chasing exercises.
days, with careful observation to be certain that the activity
Many cats and dogs have been well conditioned to the
      o  n 
sound of a can opener or other audible cues such as a door
subsequent step-up activity should be half of what it origi-
 opening to go for a walk. The animal may be placed in
 nally was to avoid a recurrent episode of exacerbated lame-
another room and the sound made. In many instances, the
ness and pain.
animal disregards a lame leg and ambulates to the sound.
It is also important to vary the routine for the animal's
Most cats and some dogs will play with a toy such as a
and the owner's sake to avoid boredom, and to allow incor-
string or other object that they are used to “"stalking" or
poration of function-specific activities in the animal's
chasing. Engaging the owner to identify some favorite
home or work environment. During chronic management 
 playthings is important, because some animals will not
of the patient, weight control is extremely important. It is
also important to continue to oversee the protocol and
 It is equally important to instruct the owner regarding
document improvement. Progress will occur at a slower
Chapter 29
Therapeutic Exercises: Early Limb Use Exercises
505
rate during the chronic phase of recovery, but continued
Therapeutic exercises are undoubtedly the most impor-
rehabilitation is just as important to achieve as full a retum
tant aspects of rehabilitation. They may (and should) be
 to activity as possible.
incorporated with other modalities to enhance recovery.
Several medications may be appropriate for use during
but it is the exercises that help improve muscle strength,
rehabilitation, including nonsteroidal antiinfammatory
joint mobility, limb use, proprioceptive training, and
agents and chondroprotective agents. Caution should be
endurance to maximize function. Although a variety of
used, however, to be certain that any analgesic medications
techniques have been described, the ingenuity of the reha-
do not mask pain and discomfort associated with the
bilitation team, including the owner, will allow the devel-
level of activity. They should facilitate rehabilitation and
opment of other exercises that are specifc to a patient's
recovery. The keys to a successful therapeutic exercise
than normal conditions and tissue healing should allow.
program are to have site- and condition-specific exercises
When stepping up the level of an activity, antinflammatory
whenever possible, to use a variety of exercises and tech-
or pain medication may be withheld on the day of step-up
niques to keep the therapy team and patient from becom-
and for the day after, to be certain that there is no additional
ing bored, and to allow the animal to appropriately
tissue damage. If pain or lameness increases, the level of
 progress so that tissues are adequately challenged for
activity should be reduced 50% for 1 week; then the activ-
strengthening, but not so rapidly as to result in complica-
ity is stepped up again at a slower rate.
tions and tissue damage.
REFERENCES
Summary
1. Akeson WH, Amiel D, Abel MF et al: Effects of immobiliza-
tion on joints, Clin Orthop 28-37, 1987.
Beginning a rehabilitation program need not be elaborate
 2. McDonough AL: Effects of immobilization and exercise on
or costly. Consideration should be given to the patient's
articular cartilage—a review of literature, J Ortho Sports Phys
needs, the owner's needs, and the therapist's needs. Also,
Ther 3:2-5, 1981.
although protocol development greatly depends on the
 3. Appell HJ: Muscular atrophy following immobilization. A
available facilities and equipment, the willingness of the
Teview, Sports Med 10:42-58, 1990.
owners to help with rehabilitation, and the education level
4. Musacchia XJ, Steffen JM, Fell RD: Disuse atrophy of skeletal
of the staff, some rehabilitation is better than none at all.
muscle: animal models, Exerc Sport Sci Rev 16:61-87, 1988.
Therapeutic Exercises:
Joint Motion, Strengthening.
Endurance, and Speed Exercises
Darryl L. Millis, Marti Drum, and David Levine
herapeutic exercises to improve active joint motion
positive reinforcement. Negative reinforcement techniques
through a more complete range, and to build power,
may temporarily work in some instances, but because reha-
strength, and speed are the final phases of rehabili-
bilitation is an ongoing treatment, dogs will become less
tation to return the patient to as normal a function as pos-
willing to perform an activity or to leam new ones. Many
sible. The therapist must keep in mind the degree of injury
dogs will be somewhat nervous or frightened when first
or disability in determining the likelihood for the patient
undergoing rehabilitation, especially if pain is involved
to reach higher levels of function and adjust the rehabilita-
A[mo[s os on quenodu s! aI Aiasns io Ainfu jaun uoy
tion program and expectations accordingly. For example,
and gently at the beginning. Treats, favorite toys, or other
it is not expected that a 7-year-old dog with severe bilateral
rewards should be kept handy to encourage dogs when
elbow arthritis would be able to achieve near-normal func-
learming new exercises. The reader is referred to Chapter
tion, but there are exercises that can be performed to help
4 for further tips on applying behavior techniques in the
achieve greater function and ability. Some of the common
rehabilitation environment.
goals of therapeutic exercise are to improve active pain-
When designing a high-level therapeutic  exercise
free range of motion (ROM), muscle mass and muscle
 program, several factors must be considered. A problem
strength, performance, and conditioning. Common activi-
list is developed based on an initial evaluation of the reha-
ties include stair climbing, sit-to-stand exercises, treadmill
bilitation patient, and a treatment plan is formulated to
activity with resistance, pulling or carrying weights,
address the identifed problems. Realistic outcome goals
"wheelbarrowing"’ (for forelimb activity), “dancing" (for
are then established. Appropriate exercises are those that
rear limb activity), walking and trotting across cavaletti
can be performed safely and effectively and accomplish the
rails, jogging, running, underwater treadmill activities,
therapeutic goals. The exercise plan should target the
swimming, playing ball, and activities using balance balls
affected muscles, joints, and other structures. When pre-
or rolls. These higher levels of therapeutic exercise are
scribing therapeutic exercise, the therapist should under-
important in assisting an animal's returm to the best func-
stand the diagnosis, identify the structure or structures
tion possible following early limb use and proprioceptive
involved, and recognize the stage of tissue recovery with
exercises. Many of the exercises that target certain aspects
the resultant functional limitations. Without a good under-
of performance, such as joint motion, conditioning, and
standing of these principles, it is easy to over stress the
strength, have some overlap (Box 30-1). In addition, the
 involved tissues and potentially cause harm. The type of
equipment needed for most exercises is relatively inexpen-
injury or repair must be considered when formulating a
sive, and similar principles apply to a variety of individuals
treatment plan. For example, a patient with a tibial plateau
and conditions. Therapeutic exercise programs designed
leveling osteotomy (TPLO) will require several weeks for
for the home environment also provide an opportunity for
tissue remodeling and healing of the osteotomy before
owners to become actively involved in their pets' rehabili-
engaging in high-speed activities. Similarly, a patient with
tation. In any case, it is very important to have good footing
a partial brachial plexus injury may initially have a diffcult
to avoid slipping and to have adequate space to perform
time performing a shaking hands exercise. But over time,
exercises with as little distraction as possible.
the dog may recover and perform shaking hands exercise
It is also important to remember to use patience when
with a limb weight to achieve greater strengthening. With
working with the dog to learm new exercises. Most of the
this knowledge and understanding, appropriate decisions
exercises in this chapter have been purposefully selected
can be made regarding therapeutic exercise choices.
so that most dogs that are trained to leash can perform them
 Treatment considerations and choice of exercises vary
with some basic training. However, some dogs are highly
with each stage of tissue repair and endurance. As the
trained and the therapist should work with the owner
 animal improves clinically and tissue healing progresses,
to select exercises based on the patient's needs, as well
the exercise plan should be altered to match the animal's
things the dog is already trained to perform. The therapist
 progress and appropriately challenge the involved tissues.
is cautioned to use training techniques that are based on
The intensity of an exercise may be increased or reduced
506
Chapter 30
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion, Strengthening, Endurance, and Speed Exercises
507
Box 30-1
Exercises to Improve Joint Motion, Conditioning, and Strength
 Joint Motion Exercises
Running up stairs or inclines or down declines
 Incline and decline walking
Underwater treadmill activities with speed or resistance,
Stair climbing
floatation devices
Dancing
Swimming
Wheelbarrowing
 Pulling or carrying weights
Sit-to-stand exercises
Playing ball
Cavaletti rails
Activities using balance balls or rolls (core strengthening)
Underwater treadmill activities 
 Rhythmic stabilization
Swimming
Lateral hopping with resistance
 Tunnel and limbo walking
Sit-to-beg for core strengthening
Sit-to-stand with backpack or weights
Conditioning Exercises
Jumping
 Incline and decline walking
Limbo walking
Stair climbing
Sport-specific activities
Treadmill activity
Jogging
Feline Exercises
 Proprioceptive exercises (e.g., weight-shifting activities, balance
Running
Underwater treadmill activities
board, wobble board, and standing on a therapy ball or roll)
Swimming
Walking with a harness
 Ground treadmill walking with support and assistance
 Playing ball
 Sport-specific activities
Treadmill walking with small leg weights or therapy bands
 Playing with feathers or toys tied on the end of the string
Strength Exercises
Scratching post
 Incline and decline walking
Can opener
Stair climbing
Low cavaletti rails
Treadmill activity with resistance
Chasing a fashlight beam or laser light (use caution to avoid
 Dancing with resistance
obsessive-compulsive light chasing)
Wheelbarrowing with resistance
Aquatic therapy
by changing the duration of time that an animal performs
an exercise, the rate of speed at which a particular exercise
further injury, or exacerbation of an existing condition.
is perfommed, or the frequency (how many times per day)
 Certain exercises may not be safe for the strength, fexibil-
that it is performed.
ity, or endurance level of the animal performing the exer-
These factors may be altered to fine-tune an exercise
 cise, or an exercise may not be the correct one to accomplish
 prescription to achieve the expected outcome goals. For
the intended goal. The exercises described in this chapter
example, a realistic initial goal for a morbidly obese,
are listed with the desired outcomes of joint motion, con-
deconditioned patient with degenerative joint disease may
ditioning, or speed and strength, but there is significant
be to increase the amount of time the dog is able to com-
overlap with some exercises, and the differences are indi-
fortably tolerate walking, thus improving endurance and
cated for the various outcomes. The reader is also referred
 promoting weight reduction. Increasing the speed at which
to Chapter 24 on biomechanics of rehabilitation for further
the dog walks may not be a realistic initial goal for this
details on therapeutic exercises, especially as they relate to
animal. A contrasting example may be an athletic animal
joint motion and forces.
recovering from injury that must be challenged to improve
y e o mai on [og a naa o Aouanba pue paads
Joint Motion Exercises
level of performance. It is important for the therapist to
have an understanding of exercise intensity and what is
Incline Walking
appropriate for each patient during rehabilitation treat-
ment. Routine reevaluation of the patient is recommended
Walking the dog up an inclined surface alters joint motion
to assess the adaptations that are occurring with the reha-
and aids in strengthening of the hip and stifle muscles,
 bilitation treatment plan and to determine the appropriate
especially the extensors, while ascending (Figure 30-1).
rate of progression.
Therapeutic exercise routines should be monitored at
Joint Motion Considerations
regular intervals by a trained individual familiar with the
Climbing up an inclined surface promotes increased
 patient and the exercise techniques. Inappropriate exercise
fexion, extension, and ROM of the hip. Stife fexion is
508
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 30-1  Leash walking up ramps or hills encourages muscle
Figure 30-2  walking up a ramp or hill while wearing a leg weight
 strengthening and cardiovascular endurance.
provides greater challenges.
decreased, however.' When the limb is in the stance phase
perforn with the limb in a more fexed position. It is
of gait and the body is traveling forward, the knee and hip
particularly important to monitor gait patterms when
must extend to propel the animal forward. If extension is
walking downhill as many dogs with neurologic conditions
painful, the dog's stance time on the limb may be reduced
may exhibit more ataxia, causing the hind end to sway to
and an altered gait may result. In addition, dogs may
one side or the other. Also, if descending too fast, the
shorten the stride length to help control joint motion if a
patient may stumble and fall even if its gait appears to be
particular joint position causes pain. For example, a dog
normal on level ground. Varying speeds up and down
with hip dysplasia may shorten its stride while walking up
inclines is another method to increase the challenge of this
an incline so that excessive hip extension and pain are
ex ercise.
avoided. If this occurs and a particular joint motion that is
Stair Climbing
desired does not occur, it may be better to use another
exercise, such as stair climbing, in which the limb must
Climbing stairs is useful to improve ROM, power in the
travel a discrete distance to negotiate the step rather than
rear limb extensors, coordination, and proprioception, and
adjust the stride length while walking up a ramp.
 in many instances, is an activity of daily living that must
Walking up an inclined ramp also results in greater
be performed in the home environment (Figure 30-3).
ROM of the forelimb joints.? Shoulder extension and
Quadriceps and gluteal muscle groups are strengthened as
ROM, elbow fexion and extension, and carpal fexion are
the animal pushes off, extending the stifes and hips while
greater when walking up a ramp as compared with ascend-
propelling the body up the steps.
ing stairs or trotting over level ground.
Joint Motion Considerations
Exercise Considerations
ROM of the pelvic limb joints is significantly increased
Initially, walking should be done slowly and on leash;
during stair climbing compared with trotting on level
otherwise the dog may only toe-touch with the limb or hop
 ground.34 Extension of the hip and hock joints is moder-
 in a non-weight-bearing fashion. Inclines should be intro-
ately increased with stair climbing, whereas stife exten-
duced slowly, beginning with gradual slopes. As the dog's
sion may be mildly increased or decreased, depending on
ROM, strength, and limb use improve, the dog may be
the size of the dog relative to the size of the step. Flexion
challenged by walking up longer, steeper slopes and by
of the stife and hock is also increased. Although hip
increasing the duration, speed, and frequency of the climb-
fexion contributes little to stair ascent, the stife and hock
ing exercise. Further challenges are provided by doing
joints seem to contribute significantly to ascending stairs
inclines while wearing a weighted vest, leg weights (Figure
by fexing these joints to raise the limb up to the height of
30-2), or pulling a small amount of weight with a hamess.
the step.
Ascending or descending a slope at an angle may also alter
Regarding the forelimb joints, there is less ROM with
joint motion of an affected limb. If the affected limb is on
stair ascent as compared with walking up a ramp with
the downhill side while ascending diagonally, the joints
similar slope. These differences are primarily due to
and muscles perform with the limb in a more extended
position. Conversely, if the affected limb is on the uphill 
fexion of forelimb joints. Shoulder extension is less with
side while ascending diagonally, the joints and muscles
stair climbing as compared with trotting over ground,
Chapter 30
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion, Strengthening, Endurance, and Speed Exercises
509
B
Figure 30-3  Stair climbing should begin on stairs with a gradual rise (A) and progress to steeper stairs (B). Care should be taken to be certain
that the dog pushes symmetrically off of both rear limbs.
whereas fexion is greater with stair climbing. Elbow and
advanced exercise is often easier to teach using a few steps
carpal fexion, extension, and ROM are greater with stair
versus a full flight of stairs. A three- or four-stair block can
ascent as compared with trotting over ground.
be built for this purpose.
 Stair descent results in significantly greater stife fexion
and hock fexion and extension compared with walking
Dancing and wheelbarrowing
down a declined surface. Significantly greater ROM also
occurs in the coxofemoral, femorotibial, and tibiotarsal
 Raising the forelimbs off the ground and walking the dog
joints during stair descent.
forward or backward, also called dancing, alters motion of
rear limb joints and challenges proprioception, coordina-
Exercise Considerations
tion, and strength. The amount of peak force placed on the
The dog must begin slowly climbing stairs to encourage
limbs is slightly greater than what would occur at a trot.6
proper use of the rear limbs, as opposed to simply carrying
Therefore if the stage of recovery is not adequate to with-
the limb, hopping with both rear limbs, or skipping up
stand trotting, then dancing should not be undertaken. On
stairs. Encourage the dog to go slowly and deliberately.
 the other hand, additional strengthening of postural muscles
climbing the stairs in a reciprocal stepping gait. Stairs
may be obtained with dancing when it is safe to perform
should be introduced slowly because this is a challenging
the exercise.
exercise for both the musculoskeletal and cardiovascular
Wheelbarrowing is an exercise similar to dancing,
systems and the animal may fatigue quickly. Initially, some
except that the forelimbs are targeted by raising the rear
dogs may require assistance from the handler. Begin
limbs off the ground and walking the dog forward. This
with five to seven steps, and gradually increase to two
exercise encourages increased use of the forelimbs and
to four flights of stairs once or twice daily. In severely
challenges proprioception, coordination, and strength. The
affected dogs or smaller dogs, it is advisable to begin stair
dog's orthopedic condition must be adequately stable to
climbing on stairs with a gradual ascent and progress to
handle the stresses of these exercises. Wheelbarrowing
steeper stairs. Another strategy for smaller dogs is to attach
results in peak force placed on the limb that is between
blocks to existing stairs to make "half stairs."' As the patient
walking and trotting.
improves, dogs may jog up stairs. In the motivated patient,
Joint Motion Considerations
walking backward up or down stairs can be an additional
significant challenge. To introduce this exercise, use a treat
Forward dancing results in significantly less hip fexion,
or toy to encourage stepping backward up one step while
total hip ROM, hock fexion, and hock total ROM com-
the patient keeps the forelimb on the ground and then have
 pared with walking.6 Dancing backward results in greater
patient come back down to level ground. The reverse is
hip extension and stife fexion, whereas hip fexion, hip
true for backing down a step. Repeat this several times
ROM, stife extension, and stife ROM are less than regular
until the patient is comfortable with this movement before
walking.
having the patient walk backward up or down two to three
Wheelbarrowing alters motion of the forelimb joints,
steps, and advance to a full fight after the patient is
increasing shoulder extension and elbow fexion as com-
comfortable and understands what is being asked. This
pared with walking.
510
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 30-5  Dancing activities may also be accomplished with
Figure 30-4  Dancing encourages weight bearing on the rear limbs.
-red asiaxa siun anojag shop awos rot Assasau ag Ae buzn
limbs on the roll or ball and the therapist slowly rolls the ball toward
jaat io payonoi iaat layi aaey ot axl iou op jeui shop ui Ajein!
sqwmuy jiaun anow on wayi buioy juajied aui woy Aee 1o
threatened by the therapist's posture. The forelimbs are lifted off the
backward or forward.
 ground, allowing the patient to bear weight only on the rear limbs.
also be accomplished with the assistance of a physioroll
Exercise Considerations
 or ball. The front limbs of the patient are placed on the
It is important for the therapist or veterinarian to evaluate
roll or ball and the therapist slowly rolls the ball toward
available ROM in the rear limb joints before attempting
the patient, forcing the dog to move the hindlimbs back-
dancing to identify any potential limitations that may
ward (Figure 30-5). Most dogs will reposition their fore-
prevent the animal from safely performing the exercise.
limbs, especially if they are standing on the ball, rather
For example, in the early phases of a therapeutic exercise
than resting their antebrachium on the ball. Once comfort-
 program for a dog that is painful with hip extension as a
able with walking backward in this fashion, the ball can
result of hip dysplasia, gluteal muscle strengthening may
be slowly rolled away from the patient, stimulating forward
be more comfortable by dancing the dog forward rather
walking of the rear limbs. A harmess to provide support for 
than backward.
the patient is very helpful for this activity. Altermatively, a
When a dog is using its affected limb consistently at a
wagon or other fat surface on wheels can be used for this
walk with minimal lameness, dancing may begin. Muz-
activity, particularly for forward dancing.
zling may be necessary for some dogs before this exercise,
To perforn the wheelbarrow exercise, the handler
particularly in dogs that do not like to have their feet
places the hands under the caudal abdomen and lifts the
touched or feel threatened by the therapist's posture. The
rear limbs of the dog off the ground, and the dog is moved
forelimbs are lifted off the ground, allowing the patient to
forward (Figure 30-6). The handler may wish to place a
bear weight only on the rear limbs (Figure 30-4). Dogs
muzzle on the dog. Dogs with normal proprioception will
with normal proprioception will naturally move the rear
move the forelimbs so they do not fall. Some dogs may
limbs as the handler moves and the animal "dances" back-
require sling support if they are weak. Dogs may be wheel-
ward and forward. Some dogs may resist dancing forward
barrowed up and down inclines for greater muscle strength-
if the handler stands in front of the dog; dogs may plant
ening (Figure 30-7). Theoretically, the higher the animal is
their rear limbs and stretch out as the handler moves until
lifted, the greater the forces placed on the forelimbs.
the forelimbs reach the ground. In this situation, the handler
However, the increase in weight bearing may not be as
should stand behind the dog, placing the arms under the
great as anticipated because the stride length is much
axillary region to support the dog, and walk forward. How
shorter when the animal wheelbarrows from a greater
far the dog is elevated off the ground depends on the
height. The shortened stride results in less force placed on
amount of stress the animal is able to comfortably handle
the limbs while wheelbarrowing as compared with walking
 On the rear limbs. Dogs may be elevated as high as possible
or trotting at a faster speed. A hindlimb sling, particularly
and also dance up and down inclines or hills to place
one that lifts at the pubis rather than the abdomen, may be
 additional stress on the rear limbs. Dancing activities may
used to assist the dog while wheelbarrowing.
Chapter 30
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion, Strengthening, Endurance, and Speed Exercises
511
Exercise Considerations
Some training may be necessary, and low-calorie treats
may be offered as a training aid to provide motivation to
perform the movement. It is important to perform these
exercises correctly. Attention should be paid to sitting and
standing straight, with no leaning to one side, and the
joints of both rear limbs should be symmetrically fexed
so that the dog sits squarely on its haunches (Figure
30-8). While on the leash, after a sufficient wamm-up
period of walking, the handler asks the dog to sit squarely
for a few seconds and then asks the dog to stand, take a
few steps forward, and then again sit. The sit-to-stands
may be repeated a number of times before the dog is
allowed to rest. It may be easier in some cases to back
the dog into a cormer, with the affected limb next to a
wall so that the dog cannot slide the limb out while rising
 Or sitting. Start with 5 to 10 repetitions once or twice
Figure 30-6
6   Wheebarrowing encourages use of the forelimbs. The 
daily, and work up to 15 repetitions three to four times
therapist supports the abdomen and lifts the rear limbs of the dog
daily.
 off the ground, and the dog is moved forward. The handler may wish
This exercise may be particularly beneficial for dogs
to place a muzzle on the dog.
with osteoarthritis of the hips. These patients generally feel
pain when the hip joints are extended. Going from a sitting
position to a standing position results in movement of the
hip joint from a greatly fexed position to a hip angle
similar to normal standing. In addition, there may be
atrophy of the gluteal muscles. The sit-to-stand exercise
allows active contraction of the gluteal muscles, but the hip
joint is not generally extended to the point that results in
pain. Therefore strengthening of the gluteal muscles can
occur without the excessive pain encountered with hip
extension.
Of course, each patient must be assessed to be certain
that sit-to-stands are not too stressful or painful for that
individual. If normal sit-to-stands are too painful, or the
patient is too weak to rise from a sitting position, several
modifications may be tried. Doing sit-to-stands with the
pelvis in an elevated position may be helpful in patients
that are too weak to rise from a complete sitting position.
Figure 30-7  Dogs may be wheelbarrowed up and down inclines
Dogs may sit with their pelvis on a stool, step, stack of
for greater muscle strengthening.
books, curb, finm cushion, or the therapist's leg or knee,
and rise from this elevated position. Many dogs will need
guidance from the therapist's hands to leam to sit on an
object because it may feel strange for some patients. Alter-
Sit-to-Stand Exercises
natively, dogs may be assisted with a sling from a sitting
Sit-to-stand exercises help strengthen hip and stife exten-
to a standing position. Dogs may also do sit-to-stands on
 sor muscles and improve active ROM. The act of sitting.
an incline, with the body facing downhill to make it easier
then standing up, requires muscle strength of the gluteal,
to stand. Altermatively, dogs may do sit-to-stands on an
quadriceps, hamstring, and gastrocnemius muscle groups.
incline with the body facing uphill or sideways to each
direction to provide an additional challenge and greater
Joint Motion Considerations
strengthening. For this challenge, dogs may perform five
Sit-to-stand exercise results in greater fexion of the tarsus
repetitions in each direction, twice daily. Finally, dogs may
and nearly twice as much fexion of the stifle and hip,
find it easier to do sit-to-stands in the water, using the
whereas extension of these joints is less as compared with
ns e on un asiss da on rm an jo n ong
walking."
position.
512
Section V
Therapeutie Exercise and Manual Therapy
A
B
Figure 30-8 Sit-to-stand exercises. A, Note the symmetrical position of the dog in the sitting position. Placing the affected limb toward a wall
will help the dog to sit in a square, symmetrical position. B, As the dog rises, it should push off equally with both rear limbs. Attention should
be paid to sitting and standing straight, with no leaning to one side, and the joints of both rear limbs should be symmetrically flexed so that 
the dog sits squarely on its haunches.
 greater active ROM of certain joints, and lengthened strides
Down-to-Stand Exercises
in all limbs. They may also be used to challenge proprio-
A variant of the sit-to-stand exercise is the down-to-stand.
ception, balance, and coordination in animals retuming to
With this exercise, the dog is allowed to rise from a ven-
function following neurologic impainment.
 trally recumbent position to a standing position. In addition 
Joint Motion Considerations
to strengthening the muscles of the pelvic limb, muscles
of the forelimb are also engaged.
Walking over cavaletti rails results in significant increases
in fexion and total ROM of the elbow, stife, and hock as
Joint Motion Considerations
compared with walking, and the increase is related to the
In particular, the shoulder and elbow extensor muscles are
height of the cavaletti rails.? There is also a mild increase
activated through a greater ROM. The amount of motion
in hip fexion. There are no differences in joint extension,
has not yet been quantified, but joint motion of the
however.?
hindlimbs should be similar to sit-to-stand exercises.
Exercise Considerations
Exercise Considerations
Commercial cavaletti rails are generally used, although
It is important to have the dog rise symmetrically and push
they can be constructed relatively easily. An altermative to
off equally with all four limbs. This exercise may require
cavaletti rails is to use a ladder and allow the rungs of the 
some additional time and training to perform correctly.
ladder to act as the low rails. Although ladders are readily
Dogs will most commonly rise to a sitting position first
available in most households, they have limited fexibility
and then stand, which is not the goal of this exercise.
to change the distance between the rungs and the height
Similar to the sit-to-stand exercises, some training may be
that the animal steps over the rungs. This exercise can be
necessary with low-calorie treats to provide motivation to
beneficial for either orthopedic or neurologic patients in
perform the movement. Attention should be paid to try to
need of greater active fexion and ROM of targeted joints,
get the animal to use all four limbs to push up squarely and
improved voluntary motor control, and accuracy in place-
symmetrically. Start with 5 repetitions once or twice daily,
ment of the limbs.
and work up to 10-15 repetitions three to four times daily.
One or more poles may be used and should be spaced
 at appropriate distances apart, determined by the dog's
Cavaletti Rails
natural stride length (Figure 30-9). The distance between
Cavaletti rails are poles that are spaced apart on the ground
the rails should allow for a single step; the exercise may
at a low height. Cavaletti rails may be used to encourage
not be as beneficial if dogs are allowed to take two or three
Chapter 30
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion, Strengthening, Endurance, and Speed Exercises
513
Figure 30-9  Cavaletti rails help increase active flexion of certain
joints as the dog negotiates the rails. One or more poles may be used
and should be spaced at appropriate distances apart, determined by
the dog's natural stride length. Stride length may also be altered by
 placing the rails closer together or farther apart.
Figure 30-10  To provide additional flexibility to the trunk and
proprioceptive awareness, dogs may do serpentine walking in com-
steps between rails. In general, the height of the poles
bination with cavaletti rail walking.
should be at the same level or higher than the carpus ini-
tially, but severely affected dogs may need very low poles
to start. For very small dogs, cavaletti poles, broom handles,
or PVC pipe can be taped to the foor at an appropriate
limb movement during walking and jogging and strength-
width for the patient. After the animal becomes accus-
ens the fexor muscles, which must contract more to lift the
tomed to the task, the handler can further challenge the dog
limbs. However, one must be cautious with walking in
by making simple modifications such as adding more
-yp aagy Aeu shop se Aisnun io asuap s! geun mous daap
poles, increasing the height of all the poles to encourage
culty pulling their limbs from the heavy, wet snow. Also,
greater active fexion and ROM of joints, and altering the
some dogs with metal implants (for example, a TPLO
heights of altermating poles to encourage dogs to negotiate
plate) may experience discomfort or postexercise lameness
different situations. Begin with walking 3-5 times over the
after walking in snow because the metal may contract,
rails, and progress to 8-10 times over the rails. To provide
resulting in discomfort. Similarly, walking and jogging in
additional fexibility to the trunk and proprioceptive aware-
tall grass strengthens the extensor muscles to some degree,
ness, dogs may do serpentine walking in combination with
which must contract to a greater extent to advance the limb.
cavaletti rail walking (Figure 30-10). Dogs may also pr0-
Exercising in sand and snow minimizes concussive forces
gress to trotting for greater rate of joint motion and pro-
 placed on arthritic joints, while allowing strengthening of 
prioceptive challenges, or the cavalettis can be positioned
supporting periarticular muscles. Caution should be used
Over an unstable surface such as dense foam.
when starting these exercises to avoid muscle soreness.
 Short, frequent sessions are recommended in the begin-
Walking in Tall Grass, Sand, or Snow
ning, with a gradual increase in the time and repetitions.
Walking a dog through a field of tall grass enhances muscle
Standing in sand may also be beneficial to dogs in rehabili-
strengthening and endurance because of the resistance pro-
tation following neurologic conditions.
vided by the grass, as well as coordination to navigate
Tunnels and Limbo
varying terrain. In addition, dogs have a tendency to fex
their joints to a greater extent as they negotiate the grass,
Agility training tunnels or children's play tunnels may be
 resulting in greater overall ROM.
used to promote fexion in the forelimbs and rear limbs,
while strengthening the supporting muscles that hold the
Exercise Considerations
joints in this more fexed position. The size of the tunnel
 Some caution should be used in dogs with allergies walking
opening should be appropriate for the size of the dog, that
in grass, which may be aggravated in such conditions, and
is, just shorter than the dog's standing height. The dog is
in dogs with conjunctivitis, which might also be exacer-
encouraged to crouch low and walk through the tunnel,
bated. Walking in deep sand or snow provides resistance to
which requires greater limb fexion and strength than that
514
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 30-12 For vertical pole weaving. the distance between
Figure 30-11  A telescoping pole, such as a shower rail, may be
poles should be adjusted so that sufficient side bending results. The
adjusted in a doorway, with the height lower than the dorsal midline.
distance between poles should be slightly less than the body length
The dog then walks under the pole to perform the limbo exercise.
of the dog. In addition, the handler must lead the animal so that the
head, neck, and body actually flex as the poles are negotiated.
 needed for normal walking. Greater challenges may be
of the circles may become smaller. The same principles
instituted by using tunnels that are even smaller as dogs
apply for figure-eight walking.
strengthen their muscles.
For vertical pole weaving, the distance between poles
Altermnatively, a telescoping pole, such as a shower rail,
should be adjusted so that sufficient side bending results;,
may be adjusted in a doorway, with the height lower than
in general, the distance between poles should be slightly
the dorsal midline. The dog then walks under the pole to
less than the body length of the dog. In addition, the
perform the limbo exercise (Figure 30-11). The pole may
handler must lead the animal so that the head, neck, and
be lowered to challenge the dog to crouch to a greater
body actually fex as the poles are negotiated (Figure
degree as strength and ability allow.
30-12). Altermatively, a very advanced version is to have
the patient weave between the handler's legs, usually fol-
Under and Over Exercises
lowing a treat or toy (such as a Frisbee). The handler can
A combination of walking over cavaletti rails and altermat-
then walk forward and backward while the patient contin-
ing limbo walking is termed under and over exercise. This
ues to weave through the handler's legs. The patient should
is a more advanced exercise that challenges strength, joint
 be released from exercise restrictions prior to performing
fexion, and proprioception.
this advanced exercise.
Circling. Figure-Eight Walking. Vertical
Aquatic Exercises
Weave Poles
The reader is referred to Chapter 31 on aquatic therapy for
Circling aids in lateral fexion of the spine, strengthening
specific information regarding aquatic exercise, especially
of the adductor and abductor muscles, balance, and pro-
underwater treadmill walking and trotting and swimming.
prioception. Walking in figure eights is a progression of
In general, joint fexion is increased over typical land-
circling. It adds additional challenges by changing direc-
based exercises, such as walking or trotting. With swim-
tions repeatedly and helps to prepare the patient for irregu-
ming, joint extension is less as compared with walking or
lar turming as the patient retums to more normal function.
 trotting. Underwater treadmill walking has the advantage
Weaving between vertical poles also helps to promote
of increased joint fexion, with joint extension that is
side bending of the dog's trunk and also challenges pro-
similar to land-based exercises. In addition, the amount of 
prioceptive functioning and strengthening of limb abductor
fexion of specific joints may be affected, to some degree,
and adductor muscles, but with more sudden changes in
by the level of the water.10
direction.
Strengthening and Endurance Exercises
Exercise Considerations
The size of the circles for circling should be large to begin
Many of the exercises used for strengthening and endur-
with, and as limb use and proprioception improve, the size
ance are also used for joint motion exercises. The reader
Chapter 30
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion, Strengthening, Endurance, and Speed Exercises 
515
is referred to additional information regarding specific
Standing on a Rolling Cart
exercises in the section regarding joint motion exercises.
The patient may be placed on a rolling cart, preferably with
 Strengthening exercises are used to improve the strength
sides, and slowly pulled. Although this exercise also chal-
and speed of muscle contraction, whereas endurance exer-
lenges proprioception, the core muscles are also engaged
cises are performed to help with cardiovascular and mus-
while trying to maintain balance. As the patient becomes
culoskeletal stamina. Although both types of conditioning
stronger and corrects its position while being pulled in a
may be performed, usually one form of conditioning is
straight line, turms and irregular movements may be incor-
primarily undertaken, depending on the intended use of the
porated during the therapy session for additional chal-
dog. For example, a field trial dog will likely benefit more
lenges and strengthening. The therapist should always
from endurance exercises, although some form of strength-
provide support to prevent falls in the event that the patient
ening is also beneficial. Similarly, a racing greyhound may
loses its balance.
benefit more from strengthening exercises but endurance
Rolling
conditioning is also beneficial.
Strength exercises are those performed with maximal or
Animals that roll from their side while in lateral recumbency
near-maximal muscle contraction, with relatively few rep-
or from their back in dorsal recumbency to a stemal position
etitions. The object of strength exercises is to increase the
engage their abdominal muscles, in particular, their abdomi-
strength of muscle contraction. Myofber and muscle
nal oblique muscles. If the dog can be trained to roll com-
hypertrophy occur with continued conditioning. However,
pletely, that engages even more muscles and requires more
there is little to no change in the aerobic capacity of the
strength. A low-calorie treat is helpful as a training aid.
muscle.
Endurance exercises are those performed with repetitive
Sit-Ups and Crunches and Hold,
contractions over a prolonged time, with relatively little
Twisting Crunches
load applied to the muscle. Although myofiber and muscle
Dogs may perform abdominal crunches or sit-ups with
hypertrophy do not occur to any appreciable extent, the
 proper positioning and training. To perform this exercise,
aerobic capacity and efficiency of muscle contraction are
the handler sits on the foor with the legs spread far enough
 greatly enhanced.
apart to support the dog in dorsal recumbency. A treat is
then used to encourage the dog to lift its head and thorax
Core Strengthening Exercises
up while maintaining the pelvis and lower limbs in contact
The importance of strong core body muscles, including
with the ground and within the trough formed by the han-
the back, abdominal, and upper limb muscles, has been
dler's legs. If possible, the treat may be held just out of the
recently emphasized in human rehabilitation and train-
dog's reach to encourage the dog to hold the crunch for
ing. Strong core muscles make it easier to perform many
several seconds. In the beginning, it may be beneficial to
 physical activities and help provide support to the mid-
have the dog receive a treat reward on every crunch. But
 section when performing other exercises. Although these 
 as the training progresses, intermittent administration of a
types of exercises are a bit more challenging in dogs
treat is likely adequate to keep the dog motivated. Peanut
because of  the difficulty  in consciously performing
butter or Kong paste frozen into a Kong toy or coffee mug
exercises that isolate particular muscle groups, there are
may work better than individual treats for some patients
several exercises that are useful and require relatively
during this exercise because it is easier to get the patient
little training.
to hold the desired position.
Caution should be used in performing any of these
Another version of the abdominal crunch is the twisting
exercises in dogs with back, hip, or shoulder problems. In
crunch. To perform this exercise, the treat is held somewhat
general, core-strength exercises may be repeated five
to the side, encouraging the dog to sit up in a diagonal
times. As core strength improves, they can be increased to
fashion to reach the treat. This is one of the most effective
10 to 15 repetitions, two to three times daily. A combina-
crunch workouts, because it engages all of the abdominal
tion of exercises allows strengthening of different muscle
muscle fibers at once.
 groups, while preventing boredom.
Super Pointing
Sit-to-Stands, Down-to-Stands on Ball, Physioroll
This exercise is relatively easy to perfonm and most dogs
or Trampoline
tolerate it well; however, two handlers may be necessary.
This variation of the sit-to-stand and down-to-stand is
The dog is placed in a square standing position and one
performed on an exercise ball, physio-roll, or trampoline.
handler maintains control of the dog's head and lifts one
The additional challenge achieved by performing these
of the forelimbs. Another handler simultaneously lifts the
activities on an unstable surface engages the core muscles,
diagonal rear limb. This position is held for several seconds.
resulting in strengthening. These exercises are good to
In patients with hindlimb injuries, it is often easier to lift
 perform early in the course of a core strengthening program.
the contralateral hindlimb first followed by the ipsilateral
516
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
forelimb. If possible, lifting of the legs may be done with
which the rear limbs move laterally. In addition to normal
 an elastic resistance band so that the dog not only engages
core strengthening, this helps to strengthen the abdominal
the core muscles, but also contracts the limb muscles to
oblique muscles as well as the thigh abductor and adductor
help maintain balance. Although having the handler lift
muscles. For symmetrical strengthening, the dog should
au sasnsua ose spueq noum uaun piou pun saal ynog
move equal distances in both directions. A balance dome
 core muscles, additional challenges and strengthening are 
(half ball-half fat surface) or a BOsU ball may also be
achieved by using resistance bands. Another variation is to
used.
train the patient to shake or lift a forelimb while standing
 For more challenge, a modified plank on a ball may be
squarely without shifting weight significantly onto the
performed. With the dog positioned as previously described,
hindlimbs or the contralateral side.
a forelimb or rear limb is raised off the foor and held for
An easier version of this exercise is simply one-legged
3 to 5 seconds. The exercise is repeated holding up the
pointing. If only one handler is available, or if the dog is
other limbs. Super pointing may also be performed with
not strong enough or has proprioceptive deficits, one leg
the forelimbs on the ball by lifting diagonal limbs at the
may be lifted and held at a time. The forelimbs and rear
same time.
limbs should be raised one at a time to engage the different
Back Extension
core muscles.
The muscles responsible for back extension may be
Hup and Praying Positions
 strengthened by going from a sitting to a begging position
Core strengthening may be achieved by having the dog
or jumping up on the rear limbs and holding this position
stand with the forelimbs supported while the rear limbs
while pursuing a treat. As strength and coordination
remain on the ground, a maneuver sometimes called hup
 improve, the dog should maintain the two-legged standing
 Or a standing plank position. The handler may support the
 position for several seconds; some dogs may be training to
forelimbs of the dog or the limbs may be supported by a
"walk' on two legs. Plank exercises also help to strengthen
piece of furmiture or stairs. This exercise is one of the earli-
back extensor muscles.
est to help strengthen the core muscles. A reverse standing
Super Standing
 u s   nd q pad aq  
elevated position while allowing the forelimbs to remain
 d e uo sq nog H ym s  so
 On the ground in a weight-bearing position.
 Although maintaining balance in a static position is highly
Conversely, another maneuver is a praying stance. Some
challenging to the core muscles, moving the roll from side
dogs do this naturally, whereas others will need some train-
 ing to perform it correctly. With this position, the hindlimbs 
maintain a standing position while the forelimbs remain on
the ground. It is important that the elbows be in contact
with the ground to perform the exercise correctly. Clicker
during training.
Plank on a Ball
A plank that provides additional challenges is one per-
formed on a therapy ball or roll. The plank is performed
by having the dog stand with its rear limbs on the foor and
the forelimbs supported by a therapy ball or roll. This plank 
 position may be held for several seconds. Additional chal-
lenges may be instituted by rolling the ball back and forth
(ball roll-ins and roll-outs), side to side, or 360 degrees,
doing ball circles. Initially, the excursions are kept small,
 but as stren gthening and compliance improve, larger excur-
pddns aiou sunbau saop ioh pamnsui aq Aeuu suois
and less challenge, a therapy roll may be used that moves
in only two dimensions. Altermatively, the rear limbs may
be placed on the ball or roll, with the forelimbs on the
ground. Again, additional challenges may be instituted by
Figure 30-13  Dogs may stand with all four limbs on a therapy roll
rolling the ball back and forth (ball roll-ins and roll-outs).
Although maintaining balance in a static position is highly challeng-
Another variation is for the dog to stand with its fore-
ing to the core muscles, moving the roll from side to side and rocking
limbs on a donut, and use that as a pivot point around
front to back provides additional strengthening.
Chapter 30
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion, Strengthening, Endurance, and Speed Exercises
517
Figure  30-15 Additional strengthening may be provided by
walking up an inclined surface while wearing a weighted vest or leg
weights.
strength and stamina improve, the dog may be challenged
Figure 30-14 Standing on a balance dome (half ball, half flat
by walking up longer, steeper slopes and by increasing
surface) or a BOsU ball may be used for core strengthening
the duration and speed of the climbing exercise. Further 
exercises.
 challenges are provided by doing inclines while wearing a
weighted vest or leg weights (Figure 30-15). Jogging and
to side and rocking front to back provides additional
running up slopes promotes strength and power.
strengthening (Figure 30-13). One of the most challenging
Dancing and Wheelbarrowing
core exercises is for the dog to place both forelimbs on a
therapy ball or roll, and the rear limbs on a separate ball or
Dancing and wheelbarrowing enhances strength of the
roll. Initially, larger balls with more stability are easier for 
extensor muscles of the rear limbs and forelimbs, respec.
the dog. As core strengthening improves, smaller balls or
tively. The amount of peak force placed on the limbs while
rolls may be used. Altermatively, the dog may stand on
dancing is slightly greater than what would occur at a trot,
infated discs with the forelimbs on one disc and the rear
whereas wheelbarrowing results in peak force placed on
limbs on a separate disk. For additional challenges, the
the limb that is between walking and trotting.6 Therefore
balls, rolls, or disks may be rocked back and forth, and in the
if the stage of recovery is not adequate to withstand these
case of rolls and balls, they may be moved closer or farther
stresses, the exercises should not be undertaken until ade-
apart from each other to engage different core muscles.
quate healing has occurred.
The use of paw pods is less challenging for those
dogs beginning a training program. A balance dome (half
Exercise Considerations
ball, half fat surface) or a BOsU ball may also be used
Consider using a muzzle on dogs when first starting these
(Figure 30-14).
exercises. To perform dancing, the forelimbs are lifted off
the ground, allowing the patient to bear weight only on the
Incline Walking, Trotting, and Running
hindlimbs. The handler then moves the dog backward and
Walking or jogging the dog up or down inclines aids in
forward. Dogs may be elevated as high as possible and also
strengthening of the quadriceps, semitendinosus, semi-
dance up and down inclines or hills to place additional
membranosus, gastrocnemius, and gluteal muscles while
stress on the hindlimbs. Furthenmore, leg weights may be
ascending, and the triceps and shoulder stabilizing muscles
 placed on the limbs for additional strengthening.
while descending a ramp. Muscle strength in the hips and
To perform the wheelbarrow exercise, the handler
stifles is required for the dog to propel itself up an incline,
places the hands under the caudal abdomen and lifts the
whereas muscle strength in the shoulders and elbows is
rear limbs of the dog off the ground, and the dog is moved
required to brake while going down a declined surface.
forward. Dogs may be wheelbarrowed up and down
Incline walking may be used as a low-impact activity.
inclines for greater muscle strengthening. Theoretically.
the higher the animal is lifted, the greater the forces placed
Exercise Considerations
 On the forelimbs. However, the increase in weight bearing
Inclines should begin with gradual slopes and increase to
may not be as great as anticipated because the stride length
progressively steeper slopes if possible. As the dog's
is much shorter when the animal is wheelbarrowed from a
518
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
greater height. Similar to dancing, leg weights may be
 placed on the limbs for additional strengthening.
Sit-to-Stand Exercises
Sit-to-stand exercises help strengthen hip and stife exten-
sor muscles. The act of sitting, then standing up, requires
activation and strength of the gluteal, quadriceps, ham-
string, and gastrocnemius muscle groups. The back and
 abdominal muscles are also affected to some extent.
Exercise Considerations
Some training may be necessary, and low-calorie treats
may be offered as a training aid to provide motivation to
perform the movement. It is important to perform these
exercises correctly. Attention should be paid to sitting and
standing straight, with no leaning to one side, and the joints
of both rear limbs should be symmetrically fexed so that
Figure 30-16  Dogs may sit with their pelvis on a step and rise fom 
the dog sits squarely on its haunches. The handler then asks
this elevated position to modify the sit to stand exercise.
the dog to stand, take a few steps forward, and then again
sit. The sit-to-stands may be repeated a number of times
before the dog is allowed to rest. It may be easier in some
a donut or physioroll by asking the patient to sit and stand
cases to back the dog into a cormer, with the affected limb
while keeping the forelimbs on the device.
next to a wall so that the dog cannot slide the limb out
Rhythmic Stabilization
while rising or sitting. Start with 5 to 10 repetitions once
or twice daily, and work up to 15 repetitions three to four
Rhythmic stabilization is a technique used to strengthen
times daily.
postural muscles in dogs with significant weakness of these
Gluteal muscle atrophy may occur in dogs with hip
muscles. In particular, this exercise is valuable for strength-
 arthritis. The sit-to-stand exercise allows active contraction
oe  'sdno aosn saopnb pun sdao a su
of the gluteal muscles, but the hip joint is not generally
helps to provide core strengthening and neuromuscular
extended to a point that causes pain because the hip only
feedback to joints, ligaments, and muscle-tendon units.
extends to a standing position. Therefore strengthening of
Exercise Considerations
the gluteal muscles can occur without the excessive pain
encountered with hip extension. Each patient should be
Rhythmic stabilization may be performed with the patient
assessed to be certain that sit-to-stands are not too stressful
 On a therapy ball or roll, trampoline, or inflated mattress.
Or painful for that individual. If normal sit-to-stands are
With the animal standing in a square position, the therapist
too painful, or the patient is too weak to rise from a sitting
places pressure over the pelvis or interscapular region and
position, several modifications may be tried. Doing sit-to-
 gently "bounces"' the animal up and down. With downward
stands with the pelvis in an elevated position may be
 pressure, the animal will begin to sink, and then refexively
 helpful in patients that are too weak to rise from a complete
will contract the extensor muscles to recover to a normal
sitting position. Dogs may sit with their pelvis on a stool,
standing position. The bouncing motion should be rela-
step, stack of books, curb, finm cushion, or the therapist's
tively rapid, with only enough recovery time to regain the
leg or knee, and rise from this elevated position (Figure
normal standing position. Performing the exercises with
30-16). Many dogs will need guidance from the therapist's
the animal standing on a compressible surface generally
hands to learm to sit onto an object because it may feel
 prevents a well-trained animal from going to a sit position.
strange for some patients. Altermatively, dogs may be
Hand Shaking
assisted with a sling from a sitting to a standing position.
Dogs may also do sit-to-stands on an incline, with the body
In some situations, the fexors of the elbow joint may be
facing downhill to make it easier to stand. Altermatively,
weak following conditions such as partial brachial plexus
dogs may do sit-to-stands on an incline with the body
injury or intervertebral disk hermiation. Having the dog do
facing uphill or sideways to each direction to provide an
shake hands exercises with the affected limb helps with
additional challenge and greater strengthening. For this
functional strengthening.
challenge, dogs may perform five repetitions in each direc-
tion twice daily. Further challenges may be provided by
Exercise Considerations
applying a weighted vest or backpack to encourage addi-
Most dogs have been trained to shake hands with their
tional muscle strengthening. Super sits can be done using
owners, so this is a relatively easy exercise. It is most
Chapter 30
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion, Strengthening, Endurance, and Speed Exercises 
519
1 to 3 flights of stairs for early strengthening, and gradually
increase to 5 to 10 flights of stairs once or twice daily. As
the patient improves, dogs may jog and trot up stairs, and
eventually may run up stairs.
Cavaletti Rails
Cavaletti rails may be used to encourage muscle strength-
ening and coordination through a greater active ROM of
certain joints, and lengthen strides in all limbs. Similar to
the shake hands exercise, they may be used to help increase
strength of forelimb fexor muscles in patients with weak
joint fexion. Unlike the shake hands exercise, however,
walking over cavaletti rails may be used to strengthen weak
fexor muscles of the rear limbs.
Exercise Considerations
Figure 30-17  Greater strengthening may be achieved by place-
ment of a leg weight while doing shake hands exercises.
 Poles should be spaced at appropriate distances apart,
determined by the dog's natural stride length. The distance
between the rails should allow for a single step; the exer-
cise may not be as beneficial if dogs are allowed to take
beneficial to begin with the affected limb on the ground
two or three steps between rails. For muscle weakness, the
with the dog in a sitting position. The therapist asks for the
rails are initially placed low to the ground. After the animal
dog's paw, trying to achieve as high a placement as pos-
becomes accustomed to the task, the handler can further
sible to achieve the greatest elbow fexion possible. Shoul-
challenge the dog by adding more poles and increasing the
der extensor muscle strengthening may also occur with this
height of all the poles to encourage greater active fexion
exercise. Initially, three to five repetitions may be ade-
and ROM of joints. Begin with walking 3-5 times over the
quate. Increased repetitions are added as the dog is able.
rails, and progress to 8-10 times over the rails. Dogs may
Greater strengthening may be achieved by placement of a
also progress to trotting for an additional rate of joint
leg weight or resistance band on the antebrachium (Figure
motion challenge. Leg weights may be added for additional
30-17). To reduce the moment arm, the weight may be
strength training. Finally, for an extreme challenge, a gym-
placed proximal on the radius and ulna. As the dog gains
nastic cavaletti ("bounces") can be created so that the dog
strength, the weight may be moved further distally or more
dun! pue ‘asnnd Aganq 'puel 'leu yona iaao dun! asnu
weight may be added.
again without taking a stride between rails, creating a plyo-
metric exercise.
Stairs
Treadmill Walking and Jogging
Climbing stairs is useful to improve power in the rear-limb
extensors, whereas descending stairs helps strengthen the
Treadmills are excellent tools for helping to improve
forelimb extensors. In many instances, negotiating stairs is
endurance, and they may be used to help with limb
an activity of daily living that may be performed in the
strengthening during gait. Not only can the walking or
home environment. Quadriceps and gluteal muscle groups
jogging time, length and speed increase, but the treadmill
are strengthened as the animal pushes off, extending both
may be angled up or down to reduce or increase the forces
hips and knees while propelling the body up the steps.
placed on the forelimbs or rear limbs. Dogs that are trained
Conversely, the biceps brachii, triceps, and extensors of the
to walk on leash generally are easily trained to walk on a
 carpus are strengthened by descending stairs.
treadmill. The fat, regular surface of the treadmill belt also
allows exercise on a consistent surface with lower risk of
Exercise Considerations
 a misstep. Patients should always be directly supervised,
The dog must begin slowly climbing stairs to encourage
however, especially when the patient is becoming fatigued
proper use of the rear limbs, as opposed to simply carrying
or the speed is at a fast walk or greater. In addition to
the limb, hopping with both rear limbs, or skipping up
monitoring for obvious fatigue, such as pulling on the
stairs. Encourage the dog to go slowly and deliberately.
hamess or stumbling, it is possible to obtain respiratory
climbing the stairs in a reciprocal stepping gait. Stairs
rates and to record heart rates with an electrocardiogram
should be introduced slowly because this is a challenging
machine or a telemetry unit to gain some insight regarding
exercise for both the musculoskeletal and cardiovascular
conditioning fitness over time. Care should be taken to not
systems and the animal may fatigue quickly. Initially, some
 exercise beyond mild fatigue because the risk of injury
may increase substantially.
520
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
The patient should not be exercised beyond mild fatigue.
 Exercising when fatigued leads to muscle weakness, poor
control of accessory joint motion, and delayed propriocep-
 tion responses, all resulting in possible joint injury.
Exercise Considerations
Jogging may be initiated in cases with stable surgical
repairs when the dog is walking on the limb with minimal
lameness and pain, and the stage of tissue recovery can
withstand jogging. Begin slowly, jogging 0.5 to 3 minutes
one to three times daily, and work up to 20 minutes two to
three times daily. Be certain that lameness is not worse
after jogging. As the patient develops adequate condition-
CTRUE
 ing and strength to easily tolerate this level of activity.
interval training may begin, which alters short bursts of
Figure 30-18 To add resistance to limbs during treadmill activity
speed activity with slower jogging. It is believed that this
to aid with muscle strengthening, an elastic band may be used to
fonm of training may result in accelerated gains in speed
 provide resistance to specific muscle groups.
and conditioning. An altermative if the therapist or owner
cannot jog with the patient is to use an extendable leash to
Exercise Considerations
allow the dog to trot or jog out, and then return to the
A warm-up period of walking and then fast walking is
 handler immediately, repeating this cycle several times for
recommended prior to trotting on a treadmill. This also
a total duration of 5-20 minutes.
allows a period of adaptation to gaiting on the treadmill. It
Walking and Jogging in Tall Grass, Sand,
is important that the treadmill speed be rapidly increased
when changing gait from a walk to a trot to avoid an
or Snow
awkward transition. In general, most medium to large dogs
Walking or jogging a dog through a feld of tall grass, sand,
walk comfortably at a rate of 0.9-1.2 m/s (2-2.7 mph).
Or snow enhances muscle strengthening. endurance, and
A medium trot is generally 1.7-2 m/s (3.8-4.5 mph). To
cardiovascular conditioning because of the resistance pro-
add resistance to limbs during treadmill activity to aid
vided by these media. In addition, dogs have a tendency to
with muscle strengthening, an elastic band may be used
fex their joints to a greater extent as they negotiate these
to provide resistance to specific muscle groups (Figure
substances, resulting in additional cardiovascular condi-
30-18). The band is secured to the involved extremity and
tioning and strengthening through a greater range of joint
the handler provides tension on the other end. For example,
motion.
the band may be tied around the forearm with tension
Exercise Considerations
applied from the rear, providing resistance and strengthen-
ing of the elbow fexors and shoulder extensors during the
Walking or jogging in deep sand or snow provides resis-
swing phase of gait. Flexor muscle strengthening may be
tance to limb movement and strengthens the flexor muscles,
 achieved by putting leg weights on the desired limbs.
which must contract more to lift the limbs. Extensor
 muscles may be preferentially recruited when walking or
bub60r
jogging in tall grass because they must contract to a greater
 Jogging not only helps to improve cardiovascular condi-
degree to advance the limb. Exercising in sand and snow
tioning, but it also helps with muscle strengthening.
also minimizes concussive forces placed on arthritic joints,
Jogging should be considered when increased speed is
while allowing strengthening of supporting periarticular
desired during the intermediate stage of recovery from
muscles. Further strengthening may be achieved by using
injury or surgery, as a transition from walking to running.
leg weights, weighted backpack or elastic resistance bands.
Early speed training aids muscle strength and the velocity
 of muscle contraction, important factors in improving
Leg Weights and Resistance Bands
speed. Consideration should also be given to the increased
To add resistance to limbs during exercise and increase
force placed on an affected limb when transitioning from
muscle strengthening, leg weights or elastic bands may be
walking to jogging. For example, walking places approxi-
used to target specific muscle groups (Figure 30-19). Leg
mately 60% and 30% of body weight on a forelimb and
weights are frequently used in dogs with weakness as a
hindimb, respectively, at a walk.! Progressing to a
result of injury to musculoskeletal tissues and subsequent
surgery, or neurologic conditions. Leg weights may be
mately 110% and 70% of body weight on a forelimb and
fashioned from lead strips, or commercially available leg
hindlimb, respectively.
weights for people may be used. It is important that the
Chapter 30 
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion, Strengthening, Endurance, and Speed Exercises 
521
lowered to the ground. Strengthening of the fexor muscles
has occurred in this situation, and eventually the dog places
the limb on the ground, resulting in improved weight
bearing while standing or walking. Therefore a positive
outcome has occurred.
Elastic resistance bands are also frequently used for
limb muscle strengthening. Bands come in various degrees
of resistance, with the lighter colors generally having the
least resistance and darker colors having greater resistance.
The band is secured to the involved extremity and the
handler provides stability on the opposite end. For example,
the band may be tied around the foreanm with the line of
 pull from the rear, providing resistance and strengthening
of the elbow fexors and shoulder extensors during the
swing phase of gait. Although leg weights require no real
Figure 30-19  To add resistance to limbs during exercise and
 intervention on the part of the therapist other than securing
increase muscle strengthening, leg weights or elastic bands may be
the weight, the therapist is usually engaged while using
-nyoualh peipaw aui se yns sdnonn apsns sads iahiet oi pasn
resistance bands. The tendency is to try to "time" the
meral structures.
movement of the limb with the therapist's hand motions.
Frequently, this is mistimed and results in disruption of the
gait cycle of the dog. In most cases, it is better to simply
method of securing the weight is appropriate for dogs.
apply some light constant tension to the band and allow
Many leg weights designed for people may not fit properly.
the dog to contract the desired muscle group against the
Many of these are filled with sand, and when the weight is
band to move the limb. The tension is placed on the band
applied to the thinner dog limb, the fastening straps may
in the direction opposite the muscle group for which
not provide a snug fit, allowing it to slip off. Removal of
strengthening is desired. For example, if strengthening of
some of the sand may solve this problem. The leg weight
the quadriceps muscle is desired, caudal tension is placed
must be firmly attached to the dog's limb because most
on the band. Therefore when the limb is advanced and the
dogs will attempt to shake the weight off when first intro-
quadriceps muscles contract to extend the stifle during the
 duced to it. In addition to considerations regarding secur-
end of the swing phase of gait, the caudal tension on the
ing the leg weight, placement on the limb should also be
band results in increased contraction strength of the quad-
considered. The moment arm, and therefore the stress on
riceps muscle. Unlike leg weights, which result in strength-
the limb, is less when the weight is placed closer to the
ening of all muscle groups, resistance bands may be used
affected limb segment. If additional muscle force to move
 to target specific muscle groups. For example, in a dog with
the limb is desired, the weight should be placed distal to
early medial shoulder instability, it may be desirable to
the affected segment so that a larger muscle force is gener-
strengthen the medial shoulder muscles, including the sub-
ated to move the limb and weight. A general rule of thumb
scapularis. An elastic band may be used to increase the
is to use a weight that is between 1% and 3% of body
contraction strength of this muscle group. For example,
weight, depending on limb strength and the stage of recov-
while walking on a ground treadmill, gentle lateral tension
ery. Therefore % -lb leg weights may be used on dogs that
is applied to the band, so that the adductor muscles must
weigh 10 to 20 1b, 1-1b weights 0n dogs weighing 20 to
contract to a greater degree, resulting in strengthening of
40 1b, 1% -lb weights for 40- to 60-1b dogs, and 2-1b
that group. Similarly, resistance bands may be used to
weights for dogs weighing more than 60 Ib. Caution should
apply tension while hopping the animal laterally, similar
be used when first applying the weights because some dogs
 to hopping performed during neurologic evaluation. The
may shake the limb or have exaggerated limb motion
degree of tension applied should not result in discomfort
because of the altered sensation. It is possible that injury
to the dog or significantly alter the dog's gait. In general,
may occur, so it is important to gradually introduce the
elastic resistance bands are used most frequently while
weight to allow a period of accommodation. Leg weights
walking over ground or on a ground treadmill, but they can
are most effective in strengthening the fexor muscles
 also be used while swimming or walking on an underwater
because these muscles are engaged to lift the limb during
treadmill. In these situations, the band should be stretched
the swing phase of gait to advance the limb. In many dogs
out and laid fat to dry to avoid sticking together.
that are not accustomed to the leg weight, the limb will be
held up in a fexed, non-weight-bearing position, and the
Pulling or Carrying Weight
therapist may be discouraged. However, the fexor muscles
A variety of harmesses are available for dogs to attach to
will fatigue in most cases, and the limb will be gradually
carts or sleds for pulling weight. The harmess should be
522
Section V
Therapeutie Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 30-20  Pulling a sled with added weight helps with muscle
strengthening.
Figure 30-21  Additional strengthening of the limbs may be
achieved by using flotation devices placed on a limb while walking
 on an underwater treadmill.
well padded and comfortable. Pulling a cart with a large
wheel diameter is easier than pulling a sled that slides
 along the ground. The positions of the head and neck are
important in determining whether a dog pulls the weight
forward with the forelimbs or drives forward from the rear
limbs (Figure 30-20). If the dog carries its head and neck
Jow to the ground, it is likely pulling with the forelimbs.
A dog with the head and neck held high will shift some of 
the weight caudally and tend to use the rear limbs to drive
the body forward. A variety of sleds and carts are com-
mercially available. In all cases, the harmess should be
adjustable and properly fit the animal and cart or sled to
avoid abnormal pressure where the hamess contacts the
animal; a poorly fitted rig may result in pressure sores and
alter the manner in which the dog pulls the weight.
Figure 30-22  Resistance bands may be attached to a limb while
Dogs may also strengthen the core and postural muscles
walking on an underwater treadmill. The therapist pulls on the band
by wearing a canine backpack filled with weights. Weights
in the direction opposite of the muscle group in which strengthening
may be loaded unequally or equally on both sides. When
is desired.
a dog wears a weighted backpack during down-to-stand or
sit-to-stand exercises, greater muscle force is required to
rise to a standing position. There does not seem to be a
 Strengthening of muscle groups is achieved by moving the
sides of the dog or asymmetrically to enhance weight
limbs against the resistance of the water. The effort to move
bearing on an affected limb. A trial-and-error approach
the limbs increases by a factor of the velocity to the third
should be used on an individual to determine the best
 power when the speed of swimming is increased; a similar
        
phenomenon presumably occurs when the velocity of
bearing on a particular limb. In general, these devices
underwater treadmill walking increases. Further strength-
should be limited to dogs that are either healthy and using
ening may be achieved by using fotation devices placed
them for conditioning, or for dogs that are rehabilitating
on the limbs (Figure 30-21). Similarly, resistance bands
from a specifc injury (e.g. CCL tear) and are using them
may be attached to the limbs; the therapist pulls on the
for a specific purpose in rehabilitation, such as building up
 band in the direction opposite of the muscle group in which
the hip extensor muscles. Dogs with conditions such as OA
strengthening is desired (Figure 30-22).
may be made worse by increasing the weight they are car-
rying, which increases forces on abnormal joint.
Speed Exercises
Aquatic Exercises
As the patient recovers and has very good to full weight
The reader is referred to Chapter 31 on aquatic therapy for
bearing on the limbs, the goal should be to returm the dog
specific information regarding aquatic exercise, especially
to as complete athletic function as possible. Although
underwater treadmill walking and trotting and swimming.
most dogs undergoing rehabilitation are not competitive
Chapter 30
 Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion, Strengthening, Endurance, and Speed Exercises 
523
athletes, nearly all dogs enjoy running and playing. There-
cats may actually become less comfortable and more suspi-
fore rehabilitation patients should be gradually conditioned
cious of various rehabilitation activities. In addition, many
to withstand the rigors of activity at moderate to high
cats are not motivated by food rewards as dogs are. There-
speeds. It is vital that this phase of training not occur before
fore a different approach to physiotherapy is often
adequate tissue healing and muscle strength and endurance
necessary.
have occurred to prevent possible injury. Trotting, running.
 Proprioceptive exercises may be performed similar to
and running on a treadmill are all methods to increase
dogs, and include weight shifting activities, balance board,
speed. In addition, sport-specific activity should be gradu-
wobble board, and standing on a therapy ball or roll. A
ally introduced to improve function. Interval training
small foam roll or roll of paper towels undermeath the cat 
techniques may be especially effective in enhancing perfor-
to help provide support may make the proprioceptive activ-
mance, including endurance training. With this form of
ities easier. The therapist must be very observant and watch
training, near-maximal effort is used, followed by a less
the cat for signs of agitation to prevent the cat from having
intense effort. The cycles are repeated during a single
an unpleasant experience during rehabilitation. Initial ses-
training session. The number and length of cycles are grad-
sions may only last for 30 seconds on a balance board, for
ually increased to add conditioning stress to enhance
example. If the cat has a pleasant experience, the sessions
 performance.
may gradually extend to 1 or 2 minutes on the balance
board.
Controlled Ball Playing
 Most cats are not trained to walk on leash, but if a par-
Ball playing is a fun and effective form of therapeutic
ticular individual is able to, especially with the hamess,
exercise that dogs and their owners enjoy. It also has the
then leash walks are some of the earliest therapeutic exer-
potential to cause damage to surgical repairs. Controlled
cises that may be performed. Ground treadmill walking
activity is the key. The degree of activity depends on the
with support and assistance is another way to improve limb
surgical procedure performed, the condition of the tissues,
use. With many therapeutic exercises, cats that are accus-
and the stage of tissue healing. Ball playing should begin
tomed to going into their carrier may be lured into an open
on a relatively short leash to avoid explosive activity in the
door. This technique can be effective for a number of exer-
early postoperative period. As the patient progresses, the
cises. As the cat improves with treadmill walking, strength-
 dog graduates to ball playing in an enclosed area, such as 
ening can be achieved with small leg weights or elastic
a run. As the animal nears full returm to function, off-leash
resistance bands to increase the strength of muscle contrac-
activity may be performed in a large fenced field free of 
tion. Many cats will resist this type of activity and it is
irregular surfaces. The main benefits of ball playing are to
important to be certain that the cats do not injure them-
 increase power, speed, and muscle strength. In most condi-
selves while resisting.
tions, jumping should be avoided to reduce the risk of
Many cats will also play with feathers or toys tied on
injury. It is important to start by rolling the ball or throwing
the end of the string to encourage activity and motion. A
such that the ball is not bouncing high in the air, which
catnip mouse works well as a lure to get the cat to move.
encourages jumping.
Cats that are conditioned to come running when the can
opener is running can be exercised by putting them in a
Exercises for Cats
 different area of the house and then starting the can opener,
resulting in the cat coming to the open can.
 Physical rehabilitation of cats can be challenging. The
 Active ROM of joints is also important after many sur-
principles of physiotherapy in cats are similar to those of
gical procedures. One such exercise is to have the cat walk
dogs. However, the personality of some cats can alter the
over low cavaletti rails. Again, an open carrier at the
approach to physiotherapy. The most common reasons to
end of the cavaletti rails may entice the cat to walk
perform physiotherapy in cats are generally related to inju-
over the elevated rails. It is important to let the cat win
ries sustained as a result of trauma or joint conditions.
every so often by actually letting them advance into the
 Fractures of the long bones, especially the femur and tibia,
carrier. Some cats respond quite well to a fashlight beam
as well as the pelvis are relatively common. Common joint
or laser light moving along the ground. Although cats tend
 conditions that undergo postoperative rehabilitation include
to move in a relatively rapid manner as opposed to
cranial cruciate ligament rupture, deranged stife, femoral
slow consistent movements, it can be an effective way to
head and neck excision, and patella luxation. On occasion,
entice movements as well as stretching along a wall or
neurologic conditions occur in cats that could benefit from
vertical surface. However, caution should be exercised so
 physiotherapy, including trauma and intervertebral disk
that cats do not develop an obsessive-compulsive disorder
hermiation. Osteoarthritis is yet another condition for which
with light chasing.
physiotherapy may be beneficial.
Aquatic therapy is possible in many cats. Although
Although most dogs improve and become more com-
many cats do not like water, a number of cats will tolerate
fortable with rehabilitation as the sessions continue, most
either swimming or walking on an underwater treadmill.
524
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
The therapist generally will need to accompany the cat in
of the patient, weight control is extremely important. It is
the aquatic environment. A small life jacket is advised in
also important to continue to oversee the protocol and
cats that will undergo swimming.
document improvement. Progress will occur at a slower
Although physiotherapy in cats is more challenging
rate during the chronic phase of recovery, but continued
than in dogs, it is still an important part of recovery to help
rehabilitation is just as important to ac hieve as full a returm
returm them to full function as quickly as possible. Careful
 to activity as possible.
attention to behavior differences in cats and choosing
Several medications may be appropriate for use in the
activities that the cat enjoys are critical to successfully
chronic rehabilitation period, including intermittent non-
 provide rehabilitation to cats.
steroidal antinflammatory agents and chondroprotective
agents. Caution should be used, however, to be certain
Factors Affecting Progression of Exercises
that any analgesic medications do not mask pain and dis-
comfort associated with the level of activity. They should
Many variables must be considered in the design of a
facilitate rehabilitation and recovery rather than allow
therapeutic exercise program to enhance strength, endur-
rehabilitation to progress faster than normal conditions and
ance, and speed, including the type and severity of the
tissue healing should allow.
condition; the stability of any surgical repairs; the number
of involved limbs and joints; the size of the animal; the
 preexisting physical condition of the patient; the available 
Summary
facilities; the skill and experience of the therapist; and
whether the exercises will be administered by a profes-
Therapeutic exercises to increase joint motion, strength
sional, the owner, or a combination of the owner and a
endurance, and speed are undoubtedly the most impor-
professional. Unfortunately, it is impossible to have a
tant aspects of rehabilitation. They may (and should) be
single protocol for each specific condition. Some basic
 incorporated with other modalities to enhance recovery.
guidelines may be applied, however.
but it is the exercises that help improve muscle strength,
The goal of any therapeutic exercise program should be
joint mobility, limb use, and endurance to maximize
to restore the animal to as full and active use as possible.
function. Although a variety of techniques have been
The goal may need to be periodically adjusted if the patient
described, the ingenuity of the rehabilitation team,
 progresses to a greater or lesser degree than expected. As
including the owner, will allow the development of other
the animal nears retum to function, strategies should be
exercises that are specific to a patient's recovery. The
developed to encourage muscle mass and strength, endur-
keys to a successful therapeutic exercise program are to
 ance or power, depending on the intended function of the 
 have site- and condition-specific exercises whenever pos-
patient.
 sible, to use a variety of exercises and techniques to keep
It is very important to perfonn the exercises correctly
the therapy team and patient from becoming bored, and
and to maintain a consistent level of activity daily or
every other day. When considering a muscle strengthening
tissues are adequately challenged for strengthening, but
not so rapidly as to result in complications and tissue
two to three times per week to avoid overtraining and
damage.
muscle pain. Overdoing activity will likely be detrimental
to the animal's recovery. Appropriate nutrition is also
REFERENCE
important when undergoing muscle strengthening, espe-
1. Holler PJ, Brazda V, Dal-Bianco B et al: Kinematic motion
cially appropriate protein and amino acid balance in the
anal ysis of the joints of the forelimbs and hind limbs of dogs
diet.
during walking exercise regimens, Am J Vet Res 71:734-740,
If pain or lameness increases during or several hours
2010.
after stepping up an activity, the level of activity should be
2. Carr J, Millis DL, Weng. Canine physical rehabilitation:
reduced by 50% for 3 to 7 days. If the lameness and pain
range of motion of the forelimb during stair and ramp ascent,
then resolve, the activity may be slowly increased back to
 J Sm Anim Pract In Press, 2013.
the pre-step-up activity level over 3 to 5 days, with careful
3. Durant AM, Millis DL, Headrick JF: Kinematics of stair
observation to be certain that the activity is not increased
ascent in healthy dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 24:99-
105, 2011.
-ds guanasns yo ae a iidi n aiss c
4. Richards J, Holler P, Bockstahler B et al: A comparison of
activity should be half of what it originally was to avoid a
human and canine kinematics during level walking, stair
recurrent episode of exacerbated lameness and pain.
ascent, and stair descent, Wiener Tierarztliche Monatsschrijft
It is also important to vary the routine for the animal's
97:92-100, 2010.
and the owner's sake to avoid boredom and to allow incor-
 5. Millard RP, Headrick JF, Millis DL: Kinematic analysis of
poration of function-specific activities in the animal's
the pelvic limbs of healthy dogs during stair and decline
 home or work environment. During chronic management
slope walking, J Small Anim Pract 51(8):419-422, 2010.
Chapter 30
Therapeutic Exercises: Joint Motion, Strengthening, Endurance, and Speed Exercises
525
6. Millis DL, Schwartz P, Hicks DA et al: Kinematic assessment
of selected therapeutic exercises in dogs. Proc 3rd Interna-
Congress/Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Keystone CO,
tional Symposium on Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation in
2006.
Veterinary Medicine, Raleigh, NC, 2004.
10. Jackson AM, Stevens M, Barnett S: Joint kinematics during
7. Feeney LC, Lin C-F, Marcellin-Little DJ et al: Validation of
underwater treadmill activity. 2nd Intermational Symposium
two-dimensional kinematic analysis of walk and sit-to-stand
on Rehabilitation and Physicat Therapy in Veterinary Medi-
motions in dogs, Am J Vet Res 68:277-282, 2007.
cine, Knoxville, TN, 2002.
8. McEachern GL, Millis DL, Headrick J et al: Kinematic
11. Budsberg SC, Verstraete MC, Soutas Little RW: Force plate
assessiment of sit-to-stand exercise in dogs with chronic
analysis of the walking gait in healthy dogs, Am J Vet Res
extracapsular cranial cruciate repair. Proc 2nd World Veter-
48:915-918, 1987.
nary Orthopedic Congress/Veterinary Orthopedic Society.
12. Riggs CM, DeCamp CE, Soutas-Little RW et al: Effects of
Keystone CO, 2006.
subject velocity on force plate-measured ground reaction
 9. Headrick JH, Hicks DA, McEachern GL et al: Kinematics
forces in healthy greyhounds at the trot, Am J Vet Res
of walking over cavaletti rails compared to overground
54:1523-1526, 1993.
31
Aquatic Therapy
David Levine, Darryl L. Millis, Jeffrey Flocker, and Lauren MacGuire
quatic therapy has become a very valuable com-
water. If a person's specific gravity is greater than 1, that
ponent of veterinary physical rehabilitation. There
 person will tend to sink. The greater the specific gravity.
 are specific principles of aquatic therapy that
the faster the sinking velocity.? Thus a lean animal that is
provide unique benefits to the patient that other forms of
not moving will have a tendency to sink faster than an
therapy do not provide. In addition aquatic therapy comes
obese animal.
naturally to many patients, which is especially beneficial
Buoyancy
because exercises in animal patients must be in a form that
they naturally perform or can be easily trained to do.
A body immersed in water is subjected to two forces,
 Although dogs cannot follow verbal instructions, they gen-
gravity and buoyancy. Buoyancy is defined as the upward
 u s  q e u  rm g n
decrease in the weight of a body while immersed.? Buoy-
Principles of Aquatic Therapy
ancy stems from Archimedes' principle: When a body is
fully or partially submerged in a fuid at rest, it experiences
It is necessary to understand the basic principles and
an upward thrust equal to the weight of the fuid dis-
properties of water, including relative density, buoyancy.
 placed.1.2.4.6 The amount of water displaced depends on the
viscosity, resistance, hydrostatic pressure, and surface
density of the body immersed relative to the density of
tension to appreciate the benefits of aquatic therapy. These
water.? An immersed limb or body with a relative density
are important components to consider when planning an
less than that of water will be assisted to the surface by
 aquatic rehabilitation program.
buoyant forces.7 An object with a relative density less than
1 floats because the weight of the object is less than the
Relative Density
weight of the water displaced.s Buoyancy acts directly
The relative density of an object is the ratio of the weight
Aoueonq jo iaua au gounronq jo rauao ay yno
of the object to the weight of an equal volume of water.
is the centroid of the displaced volume of water and
 Relative density depends on the composition of an object.
depends on the distribution of the displaced volume of fuid
Densities of various substances are defined by a pure
relative to the body.? Problems arise when the center of
number value called specific gravity. The specific gravity
gravity and the center of buoyancy are not in the same
of pure water is 1.0.? The specific gravities of fat, lean
vertical line. This can occur with the use of improperly
muscle, and bone are 0.8, 1, and 1.5 to 2, respectively.? The
placed foating devices, which can disrupt the vertical line,
relative density and specific gravity of an object determine
causing an animal to tilt or fip over so as to reach a state
how well an object will foat. If the ratio of an object's
of equilibrium. The location of the center of buoyancy
specific gravity to that of water is greater than 1, the object
varies depending on the percent of body fat and distribu-
will tend to sink, and if the ratio is less than 1, the object
tion of adipose tissue. The more caudal the distribution of
will tend to foat.4 The specific gravity of an object also
adipose tissue (which tends to occur more often in human
determines how much of the object's volume will foat
females than males), the closer the center of buoyancy is
under water. For example, the specific gravity of ice is
located to the center of mass.
approximately 0.92; therefore 92% of ice will be sub-
Buoyancy aids in the rehabilitation of weak muscles and
 merged to displace enough water so that the upward force
painful joints. It allows the patient to exercise in an upright
of buoyancy will equal the downward force of gravity, and
position and may decrease pain by minimizing the amount
8% will foat above the surface of water.?5
of weight bearing on joints. For ex ample the percentage of
A lean person's specific gravity may be as high as 1.10,
weight borme by human females when immersed in water
whereas an obese person's specific gravity may be as low
is approximately 5.9% to 8.7% at the seventh cervical
as 0.93.4 An object whose specific gravity is equal to that
vertebral level, 25% to 31% at the level of the xiphoid, and
of pure water (l) will foat just below the surface of the
40% to 51% at the level of the anterior superior iliac
526
Chapter 31
Aquatic Therapy
527
spine.0 Males bear 6.8% to 10%, 30% to 37%, and 50%
muscles and improve cardiovascular fitness. Viscosity is
to 56% of their body weight in the upright position at these
important in aquatic therapy for several other reasons. Vis-
same levels.'° Other studies of humans have also found
 cosity may increase sensory awareness and assist in stabi-
similar percentages of weight bearing at these same
lizing unstable joints.? It can also help prevent falling by
levels.!1.i2 In a study performed on dogs the amount of
 increasing the time span for patients to react,? which may
body weight borme when immersed in water (as a percent-
reduce patient anxiety. For example dogs with paraparesis,
age of body weight on dry ground) was approximately 91%
obesity, osteoarthritis, or severe deconditioning may be
when the water was at the level of the lateral malleolus of
more willing to walk in water than on land because of
the tibia, 85% at the level of the lateral condyle of the
water's combined properties of buoyancy and viscosity,
femur, and 38% at the level of the greater trochanter of the
which help to support the dog.
femur (Figure 31-1).13 This information may be particu-
Any body movement occurring in water must overcome
larly useful when treating patients with arthritis because
water viscosity.16 The resistance created by the viscosity of
joints may be unloaded as a result of the buoyant properties
the liquid is proportional to the velocity of movement
of water.
through a liquid. With increased velocity of movement in
water, there is a uniform increase in resistance.
Hydrostatic Pressure
  a  m  s 
Pascal's law states that fuid pressure is exerted equally
reduce resistance. Streamline flow is the steady, continuous
on all surfaces of an immersed body at rest at a given
movement of fuid. There is little friction between layers
depth. This fuid pressure is directly proportional to both
of fuid in streamline fow because the layers separate to
the depth and density of the fuid.4 Therefore the deeper a
move around the object and smoothly rejoin behind it.
body is immersed in water, the greater the pressure
Turbulent fow consists of irregular movements of the
exerted. The atmospheric pressure at the surface of water
layers of fuid.s The irregular movement in turbulent
is 1.00 kPa (15.7 psi), and fuid pressure increases by
fow causes increased friction between the molecules of the
0.029 kPa (0.43 psi) per foot of depth.? It can be estimated
fuid and between the object and the fuid. Eddies are
that the pressure exerted on a part of the body immersed 3
a form of turbulent flow in which the layers of fuid fol-
feet below the surface will experience a fuid pressure of
Jowing a moving object in water move in circular direc-
1.09 kPa (17 psi). Because hydrostatic pressure provides
tions. Eddies resist an object's movement in water by
constant pressure to a body or limb immersed in water, it
pulling the object backward. Because of all these factors,
may provide an improved environment for working with
 resistance in aquatic exercise may be increased by increas
swollen joints or edematous tissues.7 Hydrostatic pressure
ing the velocity of movement of the patient, increasing
opposes the tendency of blood and edema to pool in the
the surface area of the object or body part moving in
lower portions of the body and can therefore aid in reduc-
water, or by increasing the length of the lever arm of the
 ing swelling.3 The benefits of edema reduction because of
 object moving in water.16
hydrostatic pressure are used by pregnant women who
Surface Tension
exercise in water to help minimize swelling in their lower
extremities during exercise. The reduction in edema is
The tendency for water molecules to adhere to each other
probably caused by several factors, including a general
is known as cohesion.? Water molecules have a greater
increase in circulation with exercise, and the prevention of
tendency to adhere together on the surface. Resistance to
further pooling of fuids in the lower extremities by the
movement is slightly greater on the surface of water
pressure exerted on them by water.
because there is more cohesion on the surface of water.?
Hydrostatic pressure may also decrease pain during
 Surface tension is the force of attraction between surface
exercise. It is theorized that hydrostatic pressure provides
molecules of a fuid.? Surface tension is not a factor if the
phasic stimuli to the skin afferents (sensory receptors) that
moving body part is completely submerged in water. It
cause a decrease in nociceptor hypersensitivity. This acts
becomes a significant factor when a limb breaks the surface
to decrease a person's or animal's pain perception, which
of the water. Therapeutically if a patient is extremely weak,
may allow the patient to perform a variety of movements
 movements may be performed more easily in the water just
with less pain.714
beneath the surface rather than at or on the surface.
Viscosity and Resistances
Aquatic Exercise Research
Viscosity is a measure of the frictional resistance caused
by cohesive or attractive forces between the molecules of
 There are many benefits of aquatic therapy. Exercising in
a liquid.!$ The viscosity, or resistance to fuid flow, is sig-
water is effective for improving strength, muscular endur-
nificantly greater in water than in air,? making it harder to
 ance, cardiorespiratory endurance, range of motion (ROM),
move through water than to move through air. Water can
agility, and psychological well-being, while minimizing
therefore provide resistance that may strengthen canine
528
Section V
Therapeutice Exercise and Manual Therapy
91% of weight on land
Fill to Level of Lateral Malleolus
B5%
38%
FilltoLevel ofGreaterTrochanter
Figure 31-1 A, Dog in water to the level of the lateral malleolus. B, Dog in water to the level of the lateral epicondyle. C, Dog in water to 
the level of the greater trochanter. (Data from Levine D, Marcellin DJ, Millis DL et al: Effects of partial immersion in water on vertical ground
Chapter 31
Aquatic Therapy
529
with information regarding human studies of the benefits
in heart rate because of the initial lower resting heart rate.
of aquatic therapy. Table 31-1 provides a summary of these
Subjects in this study had lower resting heart rates in water
studies. It is likely that similar principles apply to animals.
than on land because of two factors: the refex response of
Gravity is the primary resistant force to exercise on
the cardiovascular system to the cold receptors of the skin,
land, whereas viscosity, friction, and turbulence are the
and the effect of hydrostatic water pressure exerted on the
primary resistant forces to exercise in water; these proper-
submerged body.20 The water temperature ranged from 269
ties have a direct effect on heart rate and oxygen uptake.20
to 26.5°C (78.8° to 79.7°F) during aquatic exercise. As
Arm exercises on land produced an increase in heart rate
discussed later, water temperature directly affects heart
from a resting rate of 77 beats per minute to 92 beats per
rate. Leg exercises further increased heart rate during water
 minute in men (age 21 to 27) and from 74 to 96 beats per
exercises: 76 (resting) to 124 (exercise) beats per minute
minute in women (age 20 to 29). Exactly the same anm
for men on land versus 60 (resting) to 139 (exercise) beats
exercises in water produced an increase in heart rate from
per minute in water, and 73 (resting) to 126 (exercise) beats
60 to 99 beats per minute in men and from 60 to 98 beats 
 per minute for women on land versus 60 (resting) to 126
 per minute in women. Compared with the subjects exercis-
(exercise) beats per minute in water. The increased weight
ing on land, the subjects exercising in water exercised at
of legs as compared with arms may increase the necessary
slightly higher heart rates and had a greater overall increase
energy expenditure for exercises performed on land
Table 31-1
 Summary of Human Studies on the Benefits of Aquatic Therapy
Study
Study Subjects
Study Parameters
Outcome
CARDIOVASCULAR STUDIES IN AQUATIC THERAPY
Avellini
 Three groups of
 Subjects trained on cycle ergometer 5
Water groups exercised at a lower
et al.,
five men
days/wk for 1 hr at 75% VO2maxs
 heart rate than land group
1983
group 1 exercised on land and
 groups 2 and 3 exercised in water 
at temperatures of 32° C and 20°C,
respectively
Bravo et al.,
 77 postmenopausal
Exercised in waist-deep water for
Improved functional fitness and
1997
women
60 min 3 days/wk × 12 months
psychological well-being
Choukroun
11 healthy
Subjects were immersed to neck in
Cardiac output increased significantly
and
volunteers (four
25°, 34°, and 40°C water;
 at 40° C versus lower temperatures
Varene,
women, seven
cardiovascular demands measured
1990
men)
at rest
Evans et al.,
Six men
Walked and jogged at similar
Only one third to one half of the
1978
metabolic intensities on a treadmill 
 normal walking and jogging speed
in waist-deep water
was required to work at the same
level of energy expenditure in
water as compared with on land
(on a treadmill)
Hall et al.,.
Eight women
Submaximal exercise on land and on
Heart rate higher at 36° compared to
1998
(mean 30.25
a treadmill in chest-deep water at
28° C; walking in chest-deep water
years old)
water temperatures of 28° and
yields higher energy costs than
36°C
walking at similar speeds on land
Johnson
 Four men (mean
 Same exercises perfonmed by the
Decreased resting heart rate in water
et al.,
24 years old)
same subjects on land and in
and increased Vo, demands when
1977
and four women
water: shoulder ABD/ADD and hip
exercising in water
(mean 24.5
fexion/extension with limbs
years old)
extended
Melton-
Eight adults with
Graded maximal exercise test on a
Higher maximum perceived exertion
Rogers
adult-onset
 stationary bike on land and running
and respiratory rate were seen in
et al.,
rheumatoid
in water wearing a fotation device
water running; water provides a
1996
arthritis (30-40
means for exercise for individuals
years old)
with rheumatoid arthritis
530
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Table 31-1
 Summary of Human Studies on the Benefits of Aquatic Therapycont'd
Study
Study Subjects
Study Parameters
Outcome
Perk et al.,
20 stable COPD
Cardiorespiratory parameters were
At rest in water there was a decrease
1996
patients
measured on land and in
in systolic and diastolic BP
temperature-controlled water
(32° C) at rest and during a 15-min
submaximal upper-body exercise
program
Whitley and
12 healthy female
Heart rate was measured immediately
Heart rates were higher at each speed
 Schoene,
 college students
after walking in waist-deep water
when walking in water vs. walking
1987
 and then on treadmill at same
on land
speed, duration, and distance
RANGE OF MOTION AND STRENGTH STUDIES IN AQUATIC THERAPY
Suomi and
17 women with
Exercise subjects participated in three
Greater increase in strength and
Lindauer,
arthritis
 45-min aquatic training sessions/
ROM occurred in the aquatic
1997
wk for 6 wk; control subjects were
therapy subjects
 asked to refrain from participating
in any organized physical activity
Tovin et al.,.
14 men and six
10 subjects participated in traditional
Rehabilitation program for patients 
1994
women (16-44
rehabilitation protocol (stationary
with intraarticular ACL
years old) with
cycling, gait training, steps, hip
reconstruction performed in a pool
ACL
fex/ext, ABD/ADD in standing.
was more effective in reducing
reconstructions
and knee fexion in sitting),
joint effusion and facilitating
whereas other 10 subjects
recovery of lower extremity
performed same exercises in a
function as indicated by Lysholm
pool; performed over first 8
scores; rehab in water is equally
postoperative wk
effective as on land for restoring
knee ROM and quadriceps strength
because of the increased mass and pull of gravity. This
Both expended the same amount of energy, despite the
study demonstrated that heart rate and oxygen uptake were
 greater velocity of people walking on land.21 A study by
 greater when performing exercises in water compared with
 performing the same exercises on land.20
vation that various types of exercises performed in water
The metabolic requirements are also greater for exer
(aquatic calisthenics, shoulder and leg exercises, bicycle
ergometry exercises, walking, and jogging) require a sig-
land. In a study by Johnson et al.20 men and women per-
nificantly greater amount of energy expenditure compared
formed the same arm and leg exercises in water and on
to the same exercises performed on land. Subjects in a
land. Oxygen uptake during exercise in water was 34%
study by Hall et al.22 also expended more energy walking
 greater in men and 27% greater in women as compared
in water than on land at speeds greater than 4 km/hour
with the same exercises on land.?0 The differences between
(2.5 mph).
men and women are probably owing to different body
When aerobic exercise is used in the rehabilitation
compositions (male body composition tends to be more
 process, it may aid in improving cardiovascular ftness and
 muscular, which requires more oxygen) and heights (men
weight reduction. Melton-Rogers et al.?3 compared exer-
tend to be taller and have longer extremities, thereby
cise during land bicycle ergometry with running in water
having a longer lever arm, which requires more exertion to
with a fotation device in individuals with rheumatoid
move). Another study found that subjects could walk or jog
arthritis. Higher ratings of perceived exertion (RPE) by the
at slower speeds in water than on land while expending the
subjects and respiratory exchange ratios were seen during
dunsuon uaxo q pansnau se raua jo gunoun aus
water running.23 These studies demonstrate that walking in
tion. In this study subjects walked at 2.6 to 3.5 km/hour
water at specific speeds may be sufficient to meet heart rate
(1.6 to 2.2 mph) in water, whereas subjects on land walked
requirements for developing and maintaining cardiorespi-
or jogged at speeds of 5.5 to 13.4 km/hour (3.4 to 8.3 mph).
ratory fitness.
Chapter 31
Aquatic Therapy
531
Aquatic exercises are also beneficial for muscle strength-
improvement in performing daily activities had a significant
ening. Bravo et al.17 performed a study on postmenopausal
impact on the overall increased functional ability of the
women who exercised in a pool with waist-deep water for
subjects.26 These findings support aquatic therapy as an
60 minutes, three times a week for 12 months. The average
effective rehabilitation technique for increasing functional
strength gain as a component of functional fitness was
ability and joint fexibility in people with severe joint
approximately 18%. Because of buoyancy water walking
disease. Osteoarthritic and rheumatoid arthritic patients
can provide an excellent altermative method of achieving
 participated in another study of the effects of aquatic exer-
and maintaining muscle strength and ROM in individuals
cise on ROM and strength.?7 Control subjects were asked to
with lower limb joint problems such as osteoarthritis (OA).
n d      
Although exercise in water may not be as effective in
throughout the duration of the study, whereas the exercise
achieving maximum muscle performance as land exer-
cises, rehabilitation in water may minimize the amount of
weeks, hip strength and ROM were measured. Hip strength
 joint effusion and lead to greater functional improvement.24
 in the aquatic exercise group increased 10.9%, whereas
Closed-chain exercises such as walking in water are more
ROM increased 11 .8% as compared with the control group.?
closely associated to movements in everyday activities
Water temperature may have a significant effect on the
than open-chain exercises because they recruit muscles in
cardiovascular response to exercise. Subjects in cool water
a more functional manner.2 Performing closed-chain exer-
 exercise at lower heart rates than those exercising on land
cises in an environment in which weight-bearing forces are
at the same workload for several reasons.? If the water
decreased may minimize or eliminate damage and inflam-
temperature is low, peripheral vasoconstriction occurs,
mation to the soft tissues, while maximizing functional
blood moves centrally, venous retum is enhanced, and
training. The aqueous environment may also aid in reduc-
stroke volume increases. Therefore to maintain the same
ing knee pain and joint effusion,24 which may facilitate the
cardiac output, heart rate decreases. In one study, subjects
recovery of lower-extremity function after cranial cruciate
s  u (o )    n
ligament (CCL) stabilization in dogs.
volume and decreased heart rate, thereby increasing exer-
Water's buoyancy can ease the performance of exercise
cise efficiency.? It is also our experience that dogs exercise
activities while also providing proprioceptive feedback to
at lower heart rates walking on underwater versus land
 aid in the rehabilitation process. The effect of buoyancy
treadmills at the same velocity and length of time (unpub-
allows for gentler active exercises by decreasing the loads
lished data, Millis DL, 2000).
placed on the injured tissues compared with exercises per-
Blood pressure is also affected by water temperature. In
formed on land.' Aquatic exercises may be used as a
a study of subjects at rest while submerged in 32°C
 transition to land-based exercises in postsurgery or postin-
(89.6°F) water, systolic blood pressure decreased 14 ±
jury rehabilitation. Water exercises are generally less
14 mm Hg and diastolic pressure decreased 6 ± 10 mm Hg
painful than land exercises because of the support that
because of peripheral arterial dilation. On the other hand,
exercising in water at temperatures that exceed body
in less discomfort maintain ROM and functional move-
temperature may increase cardiovascular demands above
ment, and provide a better sense of security when initiating
those of exercise alone.12 In one study, cardiac output was
active movements.18
measured at rest while people were immersed in water
There are many physiologic effects resulting from exer-
temperatures of 25°, 34°, and 40°℃ (77°, 93.2°, and
cise in heated water. Among them are increased circulation
104° F).30 Cardiac output of those immersed in 40° C water
to muscles, increased joint fexibility, and decreased joint
increased significantly. The authors of this study recom-
 pain.26 Templeton et al. performed a study to determine
mend that elite athletes train in water temperatures between
whether subjects with rheumatic diseases experienced
26°C and 28° C (78.8°F and 82.4°F) to prevent any heat-
changes in joint fexibility and functional ability following
related complications.3 This temperature range is also rec-
iaem u pasjoraxa soalqns gr'uesoid Aderau onenbe un
 ommended by the authors for pools in which healthy dogs
for 8 weeks. Exercises consisted of therapeutic games
are training. Lower temperatures are also apparently toler-
emphasizing both isotonic and isometric exercises of the
 ated quite well by dogs, especially those with thicker hair
trunk, neck, and upper and lower extremities. Water tem-
coats.
perature was maintained at 32.9°C (91.3°F), and the air
All of the benefits of aquatic therapy in humans
temperature was maintained at 31.7° C(89° F). Active ROM
(improved strength, muscle endurance, cardiorespiratory
and a Functional Status Index test that recorded the degree
endurance, increased ROM, decreased stress on healing
of assistance, pain, and difficulty experienced in the perfor-
tissues, and minimized pain) may also apply to dogs. The
mance of 18 tasks were measured before and after the
type of aquatic therapy used by therapists, veterinarians,
 8-week aquatic therapy session. The results of the study
and owners depends on the specific rehabilitation needs for
indicated that pain decreased with therapy, and active ROM
each individual. An understanding of the benefits of aquatic
and functional ability increased. The decreased pain and
therapy aids the prescription of specific protocols.
532
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Figure 31-2  Dog walking on underwater teadmill.
Aquatic Therapy Equipment
Figure 31-3  Dog receiving aquatic therapy in whirlpool.
This section provides the reader with infonmation con-
rently available for dogs. The anticipated use, size of the
dogs receiving therapy, and funds available help determine
the type of equipment best suited for rehabilitation. Some
AQUADOC
 of the available forms of aquatic therapy include under-
water treadmills, pools of various sizes, and whirlpools
(Figure 31-2).
Underwater treadmills are very useful for aquatic
therapy. In addition to the buoyancy and resistance effects
 of water, the treadmill encourages walking or jogging with
-   s    g  
ming. The height of the water can be adjusted, which alters
the buoyancy and alters joint motion. Underwater tread-
Figure 31-4  Dog wearing life vest.
mills are very useful in neurologic patients to help with
gait patterning with the support of the water. Units typi-
cally have entrance and exit doors, a storage tank for water,
the inner walls to which safety straps may be attached;
heater, filters, and water treatment with chlorine or bromine.
manual versus computer-controlled water treatment and
 Dogs typically walk into the unit, the doors are sealed shut,
heating systems; above-ground versus in-ground pools;
and the water is pumped into the chamber until the desired
and stairs, lifts, or ladders to enter the pool. In addition the
height is reached. The treadmill is then turmed on at the
physical aspects of the enclosure and surrounding area
appropriate speed. On occasion, a therapist may accom-
must be considered. For ex ample the humidity and conden-
pany a patient to assist with gait training. After treatment
sation associated with a heated indoor pool must be con-
is completed, the water is pumped out, the doors are opened
sidered. The floor surface around the pool must also be
and the patient is rinsed off and dried. Units are available
carefully designed to avoid slipping and falling by both
in some countries that have the water in the treadmill com-
 patients and handlers.
partment, with an adjustable treadmill that lowers into the
Other forms of aquatic therapy include hot tubs or
water. This type of unit helps to save space because a
whirlpools used in hospitals (Figure 31-3). Cost-effective
storage tank is not necessary, but the dog must be elevated
forms of aquatic therapy for smaller dogs include bathtubs,
on a lift to step on the treadmill; therefore, caution must
large basins, and plastic pools. Taking a dog to a lake or
be used to avoid the danger of the dog jumping from the
river is also a cost-effective means of providing aquatic
lift or treadmill.
therapy, but caution must be exercised when swimming
Swimming pools may also be used for rehabilitation.
dogs with recent incisions in these environments. Strong
Several options must be considered when installing a pool.
water currents and natural hazards must also be avoided.
Some of the considerations include whether jets or propel-
Equipment used in aquatic therapy for dogs can be rela
lers used to circulate the water and add resistance to exer-
 tively simple and inexpensive. One useful piece of equip-
cises will be useful; the location of the jets; the possibility
ment is a pet life preserver (Figure 31-4). These are
of adding an underwater treadmill into the pool; hooks on
designed to support the dog and allow free breathing. They
Chapter 31
Aquatic Therapy
533
 Over time.31 Although manual scrubbing with standard ger-
micidal detergents may reduce bacterial contamination,
complete removal of bacteria from the drains, edges, and
bottom of the tank may not be possible.?
Chlorine or bromine are commonly used to sanitize the
water in pools and underwater treadmills. These levels are
checked on a daily basis and adjusted as needed. Occasion-
ally a reaction such as a skin rash occurs but by rinsing
dogs off with water after aquatic therapy this is minimized.
Other values such as the pH and alkalinity are also checked
and adjusted. Dogs that defecate or urinate in the water or
are incontinent pose additional problems in maintaining
the cleanliness of tanks or pools. If an animal eliminates
or is incontinent in the water, the best way to minimize
Figure 31-5 Using a life vest to guide a dog during pool
cross-contamination is to drain the pool after each use and
exercises.
sanitize it. It is also recommended that this precaution be
taken with dogs that have open wounds. If draining the
pool is not possible because of its size, the pool should be
shocked with a chemical disinfectant, and dogs that have
open wounds should not use the pool for a period of time
recommended by the manufacturer to ensure that the water
has been sanitized. Although soiling the water poses poten-
tial problems, screening dogs before aquatic therapy may
help to reduce or avoid this problem. Dogs should be
walked before engaging in aquatic therapy to allow them
 an opportunity to eliminate.
Figure 31-6 Dog being transferred into a pool using a lift. (Cour
Aquatic Therapy for Dogs
tesy Trish Penick, San Diego, CA.)
 Conditions Benefiting from Aquatic Therapy
may include quick-release buckles with adjustable straps
and handles for an attendant to assist the dog while swim-
 There are many conditions for which aquatic therapy may
ming. Various sizes are available. They are also useful to
be beneficial, including rehabilitation of postoperative
control and guide the dog while performing pool exercises
fractures, CCL stabilization, neurologic conditions, tendi-
(Figure 31-5). Other devices used in aquatic therapy are
nitis, conditioning, and other disorders in which a dog is
balls and sticks for fetch games, a lift for entering or
reluctant to use the limb or there is a lack of strength,
exiting the water (Figure 31-6), and harmesses to direct and
ROM, proprioceptive ability, Or weight-bearing status.32
maintain contact with the dogs if the attendant is not in
The potential benefits such as strengthening, cardiovascu
the pool.
lar endurance, and improved function have been docu-
Persons working in the water with dogs may also benefit
 mented in humans, and aquatic therapy is now becoming
more common in veterinary medicine. Outcome assess-
tective clothing to guard against prolonged exposure to
ments of aquatic therapy programs are important for docu-
pool chemicals or cold water (see Figure 31-6). Those
menting progress and to determine the effectiveness of
working from outside the pool with dogs in water should
programs.
also expect to get wet and should take precautions.
Contraindications and Precautions to
The equipment required to clean and maintain tanks and
Aquatic Therapy
pools includes disinfectant solutions, protective gloves,
buckets, a water hose, brushes with handles to enable
Some dogs fear water or are reluctant to swim, and this
scrubbing of crevices, and clean, dry towels.? According to
must be considered before attempting treatment. In general,
Hecox et al., there is no conclusive evidence regarding
dogs tolerate an underwater treadmill better because the
clear advantages of any one specific type of disinfectant
water rises from the bottom rather than having the dog
paans suneaiasgo paodan pue sapms grauoue iaao
enter or be lowered into the water, such as a swimming
sodium hypochlorite (5.25%), sold as household laundry
 pool. If a dog panics the dog and handler could be placed
bleach, is an inexpensive and effective disinfectant.
in a potentially dangerous situation. The dog may injure
However, bleach may corrode the surface of stainless steel
itself with excessive thrashing. The handler may be injured
534
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
trying to restrain a panicked dog, or may also risk attack
Walking in the water, either on the bottom of the pool
by the animal. Questioning the owner regarding a dog's
 or on an underwater treadmill, is an excellent way to allow
history of swimming is critical, in addition to prudent
a dog with painful joints to exercise more comfortably
safety and handling techniques. If possible, dogs that will
because of the buoyancy provided by the water. This type
 be receiving aquatic therapy following nonemergency sur-
of exercise may be used as a progression to swimming if 
gical procedures should be introduced to aquatic therapy
the animal is either too weak or in too much pain to initially
before surgery. This allows for evaluation of the dog's
swim.
disposition toward swimming and also allows the dog to
 In addition to the buoyancy effects of swimming or
be introduced to the therapy received postoperatively. Pre-
walking in water, joint kinematics are also altered during
 operative evaluation is not possible for some traumatic
 aquatic therapy. Knowledge of aquatic kinematics is useful
 injuries, such as fractures. When receiving aquatic therapy.
in designing specific exercise programs. For example in
 dogs should never be left unattended in the water.3
one study comparing swimming with ground treadmill
Some veterinarians believe it is better to wait until inci-
walking, dogs that swam had significantly greater stife
sions or open wounds are healed before placing the animal
fexion and total stife ROM compared with ground tread-
in water to minimize the risk of infection; others may begin
mill walking (Table 31-2).3s Marsolais et al. published
aquatic therapy after the incision is sealed but before the
data supporting swimming as an effective rehabilitation
incision is completely healed. A safe recommendation is
modality in dogs following extracapsular repair of cranial
to wait until after suture removal if there are no wound
cruciate rupture. Two groups of dogs, control and surgical,
complications, including discharge from the incision,
were enrolled in the study. The surgical group consisted of
 gapping of the wound edges, or any evidence of infection.
26 adult dogs that underwent debridement of a ruptured
However, there may be conditions that warrant earlier use
CCL, partial or complete medial meniscectomy, and extra-
of aquatic therapy. Regardless of when therapy is started,
capsular stabilization. The control group consisted of 26
the wound should be sealed before initiation. The cleanli-
healthy dogs without cruciate injury. All of the dogs in the
ness of the water may infuence this decision, as well as
surgical group underwent the same aquatic rehabilitation
the animal's overall health and medical history. Betadine
 program focused on swimming. The rehabilitation sessions
impregnated adhesive drapes may be also be used to help
were performed twice daily, 5 days per week and consisted
seal an incision area prior to entering the water to protect
of 10 minutes of limb massage and passive ROM, 10
incisions.
minutes of walking on a treadmill, and 10 to 20 minutes
The cardiovascular fitness of the dog must be consid-
of pool time. Pool time consisted of altemating 1 minute
ered because many dogs are initially unable to swim more
of swimming and 1 minute of rest for a total of 5 to 10
than a few minutes before fatiguing. Swimming the dog
minutes of swimming. None of the dogs were allowed to
several times daily for only 2 to 5 minutes may still result
touch the foor of the pool during the swimming session
in significant gains in strength, ROM, function, and overall
 except when entering and exiting the pool. The owners of
cardiovascular ftness.3.34
the control dogs were instructed to allow normal activity
several days before data collection. The control dogs did
Aquatic Therapy Basics
not participate in any part of the rehabilitation program.
Reluctance to use a limb following injury is a common
Data collection consisted of measuring hip, stife, and hock
problem. Dogs that are reluctant to use a limb on land may
fexion and extension with slow (0.9 m/s) and fast (1.3 m/s)
use it in water to swim or walk on the bottom. Dogs that
walking on a treadmill and while swimming. Data collec-
may benefit from extra buoyancy because of weakness
tion revealed increased hip, stife, and hock fexion ROM
may be assisted by placing a life jacket or other fotation
in the control group during swimming over walking on the
 device around the dog's trunk, or by the use of an overhead
treadmill and increased stife (50° swimming and 300
walking), and hock (50° swimming and 35° walking)
encourage dogs to walk or swim. Having the animal fetch
fexion ROM in the surgical group during swimming. Stife
a ball or other object may have the same motivational
and hock extension, however, was less when swimming
effect. If possible swimming with the dog is another excel-
compared with walking in both groups. Hip joint ROM was
lent way of encouraging therapy, in addition to ensuring
not affected in the surgical group when swimming com-
that someone is present if the animal has any trouble.
pared with walking; however, the control group demon-
Caution must be used when swimming injured dogs in
strated increased hip ROM with swimming over walking.
lakes and rivers. Dogs must be prevented from diving or
The authors summarized that swimming is an effective
lunging off of docks or the shore when entering the water
modality to gain stife and hock fexion following extra
to prevent injury. Wading into the water with the dog until
capsular stabilization of CCL because it allows early mobj-
the dog is buoyant is recommended. Maintaining contact 
 lization without the added stress of weight bearing. Peak
with the dog at all times is important. In addition, water
vertical forces were 18.5% higher in the rehabilitation
sanitation and natural hazards must be considered.
group 6 months after surgery.3
Chapter 31
Aquatie Therapy
535
Rehabilitation
5±47.64*
10.6e
11.3e*
%.
3
6
二
SLOW WALKING
土
+
48.6 ±
r
102
29.4
105
7.
B
4.
7
q76
38.2a
2.
8.7.
14.8c
二
5
土
+
98.6
130.7 
62.8
101.5 :
135.1
6111
141.9
55.8
Rehabilitation
n.
.8
4
2
5
2
3
2
FAST WALKING
土
十
土
104.5
4.
4
100.1
3
138.9
120.2
70.5
15.0b
50.9a
?3.
3.7.
11a
95.9 ±
土
+
+
141.6±
+
88.2
97.1
133
182.3
X
107
80.9
Rehabilitation
7.84.*
8.
地川
6.3d
6
2
土
+
75.6
$
#
 SWIMMING
126.8
134.1
4.
7. 8. 23.
1.87.
5
4
8
Ⅱ9
2
 different letter
with different 
土
土土
6.
2.
9
4
112.9
151.5 :
9.7
216.9
8
28. 0
2.27
with
value
corresponding
C
(s/0)
C
Angular velocity (%/s)
Maximal flexion (°)
I extension
C
 extension
(。)
Maximal extension (
flexion
velocity 
Maximal flexion 
=
dnoib
controlqroup
Variable
 Maximal
Maximal
os ueaw se uanliae ee
Angular
Table 31-2
STIFLE
HOCK
Joint
即
536
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
Table 31-3
Conditions for Achieving Maximum and Minimum Joint Flexion and Extension during
Walking on Either a Ground or an Underwater Treadmill
MAXIMUM JOINT MOTION
MINIMUM JOINT MOTION
Joint
Extension
Flexion
Extension
Flexion
FORELIMB
Shoulder
142 degrees—ground
93 degrees—water
132 degrees-
-water
125 degrees—ground
(level 1)
(level 1)
Elbow
159 degrees
water
70 degrees-
-water
124 degrees-
-ground
98 degrees-
-water
(level 3)
(level 3)
(level 4)
Carpus
193 degrees-
-water
185 degrees—water
119 degrees-
—water
(level 4)
(level 1)
(level 4)
HINDLIMB
Hip
141 degrees-
—ground
93 degrees-
water
120 degrees
water
115 degrees—ground
(level 2)
(level 1)
Stifle
141 degrees-
-ground
64 degrees-
-water
113 degrees-
-water
109 degrees-
—ground
(level 2)
(level 1)
Hock
156 degrees-
—water
81 degrees-
water
135 degrees-
—water
115 degrees—ground
(level 3)
(level 2)
(level 1)
Values indicate the mean maximum and minimum joint flexion or extension angles of 8 dogs that ocur under the indicated conditions during walking.
Ground, Walking on a ground treadmill; water walking on an aquatic treadmil; level 1, water level at the greater trochanter; evel 2, water level at the stifle joint; leve!
3, water level at the hock joint; level 4, water level at the bottom of the foot.
From: Jackson A, et al.: Joint kinermatics of dogs walking on ground and aquatic treadmils. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Rehabilitation and
Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Knoxville, 2002.
However, stifle extension was less in swimming dogs
propulsion was decreased when water was filled to the
than in dogs undergoing ground treadmill activity. In addi-
level of the greater trochanter. Joint fexion was increased
tion dogs had less stife fexion, extension, and total ROM
with underwater treadmill walking. In general joint fexion
following stife surgery as compared with normal dogs.
was greatest with water levels at or higher than the joint of
Rehabilitation of dogs on an underwater treadmill may
interest. Therefore the advantages of additional joint
provide additional benefits regarding joint kinetics. The 
fexion achieved with swimming are also present with
relative degree of buoyancy and resistance to walking in
underwater treadmill walking, but full extension of joints
water can be adjusted by changing the water level. In addi-
also occurs with treadmill walking, which is not the case
tion, adjusting the water level to the level of various joints
with swimming.
 may further infuence joint kinematics because those par-
A fotation device, such as a children's water wing.
ticular joints must gain the necessary momentum and force
applied to a limb may also be used to alter joint kinemat-
to break through the water surface and overcome surface
ics. For example, if additional motion of all joints of a
tension of the water. One study compared dogs walking on
particular limb is desired, the device may be placed on the
a ground treadmill to dogs walking on an underwater tread-
distal limb. If additional joint extension and increased
mill at the same velocity (Table 31-3).37 In addition the
stance time are desired, the device may be placed on the
water level was adjusted to the greater trochanter (level 1),
contralateral limb. The altered sensation and unbalanced
stifle (level 2), hock (level 3), or the bottom of the foot
buoyancy of opposite limbs contribute to altered joint kine-
(level 4). Joint motion was determined in both front and
matics and may be used to achieve certain goals during
hind limbs, with each limb in a fully fexed non-weight-
rehabilitation.
bearing position, with each limb in the final propulsion
Underwater Treadmill Therapy
stage of weight bearing, and with each limb in the initial
braking stage of weight bearing. Unlike swimming there
Aquatic therapy performed in an underwater treadmill
was no significant reduction in joint extension with under-
allows for active range of motion similar to that in a normal
water treadmill walking during the initial braking phase of
gait using the warmth, buoyancy, and resistance of water.
stance with water levels at and distal to the stife. Therefore
Underwater treadmill therapy is used when there is a need
dogs had full active extension of all joints during a limb
for walking or jogging using a relatively normal gait
cycle, unlike joint motion during swimming. However,
patterm, with increased muscle or cardiovascular demand
hip, stife, and hock extension during the late phase of
and minimal risk of injury. Secondarily, it may be used to
Chapter 31
Aquatic Therapy
537
reduce muscle spasm or peripheral edema and improve
should not have therapy prior to 1 month after injury. These
mood or bolster confi dence.1-3
are common time frames for early aquatic intervention and
vary from patient to patient.
Advantages
Activity in an underwater treadmill has several advantages
Equipment
over swimming or immersion in water. Dogs move in a
Before getting in the water with the patient, precautions
 natural walking or jogging gait pattern, and joint extension
should be taken on the part of the therapist. Patient may be
is more complete than with swimming, The speed of the
fitted with a fotation vest to provide additional buoyancy.
treadmill may be adjusted. Slow speeds are used for early
Be certain that the personal fotation device (PFD) con-
 postoperative conditions, moderate neurological condi-
forms well to the body and does not interfere with either
tions, and patients beginning a conditioning program.
shoulder extension or hip fexion. Therapists may want to
Faster speeds may be used for higher levels of condition-
wear either a shortie or full-length wetsuit depending on
ing. The level of the water may be adjusted to alter the
their skill level and ambient temperature above the water.
degree of buoyancy, This may reduce the risk of injury and
Wearing a wetsuit minimizes injury by failing paws Or
reduces joint concussive forces. The resistance to move-
dogs climbing onto the therapist. It is also important to
ment through water increases the activity of muscles during
have a supply of foat toys, balls, and assistive devices like
the swing phase of gait. Warm water temperatures increase
cuffs made from pool noodles, weight cuffs, elastic bands,
circulation, caloric expenditure, and nerve conduction
rubber bands, and/or hair scrunchies easily accessible.
velocity; improve coordination; and allow for increased
These are used to encourage different range of motion of
soft-tissue elasticity.!-3 Additionally, hydrostatic pressure 
the affected or unaffected limbs. Pool noodles may also be
exerted by the water on extremities aids in the reduction
placed along side, in front or behind the animal to keep it
 of edema.4
centered while walking on the treadmill.
Underwater treadmill therapy allows for earlier inter-
Transfers
vention as compared with swimming. It promotes earlier
active range of motion of joints especially in fexion, and
Transferring the patient into and out of the underwater
strengthening of muscles. Functional carryover to land-
treadmill is generally easy because patients typically walk
based activities is usually seen very quickly.
into the chamber. The primary concerm is safety as well as
the comfort of the patient. Therefore, support with a sling
Underwater Treadmill Temperature
may be necessary if the patient is weak or reluctant to enter
Most underwater treadmills are maintained between 78 to
at first. Weak patients may also benefit from sling support
90 F. Warmer temperatures may be beneficial for relax ation
while in the underwater treadmill. This may be supported
of muscles. Cooler temperatures allow for more vigorous
by the therapist or a support pole that runs through the
exercise with less risk of overheating. When treating a
handle of the sling.
neurologic patient warmer water (85° to 90F) may be
Evaluation in the Underwater Treadmill
preferable. Orthopedic patients and dogs in conditioning
 programs do not require the same warm temperatures (78°
After the patient is in the underwater treadmill, the thera-
to 83°F).
pist may observe the gait of the patient from the side, front,
back or top. Gait evaluation in the underwater treadmill is
When to Initiate Underwater
often very revealing because it is like watching the patient
Treadmill Therapy
in slow motion, with exaggerated motion of the limbs and
Determining when therapy should begin is a decision made
joints. If the therapist accompanies the patient in the tread-
by the surgeon or veterinarian overseeing patient care. Fol-
mill, it is possible to palpate joints and muscles while they
lowing most orthopedic surgeries, 5 to 7 days is adequate
are moving through voluntary active range of motion.
if the incision is sealed with no drainage and the wound
Quality of joint movement, joint integrity, and determina-
edges are well apposed. The incision may be covered with
tion of individual muscle contractions can all be assessed
an adherent water-resistant bandage. However, some elect
quickly and easily.
to wait until the time of suture removal to avoid possible
Treatment
incisional complications. This allows for sufficient initial
tissue healing and initial therapeutic exercises. For surger-
Techniques for performing rehabilitation in the underwater
ies such as total hip replacements, 4 weeks or more may
treadmill include interval training, continuous walking or
be recommended. Neurologic rehabilitation postsurgery
jogging, walking that is enhanced by passive or manual
varies depending on the procedure and the quality of the
techniques by the therapist, and walking while wearing a
stabilization. Particular care should be taken to support the
resistive or adaptive device. Interval training is performed
 patient and not allow the incision to become wet. Dogs
early in rehabilitation and conditioning and consists of
with conservatively managed intervertebral disk disease
short periods of slow walking altermating with short rest
538
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
periods. This generally results in more rapid progress in
Advantages
strength and cardiovascular conditioning rather than allow.
ing the dog to walk for a longer period until exhaustion.
Immersion in water to perform exercise has several advan-
The speed is generally slow to begin with and may be
tages over an underwater treadmill. The patient is almost
increased every other session if the patient is doing well.
completely non-weight bearing and the thoracic and
The total time may be increased 10 to 15% per week if 
lumbar spines are suspended in a neutral position by water
adequate recovery and progress are made. In enhanced
buoyancy. This may reduce the risk of injury and elimi-
passive or manual walking, the therapist provides manual
nates almost all joint concussive forces. The antigravity
assistance to limb and joint movement at the appropriate
muscles are essentially inactive, resulting in only concen-
times of the gait cycle to facilitate nonmal gait or larger
tric muscle contractions that may minimize the potential
range of motion. When doing resisted walking the dog is
for delayed onset muscle soreness. Warm water tempera-
restrained by holding a vest, or using a leash or hamess.
tures increase circulation, caloric expenditure, and nerve
Adaptive devices to enhance underwater treadmill
conduction velocity; improve coordination; and allow for
therapy include fotation cuffs, small weight cuffs, and
increased soft-tissue elasticity.1-3 Warming of the tissues
 elastic bands. These can be attached to different segments 
through water temperature and increased metabolic demand
of the limb to encourage ex aggerated movement or provide
by way of swimming may also stimulate the release of
added resistance. Facilitation of joint and limb movement,
 endorphins and enkephalins that contribute to improving
particularly in attempting to improve active range of
mood, relaxing muscles, and managing pain. Additionally.
motion, is relatively easy in the water.
hydrostatic pressure exerted by the water on extremities
During the treatment session the therapist must con-
 aids in the reduction of edema.4
stantly monitor the patient. Be aware of the patient's level
Pool therapy allows for early intervention leading to
of anxiety and fatigue to allow adequate rest periods.
faster recovery. It promotes earlier active range of motion
 Labored breathing or loss of the rhythmic gait patterm are
of joints especially in flexion, and strengthening of muscles.
indicators of stress or fatigue. Patients that are older, poorly
Functional carryover to land based activities is usually seen
conditioned, or obese should especially not reach the point
of fatigue.
cially when land-based activity is not possible, such as in
Precautions and Contraindications
an overweight dog.
There are several precautions and contraindications for 
Pool Temperature
underwater treadmill rehabilitation. Patients that have a
high level of fear of the water should not undergo aquatic
Most therapy pools are maintained between 829 to 90° F.
therapy. Typical conditions that do not respond well to
 The most appropriate pool temperature for aquatic reha-
underwater treadmill rehabilitation are acute biceps ten-
bilitation will vary depending on the type of facility and
donitis and other severe muscle strains as well as fracture
the predominant patient population. Outdoor facilities 
repair with extermal fixators. Aquatic therapy should be
most often keep the water a few degrees warmer in the cool
used with caution or avoided with cardiac conditions that
months (88° to 90° F) and a little cooler in the summer (82°
limit exertion levels, especially in wanm water. Patients
with borderline respiratory conditions may have difficulty
relaxation of muscles. The cooler temperatures allow for
because of the hydrostatic pressure placed on the thorax.
more vigorous exercise with less risk of overheating.
Patients with open wounds or surface infections should not
Indoor facilities maintain more consistent temperatures
be placed in the underwater treadmill. Finally, incontinent
 based on their patient population. When treating a neuro-
patients or patients with diarrhea should not undergo
logic patient warmer water (85° to 90°F) is preferable.
underwater treadmill therapy.
Orthopedic patients and dogs in conditioning programs do
not require the same warm temperatures (78° to 86°F).
Pool Therapy
 Overheating can be easily avoided by using above-water
rests that allow evaporative cooling or by having the dog
Aquatic therapy performed in a swimming pool, or any
stand in a small cool pool placed next to the therapy pool.
deep body of water, allows for active range of motion or
The pool temperatures noted here are variable based on the
passive range of motion performed using the warmth,
ambient temperatures if the pool is outside with a range of
buoyancy, and resistance of water. Pool therapy is used
temperature from 50° to 115°F.
when there is a need for increased muscle or cardiovascular
When to Initiate Pool Therapy
demand and minimal risk of injury or when weight bearing
and balance are problems. Secondarily, it may be used to
Determining when pool therapy should begin is a decision
reduce muscle spasm or peripheral edema and improve
made by the surgeon or veterinarian overseeing patient
mood or bolster confidence.
care. Following most orthopedic surgeries, 14-30 days is
Chapter 31
Aquatic Therapy
539
adequate. This allows for sufficient initial tissue healing
and initial therapeutic exercises. For surgeries like TPLO.
TTA, and joint replacements, 4-6 weeks or more is required
to allow early bone healing. Neurologic rehabilitation post-
surgery varies depending on the procedure and the quality
 of the stabilization. Conservative (nonsurgical) neurologic
rehabilitation for conditions such as degenerative myelopa-
thy or fibrocartilagenous embolic myelopathy begins as
soon as the patient is medically stable, often immediately.
 Dogs with conservatively managed intervertebral disk
rae yuo I on iond adnra au nou pinous asnas
injury to allow a period of healing of the weakened annulus
fibrosis. Postsurgical patients with severe spinal cord inju-
ries with minimal motor function may benefit from swim
therapy as early as 5 to 10 days after surgery. Particular
care should be taken to support the patient and not allow
the incision to become wet. These are common time frames
Figure 31-7  A harness lift system can also be used.
for early aquatic intervention and vary from patient to
patient.
be hydraulic or electric and use either a sling or a platfonm
Equipment
to safely place the patient in the pool. A platform lift (see
Before getting in the water with the patient, precautions
Figure 31-6) has the added advantage of allowing the
should be taken on the part of the therapist. Nearly every
 patient to be lowered into the pool while its feet remain on
patient is fitted with a fotation vest to provide control and
a solid surface. Depth adjustability of the platform lift also
convey a sense of buoyancy to the dog. There are many
allows the therapist to control how much weight bearing
reliable personal fotation devices (PFDs) made for dogs.
 the patient performs when standing at rest on the lift. This
such as Cascade Outfitters, Outward Hound, and Ruff
provides an opportunity for balance and weight shift activi-
Wear. A good PFD conforms well to the body and does not
ties during rest periods between swims. A hamess lift
interfere with either shoulder extension or hip fexion. The
system can also be used (Figure 31-7).
Evaluation in the Water
wetsuit depending on their skill level and ambient tempera-
ture above the water. Wearing a wetsuit minimizes injury
After the patient is in the pool positioning it in front of or
by failing paws or dogs climbing onto the therapist. It is
beside the therapist allows for evaluation that cannot be
also important to have a supply of foat toys, balls, and
performed on land. It is possible to palpate joints and
assistive devices like cuffs made from pool noodles, weight
muscles while it is moving through voluntary active range
cuffs, elastic bands, rubber bands, and/or hair scrunchies
of motion. Quality of joint movement, joint integrity, and
easily accessible. These are used to make therapy fun or
determination of individual muscle contractions can all be
encourage different swim strokes.
assessed quickly and easily. As an example, for a hip joint
assessment, the therapist places his or her hand fat over
Transfers
the dorsal aspect of the hip while the dog is swimming. A
Transferring the patient into and out of the water can be
normal healthy hip will move smoothly and all that will be
performed in many ways. The primary concerm is safety as
felt is a rhythmic muscle contraction under the evaluator's
well as the comfort of the patient. Entering and exiting the
hand. Changes in articular cartilage or loose bodies in the
water are often the portions of rehabilitation in which the
joint have a crepitant feel, as though a little sand is in the
patient is at most risk of injury. Leaping into the water is
joint. Joint laxity is recognized by a range of sensations
the least desirable method. When using stairs to enter and
from subtle bumping, to clicking, to distinct clunking, to
exit the pool dogs may push back or push off and this can
snapping often accompanied by an audible pop. These are
put an extremity at risk of injury owing to rapid or poorly
indicators of abnormal femoral head movement within the
controlled loading. Steep pool steps also place extremities
joint capsule during a vigorous swim stroke. Other joints
in more demanding positions. Ramps work well especially
can also be assessed, to a lesser degree, with skillful
for ambulatory patients. Dogs are less likely to launch
palpation.
themselves from a ramp. Stretchers can be most helpful for
During the evaluation the therapist has ample opportu-
 nonambulatory patients or those with some degree of paral-
nity to educate the owner about their findings. Encourage
ysis. The therapist can easily slide a patient directly from
owners to ask questions about their dog's condition. In
the stretcher into the water. Lifts are often used. They may
human practice it has been shown there is a strong
540
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
the chin down, fattening the ears, and searching the
pool perimeter are indicators of stress or fatigue. When
exercising the patient look for other signs of fatigue
such as a change in the swim stroke or in their breathing.
It is also helpful to monitor the patient's tongue and gum
color; cyanosis is indicated by a blue color to the tongue
and mucous membranes. This is an indication to discon-
tinue exercise immediately and allow a period of rest.
Signs of distress previously listed precede this point,
and patients that are older, poorly conditioned, or obese
should especially not reach this point. It is important to
keep patients motivated by changing the routine or posi-
Figure 31-8  Dog swimming in a pool.
tioning them so that they work at a level that maximizes
recovery.
Precautions/Contraindications
correlation between a thorough understanding of the dys-
function and good home program compliance.
There are some contraindications for pool rehabilitation.
At times it is difficult to rule out if pool therapy is appro-
Treatment
priate for a patient without attempting a session to monitor
Techniques for performing rehabilitation in the water
the patient's response. Typical conditions that do not
include interval swimming, free swimming (Figure 31-8).
respond well to pool rehabilitation are acute biceps tendon-
resisted swimming, swimming against a current, swim-
itis and other severe muscle strains as well as early stages
ming that is enhanced by manual techniques, swimming
of TPLO or fracture repair recovery. Swim therapy should
while wearing an adaptive device, or passive techniques
be used with caution or avoided with cardiac conditions
performed by the therapist. Interval swimming is per-
that limit exertion levels, especially in warm water. Patients
formed early in rehabilitation and conditioning and con-
with borderline respiratory conditions may have difficulty
sists of short periods of swimming altermating with short
because of the hydrostatic pressure placed on the thorax.
rest periods. This generally results in more rapid progress
Patients with open wounds or surface infections should not
in strength and cardiovascular conditioning rather than
be placed in pool. Finally, incontinent patients or patients 
 allowing the dog to swim for a longer period until exhaus-
with diarrhea should not undergo swim therapy.
tion. Free swimming often involves following the owner
The following case demonstrates the usefulness of
or therapist around the pool or retrieving. When doing
aquatic therapy in restoring physical condition to a dog that
resisted swimming the dog is restrained by holding the
 had lost a great deal of function.
vest, or using a leash or harness. In enhanced swimming.
the therapist provides manual contacts to the feet or extrem-
Case Report
ity to facilitate a stronger contraction or larger range of
motion. This technique is reminiscent of proprioceptive
Blackie, a 2-year-old hound dog, was presented with a
neuromuscular facilitation (PNF) used in human physical
nonunion fracture of the left femur. The fracture was a
therapy.
short oblique fracture of the midshaft of the femur. The
Adaptive devices to enhance swimming include fota-
original repair consisted of an intramedullary pin and cer-
tion cuffs, small weight cuffs, and elastic bands. These can
clage wire. The fixation devices were prematurely removed
be attached to different segments of the limb to encourage
 2 months after surgery. Blackie refractured the same bone
exaggerated movement or provide added resistance. Facili-
4 weeks later. At this time, an extermal skeletal fixator was
tation of joint and limb movement particularly in attempt-
placed. Complications associated with pin loosening and
ing to improve active range of motion is relatively easy in
continued instability of the fracture site resulted in place-
the water. Passive range of motion can easily be performed
ment of an intramedullary pin. At this point the stife was
with the dog either foating in the vest or standing in shoul-
stiff. A recheck examination 2 weeks after surgery indi-
der deep water. Watsu is a technique in which the therapist
cated that the dog was not using the leg. The dog was
supports and moves a relaxed patient along the surface of
barely weight bearing while standing and was non-weight
the water using the resistance of the water to perform
bearing at a walk. Twelve weeks after the last surgery, all
passive range of motion on the spine and/or extremities of
fixation devices were removed. Following pin removal
the patient.
 instability of the fracture site was palpated.
During the treatment session the therapist must con-
Seven months after the original fracture Blackie was
stantly monitor the patient. Be aware of the patient's level
examined at a surgery referral clinic. At that time the dog
of anxiety. Know when to allow the dog to rest. Pushing
would occasionally toe-touch the limb during walking.
Chapter 31
Aquatic Therapy
541
but would hold the affected limb up most of the time. In
and relax muscle groups with minimal weight-bearing
addition the leg was painful, and the stife had only 5 to
activity. The gradual reintroduction of weight-bearing
10 degrees ROM. The quadriceps muscles were adhered
activity as the fracture site became more stable enhanced
to the fracture callus and the femur. Adhesions and exces-
rehabilitation. In this case the rehabilitation was primarily
sive callus were surgically removed to increase the stife
performed by the owner after careful instruction, and with
ROM. A bone plate was applied to stabilize the fracture
minimal facilities.
and align the bone. Following surgery maximum fexion
of the knee was 85 degrees and maximum extension was
REFERENCES
160 degrees.
 1. Haralson KM: Therapeutic pool programs, J Clin Manage
The day after surgery a nonsteroidal antinflammatory
5:510-513, 1988.
drug was administered twice daily. ROM and stretching
 2. Hecox B, Mehreteab TA, Weisberg J: Physicat agents: α com-
exercises were performed on the hip, stifle, and hock for
prehensive text for physicat therapists, Norwalk, CT, 1994,
20 repetitions, holding each stretch for 10 seconds. These 
Appleton & Lange.
were perfonmed four to five times daily. Following ROM
 3. Bates A, Hanson N: Aquatic exercise therapy, Philadelphia,
1996, Saunders.
exercises an ice pack was applied to the area for 10 minutes.
Two days after surgery stife extension was 155 degrees
4. Edlich RF et al: Bioengineering principles of hydrotherapy,
and fexion was 70 degrees. Three days after surgery
J Burn Care Rehab 8:579-584, 1987.
 5. Skinner AT, Thompson AM, eds: Duffeld's exercise in water,
Blackie was discharged from the hospital with instructions
ed 3, London, 1983, Bailliere Tindall.
to limit activity to leash walks only and to perforn ROM
6. Jamison L, Ogden D: Aquatic therapy using PNF patterns,
exercises four to five times daily. The therapy sessions
Tucson, AZ, 1994, Therapy Skill Builders.
were to be preceded by hot packs, and cold packs were to
7. Geigle PR et al: Aquatic physical therapy for balance: the
be applied after therapy. Following suture removal, swim-
interaction of somatosensory and hydrodynamic principles,
ming was recommended. The owner was warmed that
J Aquat Phys Ther 5:4-10, 1997.
Blackie might never regain full function of the limb because
8. Hay J: The biomechanics of sports techniques, Englewood
of the stiff stife.
Cliffs, NJ, 1978, Prentice-Hall.
For 2 months the owner continued performing the ROM
9. Roberson JA, Crowe CT: Engineering fuid mechanics,
Boston, 1985, Houghton Miffin.
exercises and walking. In addition, following suture
10. McLean SP, Hinrichs RN: Sex differences in the center of
removal the owner would allow the dog to swim in a river
buoyancy location of competitive swimmers, J Sports Sci
daily. The length of time was gradually increased so that
16:373-383, 1998.
he was swimming for 30 minutes daily by 1 month after
11. Hattison RA, Bulstrode S: Percentage weight-bearing during
surgery.
partial immersion in hydrotherapy pool, Physiother Pract
One month after surgery Blackie returmed for a recheck
3:60-63, 1987.
examination. It was noted that the stife had improved
12. Thein JM, Brody LT: Aquatic-based rehabilitation and train-
ROM. The thigh muscles were increasing in size, and the
ing for the elite athlete, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 27:32-41,
dog was using the leg quite well, although there was still 
1998.
an abnormal gait at faster speeds. Radiographically, there
13. Levine D, Marcellin DJ, Millis DL et al: Effects of partial
was continued but incomplete healing of the fracture site.
immersion on vertical ground reaction forces and weight
distribution in dogs, Am J Vet Res 71:1413-1416, 2010.
Blackie was discharged with instructions to continue phys-
 14. Johns KM: Aquatic therapy: therapeutic treatment for today's
ical rehabilitation and increase the length of leash walks.
patient, Phys Ther Prod 24-25, 1993.
The swimming activity was continued, and the dog was
15. Bueche F: Principles of physics, ed 4, New York, 1982,
exercised up and down hills by the owner. This activity was
McGraw-Hill.
continued daily with the amount of hill activity increasing
16. Babb RW, Simelson- Wart A: Manual techniques of the lower
to 1 mile by 8 weeks after surgery.
extremities in aquatic physical therapy, J Aquat Phys Ther
 Twelve weeks after surgery Blackie returmed for a
14:7-15, 1996.
recheck examination. At this time Blackie had full fexion
17. Bravo G et al: A weight-bearing, water-based exercise
(35 degrees) and extension (170 degrees) of the stife.
program for osteopenic women: its impact on bone, func-
There was a slight limp at a faster gait, but there were no
tional fitness, and well-being, Arch Phys Med Rehab 78:1375-
signs of pain and there was increased musculature of the
1379, 1997.
left rear limb. The fracture had reached union, and retum
18. Speer KP et al: A role for hydrotherapy in shoulder rehabili-
tation, Am J Sports Med 21:850-853, 1993.
to full activity was recommended.
19. Whitley JD, Schoene LL: Comparison of heart rate responses :
Although several exercises were used in the manage-
water walking versus treadmill walking, Phys Ther 67:1501-
ment of this case, the early swimming activity was likely
1504, 1987.
instrumental in the recovery of the dog. Because swim-
20. Johnson BL et al: Comparison of oxygen uptake and heart
ming was allowed very soon after surgery the dog was
Tate during exercises on land and in water, Phys Ther 57:273-
able to actively fex and extend the stife joint and contract
278, 1977.
542
Section V
Therapeutic Exercise and Manual Therapy
21. Evans BW, Cureton KJ, Purvis JW: Metabolic and circula-
30. Choukroun ML, Varene P: Adjustments in oxygen transport
tory responses to walking and jogging in water, Res Q 49:
during head-out immersion in water at different tempera-
442-449, 1978.
tures, J Appt Physiol 68:1475-1480, 1990.
22. Hall J et al: Cardiorespiratory responses to underwater tread-
31. Turner A, Higgens M, Craddock JC: Disinfection of immer-
mill walking in healthy females, Eur J Appt Physiol 77:278-
sion tanks (Hubbard) in a hospital burn unit, Arch Environ
284, 1998.
Heaith 28:101-104, 1974.
23. Melton-Rogers S et al: Cardiorespiratory responses of
32. Millis DL et al: A pre liminary study of early physicat therapy
patients with rheumatoid arthritis during bicycle riding and 
following surgery for cranial cruciate ligament rupture in
Tunning in water, Phys Ther 76:1058-1065, 1996.
dogs. Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of Veteri-
 24. Tovin BJ et al : Comparison of the effects of exercise in water
nary Orthopedic Society, Big Sky, MT, 1997.
and on land on the rehabilitation of patients with intra-
 33. Taylor RA: Post-surgical physical therapy: the missing link,
articular anterior cruciate ligament reconstructions, Phys
Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 14:1583-1593, 1982.
Ther 74:710-719, 1994.
34. Millis DL, Levine D: The role of exercise and physical
25. Kelsey DD, Tyson E: A new method of training for the lower
modalities in the treatment of osteoarthritis, Vet Clin North
extremity using unloading, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
Am Smalf Anim Pract 27:913-930, 1997.
19:218-223, 1994.
35. Marsolais GS, McLean S, Dertick T et al: Kinematic analysis 
26. Templeton MS, Booth DL, O'Kelly WD: Effects of aquatic
 of the hind limb during swimming and walking in healthy
therapy on joint fexibility and functional ability in subjects 
dogs and dogs with surgically corrected cranial cruciate liga-
with rheumatic disease, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 23:376-
ment rupture, J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:739-743, 2003.
381, 1996.
36. Marsolais GS, Dvorak G, Conzemius MG: Effects of post-
27. Suomi R, Lindauer S: Effectiveness of arthritis foundation
 -lio peueio ioe uogoung qu uo uogeyi sagerdo
aquatic program on strength and range of motion in women 
ate ligament repair in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:
with arthritis, J Aging Phys Activity 5:341-351, 1997.
1325-1330, 2002.
28. Avellini BA, Shapiro Y, Pandolf KB: Cardio-respiratory
 37. Jackson A et al: Joint kinematics of dogs watking on ground
physical training in water and on land, Eur J Appt Physiof
and aquatic treadmills. In Proceedings of the 2nd Interna-
50:255-263, 1983.
 tional S ymposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in
29. Perk J, Perk L, Boden C: Cardiorespiratory adaptation of
Veterinary Medicne, Knox ville, 2002.
COPD patients to physical training on land and in water, Eur
Resp J 9:248-252, 1996.
SECTION VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
32
Common Orthopedic
Conditions and Their
Physical Rehabilitation
Jacqueline R.Davidson and Sharon Kerwin
Shoulder Conditions
maintain or regain normal scapular motion in all three
planes. Postoperative physical  rehabilitation includes
NSAIDs, cryotherapy, and PROM exercises to the gleno-
Articular Fractures of the Shoulder
humeral joint for the frst several weeks. As healing pro-
It is critical that articular fractures be treated surgically with
gresses scapular PROM is performed in increasing amounts
anatomic reduction and rigid stabilization of the articular
 in all planes to prevent fibrosis and decreased ROM. Super-
surfaces. This is generally achieved using implants such as
a  a   or   u 
screws, wires, pins, or small plates. Nonsteroidal antin-
exercise to allow increased tissue extensibility, and cross-
fammatory drugs (NSAIDs), other analgesics, passive
fiber frictional massage may help to prevent or break down
range of motion (PROM) exercises, and short leash walks
adhesions. Joint mobilization using scapular glides is also
are used for the first few weeks after surgery. The goal of the
effective for increasing ROM. Aquatic therapy (underwater
early postoperative period is to maintain and improve joint
treadmill [UWTM] and swimming), and gait activities
range of motion (ROM), limit periarticular fibrous tissue,
such as treadmill walking may also be incorporated to
and allow time for adequate bone healing to support more
regain muscle strength.
vigorous active weight-bearing exercises. After adequate
healing has occurred, physical rehabilitation consists of
articular shoulder fractures are often supported in non-
continued ROM exercises with stretching if needed, and
weight-bearing slings postoperatively for several weeks.
active weight-bearing exercises such as progressive leash
The small pieces of bone involved combined with a poten-
walking and aquatic therapy (Table 32-1).
tially large amount of force normally exerted on the shoul-
Avulsion of the supraglenoid tubercle is an injury that 
der joint predispose the animal to failure of the repair
 Occurs in immature dogs and results in displacement of the
unless the repair is supported until healing has progressed.
tubercle. This injury may be classified as a traction physeal
Unfortunately, unwanted side effects of non-weight-bear-
ing slings (carpal fexion, Spica, or Velpeau bandages),
lameness and pain on palpation of the distal scapula. Surgi-
 include loss of nutrition to cartilage, joint stiffness, loss of
cal repair of this injury involves reduction and stabilization 
 range of motion, and muscle atrophy. Massage, PROM, and
of the supraglenoid tubercle with pins, wires, or screws.
measurement of fexion/extension angles should be per-
 Altermatively the fragment may be removed and the biceps
formed during each bandage change, and owners warmed
tendon left unattached or released. Physical rehabilitation
that several months of rehabilitation may be required after
includes NSAIDs, other analgesics, cryotherapy, leash
the bandage is removed to re-establish function. Commer-
walks, and PROM for the first 3 weeks. After this initial
cially available, removable slings may be more ideal, allow-
healing period, limb strengthening, especially of the biceps
 ing for some motion without weight bearing and in some
 brachi and brachialis muscles, is begun.
cases, removal to allow intermittent, controlled weight-
Scapular fractures may occur in any breed of dog as a
bearing, or rehabilitation exercises on a daily basis.
result of trauma. If the neck of the scapula or articular
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Shoulder
surface of the glenoid is involved, open reduction and
intermal fixation are usually indicated. Altermatively many
Osteochondrosis  is  a  developmental  disease  affecting
nondisplaced or comminuted scapular body fractures are
the growth plates and joint cartilage in medium and large
breed dogs. Abnormal endochondral ossification of the
543
544
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Table 32-1
Rehabilitation After Surgical
Repair of Articular Fracture
Goals
Treatment
Control
 Cryotherapy immediately after
 infammation
surgery and then daily until
infammation resolves,
particularly after exercise
Maintain range
 Passive range of motion and/or
of motion and
joint mobilizations for 3 to
joint health
4 weeks. Consider aquatic
walking to minimize joint
stress.
Add cavaletti walking after
several weeks, depending on
stability of repair.
Control pain
Nonsteroidal antinflammatories
Figure 32-1  Osteochondritis dissecans of the caudal aspect of the
plus other analgesics if needed.
head of the humerus. The right caudal humeral head is flattened and 
± Transcutaneous electrical
the linear density adjacent to the caudal humeral head is consistent
nerve stimulation
with an osteochondral flap.
Strengthen
Begin with controlled slow leash
muscle
walking. Amount of activity
 depends on stability of repair
If shoulder osteochondrosis is diagnosed early, decreased
and stage of healing. Short,
 activity may prevent cartilage flap formation. Cryotherapy
slow leash walks for at least the
and NSAIDs may be used to limit infammation. Use of
first few weeks.
disease-modifying osteoarthritis agents (DMOAs), such as
 glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate, may support cartilage
 health. Passive range of motion exercises help to maintain
joint range of motion and provide joint nutrition and stress
deep layers of articular cartilage results in focal areas of
along normal lines of movement.? Once a fap has formed
thickened cartilage that are prone to injury. Normal activity
it will not heal and should be removed. If the dog is more
may cause enough stress to create a fissure in the articular
than 7 months of age or the lameness has persisted more
cartilage. Contact of the synovial fuid with the deep layers
 than 4 to 6 weeks, surgery is indicated.4
of degenerating cartilage may cause synovitis. In the
Surgery is generally the treatment of choice in dogs
absence of further stress, the lesion may heal. However,
with clinical signs. It is performed via arthrotomy or
further stress on the cartilage may result in formation of a
arthroscopy to remove the defective cartilage and forage
cartilage fap. This condition is termed osteochondritis
Or curettage the bed of the lesion (Figure 32-2). This
dissecans (OCD). Osteochondritis dissecans has been
encourages vascular ingrowth and healing by the forma-
described in various joints of the dog, but occurs most
tion of fibrocartilage. After surgery NSAIDs, cryotherapy.
commonly in the caudal aspect of the humeral head. The
PROM, and controlled leash walks are instituted for the
etiology is multifactorial in all species. Risk factors in dogs
first 2 to 4 weeks (Table 32-2). After this initial healing
include young age, large and giant breeds, rapid growth
period the duration of the leash walks is progressively
(high calorie diet), and excess calcium consumption.
intensified. In addition treadmill walking, UWTM exer-
Dogs are typically presented with mild to moderate
cise, and swimming may be initiated. By 6 weeks, light
weight-bearing lameness between 4 and 8 months of age.
jogging usually can be started.? Seroma formation is a
Many dogs have bilateral lesions, although one side may
common complication after shoulder surgery by arthrot-
be clinically more severe. Muscle atrophy may be apparent
omy, but is usually self-limiting and resolves with rest.
in the affected limb if the dog has had a chronic lameness.
If a shoulder seroma is observed, the activity level should
Pain may be elicited on extreme fexion or extension of the
be reduced until it resolves. The value of treating a seroma
shoulder. Radiographs may demonstrate a defect in the
with hot packs or cold packs has not been documented,
subchondral bone under the cartilage fap on the caudal
but is commonly recommended. Long-term management
aspect of the humeral head (Figure 32-1). Uncommonly,
of OCD is focused on limiting or treating osteoarthritis
advanced imaging or arthroscopy is needed to confirm the
(OA). The long-tenm prognosis for shoulder OCD is excel-
diagnosis.
lent in most cases.
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
545
a weight-bearing forelimb lameness that is insidious in
Bicipital Tenosynovitis
onset, progressive or intenmittent, and exacerbated by
 Bicipital tenosynovitis is a degenerative or failed healing
exercise. Pain is not a consistent finding, but may be
response of the tendon and tendon sheath of the biceps
elicited on direct palpation of the bicipital groove on the
 brachi muscle.67 Inflammation is not consistently present.
proximal craniomedial aspect of the humerus. The pain
Tendonitis implies the presence of inflammation in the
response may be increased by fexing the shoulder with
tendon and musculotendinous junction, and may not be
simultaneous elbow extension, which increases biceps
accurate for many cases of tendon pain.& Tendinopathy is
tendon tension. Bicipital tenosynovitis may occur in
an inclusive tenm used to describe tendon pathologies such
conjunction with OA of the shoulder or glenohumeral
as tendonitis, tendinosis, or paratenonitis. Tendon injuries
ligament damage. Atrophy of the supraspinatus and infra-
may be caused by acute trauma or repetitive loading.
spinatus muscles may be palpable, particularly in chronic
Repetitive tendon overload tends to respond with tendon
cases. Mineralization of the biceps tendon, osteophytes in
sheath inflammation, tendon degeneration, or both. There
the intertubercular groove, or other degenerative changes
is some evidence that acute tendinitis is quickly replaced
may be seen on radiographs. Diagnosis can be difficult
by tendon degeneration.1o Tendon pain should not be
 and is sometimes made by diagnostic ultrasound, mag-
assumed to be caused by inflammation, but can occur with
 netic resonance imaging (MRI), or observation during
tendinosis as well.
arthroscopy.
 Bicipital tenosynovitis is commonly seen in middle- to
Conservative management of tendinopathies or tendini-
older-age large-breed dogs. Affected dogs usually have
 tis in humans primarily consists of rest, icing, and eccentric
strengthening exercises. There are little data to support
the use of therapeutic ultrasound, shock wave therapy.
orthotics or massage,β but these are used in some cases.
Analgesics are indicated, but not necessarily NSAIDs or
corticosteroids. Deep transverse friction massage has been
advocated as part of the treatment for tendinopathy pain.
Studies of the effectiveness of deep transverse friction
massage for the treatment of tendinopathies in humans are
inconclusive." Common recommendations for the conser-
vative management of tendinopathies in dogs include 4 to
12 weeks of rest and NSAIDs as needed (Table 32-3). As
an altermative to oral NSAID therapy, intraarticular corti-
costeroids may be administered because the shoulder joint
communicates with the biceps tendon sheath. Pulsed-mode
3-MHz therapeutic ultrasound is advocated over the tendon
and musculotendinous junction to promote tissue healing.
Because of the close proximity to bone, the dog must be
monitored for any signs of pain, and the ultrasound inten-
sity adjusted accordingly. Pulsed-mode ultrasound should
 not result in significant tissue temperature increase. Laser
Figure 32-2 Arthroscopic view of osteochondral defect on the
therapy may also be used to decrease pain and aid healing.
caudal humeral head. Subchondral bone is visible in the center of the
Cryotherapy may be prescribed to reduce inflammation
lesion on the right of the image. The metallic object is a bone curette.
 and pain. Response to conservative therapy varies, and may
Table 32-2
 Joint Rehabilitation After Osteochondritis Dissecans Surgery
Goals
Trea tment
Control inflammation
 Cryotherapy immediately after surgery and then daily until
infammation resolves, particularly after exercise
Maintain range of motion and joint health
 Passive range of motion for 1 to 2 weeks 
Control pain
Nonsteroidal antinflammatories for first few weeks, as needed
Strengthen muscles
 Begin with controlled slow leash walking and progress over 2 to 4
weeks. Decrease activity if seroma or lameness develops. May
begin jogging or swimming in 6 weeks.
546
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Table 32-3
 Rehabilitation for Tendinopathies
Supraspinatus Tendinopathy
Goals
Treatment
Supraspinatus tendinopathy may cause mild to moderate
oa au saop paaq ae pue unau ui ssauae
Control
Cryotherapy immediately after
of supraspinatus tendinopathy is unknown, but it is specu-
infammation
surgery and then daily until
lated to be caused by overuse and repetitive trauma.17
infammation resolves,
Affected dogs typically have chronic, intermittent, unilat-
particularly after exercise
eral lameness. Palpation of the greater tubercle, near the
Promote tissue
 Limited activity ± pulsed
tendon insertion, is usually painful. Mineralization may
healing
ultrasound ± cross-fiber
 be observed on radiographs, and may contribute to bicipi-
frictional massage
tal tenosynovitis or impingement of the biceps tendon.
Control pain
Analgesics ± transcutaneous
However, the presence of mineralization can also be
electrical nerve stimulation ±
asymptomatic and may be an incidental finding. Diag-
laser
nostic ultrasound or MRI may be needed to identify non-
Strengthen soft
May need several weeks of rest
mineralized tendinopathy. Medical treatment includes rest,
tissues
 after acute injuries or surgery.
PROM, NSAIDs, local steroid injection, heat or cold
Gradual progression of
therapy, deep massage therapy, and therapeutic ultrasound.
strength exercises, starting
Response to these treatments is limited. However, pulsed
with eccentric exercises for
therapeutic ultrasound resulted in some clinical improve-
involved muscles, such as
ment in one study of calcific tendonitis in humans.18
walking downhill.
Extracorporeal shock wave therapy may decrease the size
Maintain joint
 Joint mobilizations or passive
of the mineralized region in dogs.19 If medical treatment
range of
range of motion
 is inadequate, surgical excision of the mineralized tissue
motion
bandage may be applied for 2 weeks to prevent weight
bearing. Activity is limited for an additional 2 to 3 weeks.
Swimming may cause too much tendon stress and is not
be related to the inciting cause of the tendinopathy.12.13 Full
advised for several months. The prognosis varies with the
recovery can be expected to require 3 to 6 months of
therapy.
within 3 to 4 weeks. Lameness may recur with persistent
Surgical treatment is recommended for dogs that do not
bicipital tenosynovitis Or recurrence of supraspinatus
respond to medical treatment or have significant tears of
 mineralization.
the tendon. Surgical techniques include tenodesis or tendon
Medial Shoulder Instability
release, both of which have been described as arthroscopic
 or open procedures 1214-16 Cryotherapy, PROM, and short 
Medial glenohumeral instability is thought to result from
leash walks (preferably with a harmess that does not rub
chronic repetitive activity or overuse, such as jumping.
over the surgical site) are used for the first 3 postoperative
Dogs typically develop a chronic, intermittent weight-
weeks to promote normal joint movement while the tendon
bearing lameness that is nonresponsive to treatment with
has minimal strength. Joint mobilizations may also help
 NSAIDs. Instability may be assessed subjectively by pal-
increase joint ROM. Exercises to gradually increase limb
pating for increased translocation of the humerus.? Medial
strength and promote remodeling of the peritendinous scar
instability can be confirmed by goniometric measurements
 are performed after 3 weeks. Exercises should emphasize
 of shoulder abduction,24 although the clinician should con-
strengthening of the brachialis muscle, to improve the
sider the role of pain-related muscle atrophy as a potential
dog's ability to fex the elbow joint. Shake hands exercises
cause for increased shoulder abduction as opposed to
with limb weights that are gradually increased, as well as
true instability of the shoulder. The normal abduction
walking over cavaletti rails with limb weights, are specific
tz'saasap oe ruixoudde si sop paaiq asiel e u alue 
exercises to increase the strength of elbow fexor muscles.
The affected shoulder will have a much larger abduction
Aquatic therapy and treadmill exercises may be beneficial.
angle as compared with the normal shoulder.?4 The degree
Superficial heat therapy may be used before exercise to
of instability may be characterized as mild, moderate,
facilitate  tissue  extensibility.  Neuromuscular electrical
 Or severe.? Mild instability is associated with minimal
stimulation may be applied to the brachialis muscle. Cross-
pathologic changes and abduction angles of 35 to 45
fiber frictional massage can be used to prevent or diminish
degrees. Dogs with moderate instability have abduction
adhesions. Cryotherapy may help to minimize postexercise
 angles of 45 to 65 degrees and more advanced pathology
 u so pn s so 
is seen arthroscopically. Dogs with severe instability typi-
cally have shoulder abduction angles greater than 65
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
547
degrees. Severe disruption of the medial glenohumeral
weight-bearing exercises. Full recovery may require 1 to 3
ligament, subscapularis tendon, and joint capsule are seen
months.
arthroscopically.25
 The prognosis is generally good, although OA may
Conservative treatment with the shoulder supported
develop. In the case of severe congenital malformations
and restricted by shoulder hobbles can be used in mild
or irreparable joint fractures, a salvage procedure may
 cases. Extracorporeal shockwave treatment to the medial
 be indicated. Salvage procedures of the shoulder include
shoulder structures may be beneficial. As healing pro-
excision arthroplasty (glenoid excision), arthrodesis, or
gresses, strengthening of the medial supporting muscles
amputation.
may be achieved by walking on a treadmill with lateral
Fibrotic Contracture of the
tension supplied by an elastic band during the swing phase
Infraspinatus Muscle
Of gait. As strength improves progressively stiffer elastic
bands may be used. Dogs with moderate shoulder instabil-
Contracture is a shortening of the tendon-muscle unit that
ity are treated arthroscopically with imbrication, thermal
is not caused by active muscle contraction. Most or all of
capsulorrhaphy, reconstruction of the medial glenohumeral 
the muscle and/or associated tendon is replaced by fibrous
ligament, or transposition of the biceps tendon.2627 After
tissue. Most cases of contracture have a history of acute
surgery a shoulder support wrap with hobbles is applied
injury with lameness and infammation that subsides with
t0 protect the surgical repair. Cryotherapy, PROM, and
supportive care. Weeks to months later the animal is pre-
strictly controlled activity are instituted for the first 3 post-
sented with clinical signs, which may include pain, weak-
 operative weeks.25 After 3 weeks weight-bearing exercises
ness, finmness within the muscle, and an abnormal posture
 are gradually introduced. Function improves within three
and gait.? Proposed causes include infection, trauma,
to four months, and optimal function is not attained until
repetitive strains, fractures, infectious diseases, immune-
5 to 6 months following thermal capsulorrhaphy.26 Severe
mediated diseases, ischemia, and eosinophilic myositis.
shoulder instability is usually caused by trauma and is
 Muscle contracture leads to permanent shortening of the
treated as for acute shoulder luxation.
 affected muscle and can limit ROM of the associated joint.
Muscle contracture can occur in any muscle, but has been
Shoulder Luxation
reported in the infraspinatus, supraspinatus, teres minor,
Shoulder luxation is usually a result of trauma, but may
brachialis, quadriceps, semitendinosus, gracilis, and sarto-
also be seen with congenital joint malformation. Shoulder
rius.23 If the contracture is not severe, splinting with the
luxation may be apparent on physical examination, but 
 muscle and tendon in tension and stretching activities may
radiographs are recommended to evaluate for concomitant
lengthen the tendon-muscle unit. In many cases, surgery is
fractures or congenital bony malformations. If it is a recent
 recommended to lengthen or transect the tendon.
injury with no evidence of fracture or malformations,
Contracture in the front limb has been most commonly
closed reduction and immobilization in a sling for 1 to
reported in the infraspinatus muscle. Infraspinatus contrac-
3 weeks may be successful. Medial shoulder luxations
ture causes a mild weight-bearing lameness mainly in
are immobilized with the limb fexed in a Velpeau sling.
hunting or working dogs. The cause is hypothesized to be
whereas lateral luxations are immobilized with a spica
acute muscle trauma, which results in incomplete rupture
splint. After the sling is removed, gentle PROM is initiated.
of the infraspinatus muscle. The injury leads to infamma-
Motion is limited to the sagittal plane to avoid excess stress
tion and subsequent compartment syndrome.2-30 Replace.
 On the affected joint capsule and ligament. Weight-bearing
ment of muscle fibers by fibrous tissue occurs over days to
exercises are also limited.
weeks. The supraspinatus and deltoid muscles also may
If conservative management is unsuccessful or fractures 
 be involved and undergo atrophy or contracture.31 The
are present, surgical stabilization is indicated. Surgical
humerus is held in adduction, whereas the antebrachium
techniques for medial shoulder luxation include imbrica-
is extermally rotated with the foot abducted. The scapulo-
tion or reconstruction of the medial glenohumeral ligament
humeral joint cannot fully extend. There is a weight-
and joint capsule, or transposition of the biceps tendon to
bearing lameness in which the limb circumducts as it is
a more medial position to assist with joint stability. Post-
advanced during the stride and the paw fips into extension
operatively treatment with cryotherapy and NSAIDs can
before foot placement.
be initiated to minimize infammation, and the shoulder
 Physical rehabilitation may be beneficial if the condi-
may be placed in a Velpeau sling for 2 weeks. After the
tion is diagnosed early. Continuous mode therapeutic ultra-
Velpeau sling is removed the front limbs may be placed in
sound with stretching exercises may help to lengthen
hobbles to prevent abduction of the limb, but ROM must
contracted tissues, but the degree of contracture is usually
be restored. Passive ROM exercises are performed, but
so severe at the time of diagnosis that it is difficult to
are limited to the sagittal plane (fexion and extension)
 improve the condition.? When the dog is presented with
to avoid stressing the medial or lateral joint capsule. Exer-
contracture, the treatment of choice is surgical transection
cise is initially restricted, with gradual progression of
of the infraspinatus tendon and associated fibrous tissue.31
548
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
This immediately restores motion of the shoulder joint and
the prognosis is good.
Postoperatively full weight bearing is allowed, but
activity should be restricted for the first few weeks. Uncon-
trolled activity may cause tissue damage and recurrence of
fibrous tissue.? Passive ROM exercises to the forelimb
joints several times daily maintain joint ROM and promote
normal alignment of the healing tissues. Cryotherapy may
be used to reduce inflammation after exercise. In cases in
which there is significant disuse atrophy of the forelimb
muscles, general conditioning exercises for the limb are
used to gradually retum the muscle to normal size and
strength. Conditioning exercises include walking, jogging.
and aquatic therapy. Neuromuscular electrical stimulation
(NMES) may be used if the atrophy is severe and the dog
is too weak to use the leg well.
Teres Minor Strain
 Teres minor strain has been reported in athletic dogs of
A
various breeds.32 All dogs in one report had front limb
lameness that was improved by rest, but recurred with
returm to activity. The shoulder was painful on full exten-
sion and pain was elicited with direct palpation of the teres
 minor muscle. Treatment included ultrasound, stretching.
balancing exercises, leash walking, gait retraining, and
acupuncture point stimulation. All dogs returmed to previ-
 ous levels of activity.32
Elbow Conditions
Articular Fractures of the Elbow
Fractures of the articular surface of the distal humerus are
common and typically result from trauma. Articular frac-
tures of the proximal radius and ulna are much less
common. Salter-Harris type IV fractures of the lateral
condyle of the humerus are commonly seen in skeletally
immature dogs, and fractures of the lateral humeral condyle
are also seen in older dogs. In spaniel breeds, such as
Figure 32-3 Fracture of the lateral condyle of the humerus in a
Cocker spaniels, it is not uncommon for mature animals to
cocker spaniel. A, A-P view, B, Lateral view.
 present with articular fractures with minimal evidence or
 au o inadde shop asau (e-ze ains!) gunen jo Aos
incomplete ossification of the humeral condyles, although
there may be other predisposing factors.33 As with any
the surgical approach may be extensive, including tenoto-
articular fracture, decreased ROM and destruction of artic-
mies or osteotomies. The surgeon must carefully balance
ular cartilage may be sequelae of an articular fracture. In
the degree of soft tissue manipulation with the need for
addition Salter-Harris fractures in immature dogs may have
exposure of the fracture to facilitate reduction. Extensive
n n n s si   aq u u
dissection increases postoperative pain and swelling, and
elbow joint. Repair is accomplished with placement of a
may increase the degree of muscle scarring and periarticu-
transcondylar screw with compression of the fracture site
-sod aaissanxa aruaadxa ino u rans rae sisg e
and placement of a small antirotational pin driven up the
operative scarring and fibrosis leading to decreased range
lateral epicondyle (Figure 32-4).
of motion are particularly likely after articular fractures
Articular fractures demand both rigid fixation and ana-
involving the distal humerus or distal femur in the dog and
tomic reduction to maintain an even, stable cartilage
cat. The use of minimally invasive techniques, such as
surface. Because of the necessity for anatomic reduction,
closed reduction and fixation via the use of fuoroscopy, or
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
549
Figure 32-5  Lateral postoperative radiograph of a radial fracture
that was plated using a limited approach to minimize disruption of
the soft tissues.
In addition to the demand for anatomic reduction, rigid
fixation of articular fractures may rely on implants placed
across a small epiphyseal segment, resulting in a somew hat
tenuous repair, especially in young patients with soft bone.
In the case of distal humeral fractures, particularly Salter
type IV fractures in young dogs, the surgeon may be
tempted to splint the limb or place a carpal fexion bandage
to prevent weight bearing. Although these strategies may
Figure 32-4  Repair of the fracture shown in Figure 32-3 with a
effectively prevent mechanical  overload of the repair
transcondylar screw placed in lag fashion to compress the fracture
 during the healing process, they may have the unintended
fragments and a small pin in the lateral epicondyle to counteract
effect of promoting muscle scarring around the operative
rotational forces. A, A-P view, B, Lateral view.
site as well as cartilage atrophy.3 Although a carpal flexion
bandage still allows some ROM exercises, contracture of
muscles around the carpus may lead to longstanding pain,
arthroscopic-assisted fracture reduction should be consid-
loss of ROM and poor limb use despite good fracture
 ered (Figure 32-5).34 Whenever possible, osteotomies
healing. ROM exercises should be performed frequently
rather than tenotomies should be performed to gain access
but are best left to professionals as excessive (or too little)
to the fracture because osteotomies heal by refonming
ROM can cause failure of fixation or joint contractures
normal bone, whereas tenotomies heal via scar tissue.
respectively. Weight-bearing exercises should be used with
When osteotomies are repaired the surgeon must pay par-
extreme caution, especially during the first 3 weeks after
ticular attention to pin and wire placement. Inadvertent
repair to avoid fixation failure. Short leash walks may be
wire placement into the joint causes mechanical loss of
permitted, but it is important to properly confine the patient
range of motion and pain for the patient, rendering even
to avoid catastrophic failure, especially if the patient
the most sophisticated rehabilitation strategy useless.
 appears to be doing very well.
550
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
greater ROM. It is critical that rehabilitation be performed
following repair of bicondylar fractures of the humerus.
Particular attention is paid to achieving as complete ROM
as possible, using passive and active ROM exercises.
Control of periarticular swelling and edema with cryo-
therapy, NSAIDs, and bandages helps to improve motion
and reduce postoperative pain. Swimming or walking in
an underwater treadmill has the additional benefit of
limb usage in a buoyant enviromment. As weight-bearing
improves, other activities, such as walking over cavaletti
rails may be initiated. Daily rehabilitation for at least 2 to
3 weeks is recommended.
Avulsion fractures of the olecranon may also occur. In
immature dogs, there may be an avulsion fracture of the
olecranon with separation across the physis. Olecranon
fractures prevent extension of the elbow, which is neces-
 sary for normal weight bearing and ambulation. This con-
dition is treated by surgically replacing and stabilizing the
Figure 32-6  Therapy ball may be used to encourage elbow flexion.
avulsed fragment with a screw or pin and tension band
technique, or if the fragment is large enough, a bone plate.
Fracture through the articular surface of the ulna may also
Cryotherapy, analgesic medication, massage, and
occur, necessitating excellent anatomic reduction and rigid
passive ROM may be used for articular fractures of the
 intermal fixation, generally with a bone plate and screws.
elbow (see Table 32-1). In small breed dogs use of a
Physical rehabilitation is important to achieve optimal
therapy ball may be helpful to encourage limb use and
elbow extension. Treatments in the first 3 weeks may
fexion of the elbow without direct manipulation of the
include gentle PROM, NSAIDs, and cryotherapy. Follow-
limb (Figure 32-6). It is imperative that ROM exercises
 ing adequate healing more vigorous ROM and stretching
continue for 3 to 4 weeks after surgery to be certain that
exercises may be initiated, along with active exercises to
ROM is maintained. Normal ROM may retum 10 to 14
rebuild atrophied muscles.
days after surgery, but fibrous tissue and other healing
Elbow Dysplasia
 periarticular tissues are not yet mature. If ROM exercises 
are discontinued too soon, it is possible that some matura-
Elbow dysplasia includes fragmented medial coronoid
tion and contracture of tissues may occur with some loss
process (FCP), osteochondritis dissecans (OCD), and
 of normal joint motion. These fractures can present a very
ununited anconeal process (UAP). Dogs with elbow dys-
difficult challenge to the surgeon and the rehabilitation
plasia usually have only one of the three conditions. Elbow
practitioner. Although overuse may result in catastrophic
 incongruity may also be present. The pathogenesis is poorly
failure of the repair, failure to perform appropriate ROM
understood. Factors that have been implicated include
exercises may lead to crippling loss of ROM.
genetics, improper nutrition, and trauma. Other proposed
An even more challenging fracture to repair and reha-
 mechanisms are osteochondrosis, trochlear notch dyspla-
bilitate is a bicondylar (sometimes referred to as a T or Y)
sia, and asynchronous growth of the radius and ulna.36
fracture, in which both the medial and lateral condyles of
Elbow dysplasia usually occurs in large or giant breeds of
the humerus are fractured from the main shaft of the
dogs. Affected dogs typically have bilateral problems,
humerus and from each other. It is fairly common for
although one elbow may be more severely affected.
several additional fragments to be separated from the shaft
Fragmented Medial Coronoid Process of
of the humerus. Repair involves stabilization and fixation
the Ulna
of the condyles, and then stabilizing them to the main
shaft of the humerus with plates, intramedullary pins, Or
Dogs with FCP are presented with a mild to moderate
an extermal fixator. In many instances, an osteotomy of the
weight-bearing lameness, which is usually noted between
olecranon is necessary to repair this type of fracture. The
4 and 7 months of age.37 Physical exam findings include
olecranon osteotomy is then repaired with a pin and tension
pain on fexion and extension of the elbow, pain on palpa-
band or screw technique. Decreased ROM is very common,
tion of the medial aspect of the joint, and palpable joint
especially after an olecranon osteotomy, along with OA
effusion. In dogs older than 11 months, crepitus, decreased
 development after surgery. Newer techniques that use sepa-
ROM, and general joint thickening may be evident. Radio-
rate medial and lateral approaches to the joint to avoid an
 graphs often show degenerative changes in the joint, but
olecranon osteotomy seem to result in maintenance of
the actual lesion may not be seen (Figure 32-7). In many
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
551
Figure 32-8   Arthroscopic view of an erosion on the humeral articu-
A
lar cartilage that was created by a fragmented medial coronoid
 process This is known as a kissing lesion and may be confused with
osteochondritis.
surgical treatment must be questioned. These dogs may be
better managed by conservative treatment for the OA.37 In
all cases rehabilitation is directed toward preventing.
slowing, or treating OA to maintain an acceptable quality
 of life. Therapy includes maintaining an appropriate body
weight, controlled low-impact exercise, aquatic exercise,
monitoring pain, NSAIDs, and chondroprotective agents.
See section on OA for guidelines on rehabilitation.
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Elbow
Dogs with elbow OCD are typically presented with mild
to moderate lameness between 4 and 9 months of age.
Many dogs have bilateral lesions, although one side may
be clinically more severe. Atrophy of the muscles may be
 apparent in the affected limb if the dog has been lame for
several weeks. Pain may be elicited on extreme fexion or
extension of the affected joint. Chronic elbow OCD may
Figure 32-7 Severe elbow osteoarthritis in a middle-aged dog
also have signs of OA such as joint effusion, thickening
suspected to be secondary to a previously unrecognized fragmented
medial coronoid process. A, A-P view, B, Lateral view.
of the periarticular soft tissues, decreased ROM, and crepi-
tus. Radiographs may demonstrate a defect in the subchon-
 dral bone under the cartilage fap on the medial humeral
cases, computed tomography or arthroscopy is needed to
condyle. Fragmented medial coronoid process can create
make a definitive diagnosis.
an erosive lesion on the medial humeral condyle, called a
Treatment is removal of the abnormal process via
kissing lesion, which can look very similar to OCD at the
arthrotomy or arthroscopy, with possible subtotal coro-
time of surgery (Figure 32-8). In some cases especially
noidectomy or ulnar osteotomy in some cases. Postopera-
with elbow OCD, the diagnosis may be difficult and is best
tively activity is limited for 2 to 4 weeks. The prognosis is
 made by computed tomography or arthroscopy.
good if FCP is removed before there is advanced OA.
Surgery is usually the treatment of choice in dogs with
Osteoarthritis will progress regardless of treatment, but 
clinical signs. It is performed via arthrotomy or arthros-
changes are thought to be more severe in untreated cases.
 copy to remove the defective cartilage and forage or curet-
If the OA is severe at the time of diagnosis, the value of
tage of the lesion. After surgery NSAIDs, cryotherapy.
552
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
of healing. This may take as long as 12 weeks in some
cases. If the UAP was treated by removal, the rehabilitation
program may progress more rapidly, as dictated by the
degree of joint effusion, pain, ROM, and weight bearing.
Immediately after surgery PROM, aquatic therapy, and
light leash walks are recommended. Cryotherapy and
NSAIDs may be used as needed to control inflammation
and pain. Aquatic activity can be very beneficial because
 of the active ROM while weight bearing in a buoyant
enviromment.38.39
Elbow Incongruity
Asynchronous growth of the radius and ulna can cause
elbow incongruity in chondrodystrophoid dogs, and is
usually evident by 4 to 5 months of age. Ununited anconeal
 process and FCP have been associated with elbow incon-
gruity, although they can occur in the absence of incongru-
ity. Traumatic closure of a radial or ulnar physis also leads
to asynchronous growth with elbow subluxation and
angular limb deformity.
Figure 32-9 Ununited anconeal process. An irregular radiolucent
Surgical options to improve congruity include correc-
tive osteotomy or ostectomy of the radius or ulna, and may
line is visible between the olecranon and the anconeal process on a
flexed, lateral radiograph of the elbow. indicating that the anconeal
 involve stabilization with a bone plate or extermal fixator.
 process has not fused with the ulna.
The prognosis is worse if the incongruity is severe and the
animal is older (>9 months of age).40
pe pexnd sunof aun jo o rou Aans ra
distal to the repair should be maintained. Pain and edema
PROM, and controlled leash walks are instituted for the
may be controlled by NSAIDs and cryotherapy. If the goal
first few weeks (see Table 32-2). After the initial healing
was to lengthen the limb following surgery, increased
 period, the duration of the leash walks are progressively
tension on the soft tissues may result in decreased ROM,
intensified. Long-term management of OCD is focused on
joint stiffness, and lameness. In these cases therapeutic
limiting or treating OA. See section on OA for guidelines
ultrasound with simultaneous stretching and ROM activi-
 on rehabilitation. The prognosis for elbow OCD is good if
ties may be helpful. As bone healing progresses more
surgery is perfonmed before OA is advanced, but it is more
 aggressive weight-bearing exercises may be initiated.
guarded than for OCD of the shoulder.
Elbow incongruity invariably results in some degree
of OA of the elbow. Some dogs may not present for
Ununited Anconeal Process
rehabilitation until they have end-stage OA. In either case
 Ununited anconeal process (UAP) is a failure of the anco.
rehabilitation is directed at managing OA so as to maintain
 neal process to fuse with the olecranon by 5 months of age,
an acceptable quality of life. (See the section on OA for
and is apparent on a fexed lateral radiograph (Figure
guidelines on rehabilitation.) Conservative management of
 32-9).37 Instability of the anconeal process causes infam-
 OA includes NSAIDs, chondroprotective agents, cryother
 mation and eventual OA. The dog usually is presented with
apy, PROM, and physical rehabilitation. Dogs with end-
a weight-bearing lameness. Decreased range of motion and
stage OA often have chronic synovial effusion, reduced
joint effusion of the caudolateral aspect of the elbow may
 ROM, crepitus of the joint, pain on manipulation of the
be apparent on palpation 
elbow, muscle atrophy, and lameness. Physical rehabilita-
Treatment options include surgical removal of the anco-
tion cannot correct the underlying problem, but efforts to
neal process, screw fixation combined with osteotomy of
improve joint health, increase ROM, reduce weight, and
the proximal ulna, or osteotomy of the proximal ulna alone
rebuild atrophied muscles may significantly improve the
to relieve joint incongruity and allow healing of the anco-
patient's quality of life. Physical rehabilitation consider-
neal process. Regardless of the treatment, OA progresses,
ations would include PROM and stretching, active ROM
therefore ongoing treatment is directed at managing OA.
activities, redeveloping muscle strength with exercise or
(See the section on OA for guidelines on rehabilitation.)
neuromuscular electrical stimulation, low-impact exer-
If the UAP is treated by screw fixation, the rehabilita-
cises, laser, extracorporeal shock wave, and aquatic therapy.
 tion program should have a slower progression of weight-
Careful monitoring of ROM is important with a home
bearing activities until  there is radiographic evidence
program to avoid permanent losses in ROM.
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
553
Elbow Luxation
Elbow joint luxations are generally a result of trauma,
although congenital malformations of the elbow can pre-
dispose to luxation. Traumatic elbow luxations are usually
lateral and can be diagnosed by palpating the radial head
laterally displaced relative to the humeral condyle. Radio-
graphs are recommended to assess for concomitant frac-
tures and for congenital malformations. Radiographic
findings may affect the treatment choice and the prognosis.
If there are no congenital malformations or concurrent
fractures, closed reduction of the elbow is usually success.
ful because the joint is inherently quite stable, despite
significant collateral ligament damage. Open reduction and
surgical stabilization are indicated if closed reduction is
not achieved, closed reduction fails, or congenital abnor-
 malities or articular fractures are present. Surgical repair 
often involves direct repair of the collateral ligaments
or replacement of the collateral ligaments with a suture
 prosthesis (e.g., heavy suture secured by bone anchors or
B
screws). After closed or open reduction, joint healing is
Figure 32-10 A, Distal radial fractures in toy breed dogs that are
 protected by maintaining the elbow in an extended posi-
treated with external coaptation (splint or cast) have an increased
tion. This is accomplished by placing the limb in a spica
 risk of nonunion. B, In some cases, the radius and ulna may atrophy.
splint for 1 to 4 weeks.
Regardless of whether closed or open reduction is
performed, rehabilitation is begun after the spica splint
is removed. Range of motion must be restored without
plates, screws, or extermal skeletal fixation. In small dogs
causing the joint to reluxate. Cryotherapy and NSAIDs are
distal radius and ulna fractures have a high incidence of
used to minimize inflammation in the early postoperative
delayed or nonunion healing when treated with extemal
 period. After elbow luxation, passive and active ROM
coaptation (Figure 32-10). For optimal healing these frac-
exercises should be limited to the sagittal plane, and inter-
tures require anatomic reduction and rigid surgical fixa-
nal, extermal, varus or valgus stresses should be minimized.
tion, while using appropriately sized implants to reduce the
Activity is gradually increased, but aggressive activities
risk of stress protection. In addition to problems with bone
such as jogging, swimming, or uncontrolled play are
sunsno no sunuds Aq uonezo pasuonond sua
limited until the joint has healed. This may take 1 to 3
leads to disuse atrophy of bone, cartilage, ligaments,
months, depending on the degree of tissue damage. The
tendons, and muscle in the affected limb. In some cases
prognosis for traumatic joint luxations is generally good,
there is frank loss of bone distally in response to disuse
although OA is a common sequela.
of the leg. Following the first few weeks of physical
 Joint reduction and preservation of the joint may not be
rehabilitation, which involves reduction of pain and swell-
recommended if there are irreparable fractures involving
ing, rehabilitation efforts can be undertaken to increase
the joint or severe congenital malformations. In these cases
weight-bearing activities to load the bone during fracture
a joint salvage procedure, such as elbow arthrodesis, may
 healing and help stimulate normal healing. One of the main
be a better choice. Total elbow replacement surgery is rela-
impediments to limb use is decreased ROM of the carpus
q 'pauad Aquuon gu si pun sop un mau fan
as a result of fexural contracture of the soft tissues.
may result in better function.4 Limb amputation may be
Assisted extension of the carpus to a normal position is
elected in some cases.
lameness, despite healing of the fracture. If a coaptation
Antebrachial Conditions
device is used, it is essential that particular attention be
paid to stretching and ROM exercises of the carpus and
digits. In some cases, an extension splint molded to the
Fractures of the Antebrachium
normal contralateral side may be placed on the affected
Fractures of the radius and ulna commonly occur. These
limb, applying some tension to position the digits and
injuries may be treated by closed reduction and immobili-
 metacarpals more normally in between rehabilitation ses-
   's s g s n    
sions. It may take 10 to 14 days to achieve a normal angle
be repaired by open reduction and fixation with wires,
 Of the carpus for weight bearing.
554
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Angular Limb Deformities
limb becomes trapped beneath a skidding automobile tire.
Angular limb deformities can occur as a developmental
The soft tissues including skin, subcutaneous tissues,
 abnommality or as a result of trauma to a physis. The most
tendons, ligaments, and in severe cases, bone and tendon,
common deformity is carpal valgus as a result of fracture
are eroded away, leaving the joint unstable. Many of these
of the distal antebrachium. As the animal continues to
injuries cannot be primarily repaired, and an arthrodesis is
 grow, it may develop subluxation of the elbow and carpal
performed in these cases. Fortunately, function is usually
joints with subsequent OA in these joints. Correction of
very acceptable after bony fusion has occurred.
angular limb deformities involves a corrective osteotomy
Metacarpal and phalangeal fractures usually occur as a
of the affected bone(s) and stabilization with a bone plate
result of trauma, and phalangeal fractures are often open
 Or extemal fixator. In some cases, a circular fixator is used
fractures (Figure 32-11). Carpal, metacarpal, and phalan-
to gradually correct the angular deformity and lengthen the
geal fractures may be treated using closed reduction and
bones by distraction osteogenesis. After surgery cryother-
immobilization in a coaptation device, or with a variety of
 apy and NSAIDs may be used to limit infammation and
 implants including intramedullary pins, wires, and plates
pain. It is important to maintain normal ROM of the joints
and screws (Figure 32-12). A splint or light cast is usually
proximal and distal to the repair. This is particularly impor-
applied to the limb after intermal fixation to protect the
tant  for animals undergoing distraction osteogenesis,
relatively small implants that must be used. If a cast
because the concurrent stretching of soft tissues in the
 Or splint is used elbow ROM must be preserved during
region may cause reduced joint ROM, stiffness, and lame-
the time of coaptation application, and after coaptation
ness. Stretching and ROM activities with simultaneous
removal. Sagittal plane ROM exercises and joint mobiliza-
application of heat or therapeutic ultrasound may be ben-
tion work well to restore ROM to the area. In cases of
eficial. As bone healing progresses the intensity or duration
fracture and carpal instability, splinting is often used to
of aquatic therapy and weight-bearing therapeutic exer-
protect the repair. If possible removing the splint on a
cises may be increased.
weekly basis to perform ROM exercises to maintain joint
and tendon mobility is advised. The splint is reapplied to
Contracture of the Flexors of
 protect the fracture after performing ROM exercises.
the Antebrachium
Carpal Hyperextension
After limb immobilization or prolonged disuse, the ante-
brachial fexor muscles may undergo contracture (shorten-
Carpal hyperextension injuries occur after jumping Oor
ing of the tendon-muscle unit). The result is limited
falling from a height, spraining the palmar fibrocartilage
extension of the joints distal to the elbow, which can
and the carpal ligaments. Damage may occur to ante-
impair normal weight-bearing. Methods of lengthening
brachiocarpal, middle carpal, carpometacarpal joints, or
and stretching the contracted tendon-muscle units include
 any combination of these joints. Carpal hyperextension
 3-MHz therapeutic ultrasound or hot packs, manual stretch-
ing, exercises, and massage.424 If stretching is to0 aggres-
sive it may cause damage to soft tissues or bone fractures.
A prolonged stretch may be applied with a custom splint
 On the distal limb. The splint should be applied intermit-
tently to minimize the risk of pressure injuries from the
splint. The splint may be applied for longer periods each
day until it can be worm all day, if desired. The goal is to
stretch and realign the tissues without damaging them.
Carpal, Metacarpal, and Phalangeal
Conditions
Carpal, Metacarpal, and
Phalangeal Fractures
Fractures of the carpal bones are rare but may involve the
accessory carpal bone or the radial carpal bone in racing
athletes such as greyhounds. In other breeds carpal frac-
tures are often the result of automobile or other traumatic
insults. Some carpal fractures may result in medial or
A
lateral instability if the fracture involves the origin or inser-
Figure 32-11
1  When all four metatarsal or metacarpal bones
tion of the respective collateral ligament. A relatively
have fractured, surgical repair is generally preferable to external
common injury is a shearing injury, in which the dog's
coaptation. A, A-P view, B, Lateral view.
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
555
二
Figure 32-12  Metatarsal factures that have been stabilized with
bone plates and intramedullary pin. A, A-P view, B, Lateral view.
B
may also be caused by immune-mediated joint disease,
Figure 32-13  Pancarpal arthrodesis performed in a patient with
or endocrinopathy such as hyperadrenocortism. Affected
chronic carpal hyperextension. A, A-P view, B, Lateral view.
 animals are lame and walk with the carpus in hyperexten-
sion. In severe cases, the carpus may touch the ground. In
general healing of a sprain (ligament injury) may take
months, and occurs by the formation of fibrous connective
tissue to replace the tom ligament, rather than primary
healing of the ligament. Conservative management of
carpal hyperextension injuries is generally unsuccessful
and results in subluxation.45 The recommended treatment
is panarthrodesis (surgical fusion of all three joint levels)
 Or partial arthrodesis (fusion of only the middle and distal
joints), depending on the level of the injuries (Figure
32-13). Rehabilitation is performed as for any arthrodesis,
with an emphasis on gait training after the initial healing
period (see General Physical  Rehabilitation of Joint
Arthrodesis). Although the limb function is not normal,
 prognosis for retum to daily activity is good after carpal
arthrodesis.*6 The prognosis is more guarded if instability
is caused by rheumatoid arthritis because multiple joints
 are typically affected.
Carpal laxity syndrome has been described in puppies,
which walk with the carpus in a hyperextended position.47
The cause is unknown but is speculated to be caused by
asynchronous growth between the skeleton and the mus-
culature. Long-term application of supportive splints for 
hyperextension is avoided because it may lead to muscle
atrophy and increased tendon weakness (Figure 32-14).
 Treatment recommendations generally include balanced
Figure 32-14  This puppy had increased carpal laxity after long-
diet and controlled exercise on surfaces that provide good
term use of a splint.
556
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
traction. Carpal arthrodesis may be a treatment option for
the digit. Arthrodesis is a better choice if a high level of
hyperextension that does not resolve with exercise and
function, such as racing, is required. Postoperatively the
nutrition, but this cannot be performed until the physes are
foot is splinted until there is radiographic evidence of
closed. Carpal laxity syndrome is usually self-limiting.
fusion. Weekly splint changes with PROM or mobilization
with a short duration and good prognosis.
of the other distal joints may be beneficial.
Carpal fexural contractures have also been recogmized
 in puppies. Poor nutrition has been implicated as a factor,
Pelvis and Hip Conditions
so altering the diet may be beneficial. Splinting may be
helpful for puppies that are developing fexural contrac-
Pelvic Fractures
tures. In severe cases of fexural contracture, tenotomy may
be performed.
 Pelvic fractures account for a large percentage of fractures
seen in veterinary practice. Because of the rigid, box-like
Trauma of the Superficial and Deep Digital
anatomy of the canine pelvis, trauma usually results in two
Flexor Tendons
or more fractures of the pelvis (Figure 32-15, A). In general
Laceration or avulsion of superficial and deep digital fexor
surgical repair is recommended for fractures within the
tendons are traumatic injuries that can occur in the front
weight-bearing regions of the pelvis, including the sacro-
or rear feet. Avulsion or laceration of the tendon insertion
iliac joint, ilial body, and acetabulum. Surgical repair
 On P2 and P3 results in abnormal toe carriage. The tendons
is also recommended if there is neurologic impainment
(e.g., possible sciatic nerve entrapment) or medial dis-
for improved athletic function. Postoperatively the foot is
placement of fracture fragments impinging on the pelvic
immobilized in a splint for 2 to 3 weeks to limit edema and
canal. Surgical repair results in a quicker returm to function
provide support. Active motion is limited to prevent disrup-
with fewer changes secondary to tissue disuse, and the
tion of the weakened tissue and allow the tendons to heal
level of function will generally be superior. It is important
with minimal adhesions.
that surgical repair be undertaken within the first 7 to 10
Weekly splint changes with ROM exercises of adjacent
days after injury to minimize damage to soft tissues and
joints should be performed if possible.? Passive range of
nerves during reduction of the fractures. In some instances,
motion and light activity are used to maintain normal tissue
conservative treatment in the form of cage rest may be
length and encourage normal joint movement. Removal of
adequate to allow healing. Ex amples of injuries amenable
the splint is recommended within 3 weeks of the injury,
to conservative treatment include greenstick fractures of
because prolonged immobilization may delay healing and
the body of the ilium, mild displacement of the sacroiliac
weaken the repaired tissue. Some tendon motion promotes
joint with minimal pain or lameness, and fractures of the
remodeling of the peritendinous scar, which allows the
caudal 20% of the acetabulum. Although pubic and ischial
tendon to glide. However, restricted activity must be
 fractures may appear quite severe on a radiograph, these
enforced, because running or jumping could place cata-
 injuries are rarely repaired because they are not part of the
strophic stress on the healing tissues and result in failure.
weight-bearing axis of the pelvic limb and will heal with
By 6 weeks the tendons should have achieved adequate
rest. Repair of the injuries to the sacroiliac joint, ilium, and
strength to sustain normal physiologic stress. At this point
acetabulum generally results in adequate reduction and
the focus of therapy is to restore ROM and strength. If there
realignment of pubic and ischial fractures for healing.
is contracture of muscle-tendon units, 3-MHz continuous-
 It is important to identify any concurrent injuries with
mode therapeutic ultrasound or hot packs with simultane-
 pelvic fractures. Trauma to the spinal cord or peripheral
Ous stretching is indicated.
nerves is relatively common, especially with fractures of
the sacrum, fractures of the body of the ilium with medial
Luxation of the Metacarpophalangeal and
displacement of the caudal fracture fragment, and fractures
Interphalangeal Joints
of the cranial ischium in the region traversed by the sciatic
 Metacarpophalangeal and phalangeal luxations are treated
nerve. It is important to perform a thorough neurologic
by closed reduction or surgical repair of the collateral liga-
ex amination, checking for pain sensation, motor function,
ments and joint capsule. After repair the foot is splinted
and refexes. Because injuries to the pelvis often involve
for 2 to 3 weeks. It is beneficial to change the splint once
both pelvic limbs and other injuries to the distal limbs are
weekly so as to perform gentle PROM on the immobilized
frequently present, evaluation of the patient while ambulat-
joints. After the splint has been permanently removed,
ing or performing proprioceptive tests may not be possible.
ROM exercises in the sagittal plane are continued. Limited
In addition abdominal and thoracic trauma is relatively
weight-bearing activities are initiated and  gradually
common in animals with pelvic injuries.
increased over another 3 weeks.
Sacroiliac joint luxations are surgically managed by
Other options for metacarpophalangeal and phalangeal
placing one or more screws in lag fashion to compress
luxations include arthrodesis of the joint or amputation of
the joint. The screw(s) should engage the body of the
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
557
Figure 32-16  A sacroiliac luxation has also been stabilized with a
 screw. An ipsilateral hip luxation is repaired using a toggle pin as
evidenced by the metal implant medial to the acetabulum and bone
tunnel in the femoral head and neck.
reduction, fragments must be carefully manipulated to
avoid damage to the lumbosacral plexus, which is located
just medial to the body of the ilium.
Fractures of the acetabulum secondary to automobile
trauma are common in dogs. Most acetabular fractures
should be treated with open reduction and intermal fixation.
Depending on the size of the patient and the nature of the
fracture, repair may involve plates, screws, wires, or poly-
methylmethacrylate. In many acetabular fractures, ana-
tomic reduction is difficult to achieve, and many animals
B
with these fractures develop OA. Comminuted fractures
Figure 32-15 The pelvis usually has more than one fracture
may be difficult or impossible to reduce, and femoral head
because of its box-like construction. Typically only the weight-bearing
and neck ostectomy (FHO) may be necessary. The surgeon
regions of the pelvis are surgically stabilized. A, V-D view prior to
should be aggressive in removing as much bone as is nec-
surgery, B, V-D view after surgical stabilization.
essary, from both the femoral and the acetabular side of the
FHO, to prevent bone rubbing on bone postoperatively. It
is not uncommon for scar tissue to develop, causing late
sacrum and be deeply seated into the bone, so that the
bony contact in FHOs perfonmed to treat acetabular frac-
screw engages at least 60% of the width of the sacrum
tures; therefore early and intense rehabilitation is critical
(Figure 32-16). Fractures of the sacral body or wing can
be challenging to repair, and concurrent nerve injuries are
cause loss of use of the limb (see section on excision
quite common.
arthroplasty).
Fractures of the body of the ilium are usually repaired
 Rehabilitation should be started immediately postopera-
with a bone plate and screws (Figure 32-15, B). It is impor-
tively, even if the animal is nonambulatory. The bio-
  m  od a d a n 
mechanical limitations of the fracture repair must be
caudal half of the pelvis in anatomic alignment to avoid
considered, but analgesia, cryotherapy, and passive ROM
future problems associated with a narrowed pelvic canal,
exercises can usually be initiated immediately postopera-
such as constipation and obstipation. During the fracture
tively. On the first postoperative day sling therapy may be
558
Section Vl
 Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
started if the patient is stable. This typically involves short,
5-minute sessions once or twice daily. Advantages of sling
therapy include psychological benefits of the patient being
in a more normal position, the ability to begin assisted
active motion and early, limited weight bearing, and
improved access for the caretakers to perform massage and
ROM exercises. Rear limb slings can be used with pelvic
trauma, whereas whole body slings can be used for patients
with forelimb and rear limb trauma. After the incisions are
sealed and the patient no longer has intravenous catheters
 Or other invasive lines, water treadmill, or swimming
therapy can be considered.
Water treadmill therapy for polytrauma patients is very
useful because it allows the therapist to tailor the amount
of weight bearing (a water level at the height of the greater
trochanter allows the dog to walk with only 38% weight
bearing on its limbs). The pressure and buoyancy of the
water can also help improve blood fow and decrease
edema. Many dogs seem to enjoy being in the underwater
treadmill. It can be very demanding for the dog to walk
Figure 32-17 Hip subluxation is typically present bilaterally as a
for any length of time after trauma, so the cardiovascular
 condition of early hip dysplasia. The degree of visible subluxation may
status of the dog should be monitored and very short
be affected by pelvic positioning when making the radiograph.
(several minutes) sessions should be used for the initial
treatments.
In young dogs, there are a number of preventive surgical
Hip Dysplasia
procedures that are designed to change the joint alignment
Hip dysplasia is an abnormal development of the hip joint,
to improve joint stability and slow the progression of OA.
usually bilateral,that occurs primarily in medium and large
The most common of these procedures are the triple pelvic
breed dogs. The causes are multifactorial and include
osteotomy (TPO) and juvenile pubic symphysiodesis.
 genetic predisposition, rapid growth rate, and diet. Puppies
Triple pelvic osteotomy is performed on dogs that have
with a genetic predisposition for hip dysplasia develop
u aay inq iixel nuiof pun wisendssp du jo suis fa
clinical disease much later in life and to a much lesser
progressed to the point of having significant radiographic
extent when fed a restricted calorie diet, as compared with
evidence of OA. Most dogs that fit these criteria are
littermates that are fed ad libitum.4& The hips are normal at
 between 4 and 10 months of age. They usually have atrophy
birth but develop instability in the early stages of the
of the gluteal and thigh muscles. The technique involves
disease, between 4 and 12 months of age. At this stage the
making three osteotomies to mobilize the acetabulum and
dog may exhibit difficulty rising, decreased activity level,
change its orientation. A bone plate is used to stabilize the
"bunny-hopping"' gait, and loss of muscle mass in the hind-
ilial osteotomy (Figure 32-18). Postoperatively activity is
quarters. Early in the disease process the diagnosis is made
restricted for 4 to 6 weeks to allow bone healing. Cryo-
by palpation of joint laxity (subluxation). Radiographs
therapy, NSAIDs, PROM, and assisted ambulation, fol-
 may appear normal, although some degree of subluxation
lowed by controlled, low-impact therapeutic exercises,
may be evident, especially with distraction views (Figure
are indicated. Leash walking, sit-to-stand exercises, and
32-17). As the disease progresses periarticular fibrosis pro-
aquatic walking may be useful to attenuate muscle atrophy
vides some joint stability and the pain may be significantly
while avoiding excessive stress on the repair. After ade-
decreased. However, with further progression of the
quate bone healing has occurred the focus of rehabilitation
disease, OA results in pain, crepitus, decreased range of
 is to strengthen muscles of the hindquarters. Strengthening
motion, wadding gait, and reluctance to exercise. Thigh
activities should parallel tissue healing and tissue strength.
and hip muscles atrophy and shoulder muscles may hyper-
Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis is a performed in dogs
trophy because the body weight is shifted toward the fore-
between 16 and 18 weeks of age that are considered to be
limbs. Varying degrees of OA with remodeling of the
 at risk for developing hip dysplasia. The pubic symphysis
femoral head and acetabulum are seen radiographically.
is surgically damaged, causing it to fuse and alter pelvic
The rate of progression of hip dysplasia varies between
 growth. These puppies are often clinically normal at the
individuals and is difficult to predict. Some dogs may have
time of surgery and the surgical trauma is minimal. The
 degenerative changes before 1 year of age, whereas many
focus of rehabilitation is to promote muscular development
individuals develop advanced OA in midlife or later.
of the hindlimbs with low-impact exercise.
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
559
Figure 32-18 Triple pelvic osteotomy has been performed to
improve coverage of the head of the femur by the acetabulum.
Figure 32-19  Cementless total hip replacement performed in a
 patient with severe osteoarthritis secondary to hip dysplasia.
Dogs with mild or intermittent signs related to chronic
hip OA may be treated by conservative methods to improve
stretching exercises are indicated to improve hip mobility.
function and limit the progression of OA. This includes a
Muscle strengthening can be achieved using controlled
combination of NSAIDs, DMOAs, modalities such as heat,
walking, treadmill activity, and sit-to-stand exercises. The
electrical stimulation, therapeutic ultrasound, laser, diet
duration of these activities is gradually increased during
and exercise, and is discussed in the section on OA. For
the first 3 months. Balance and proprioception reeducation
dogs having disability or pain that is not adequately
may also be important. Dogs are restricted to leash walking,
 managed by conservative methods, there are two salvage
with no running or jumping for the first 3 postoperative
surgical options: total hip replacement (THR) or femoral
months to reduce the chances of implant loosening or dis-
head and neck ostectomy (FHO). Both procedures elimi-
location. Prognosis is good to excellent in most cases.
nate the normal joint, thus eliminating the pain. In general,
Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease
THR is not recommended following an FHO that results
in poor function. For rehabilitation after FHO, see the
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease is noninfammatory aseptic
section on excision arthroplasty.
necrosis of the femoral head and neck that occurs in small
Total hip replacement eliminates the joint, thus eliminat-
breed dogs. The etiology is unknown, although a genetic
ing joint-associated pain. The femoral head is removed and
component has been identifed in some breeds. Dogs
the acetabulum is replaced with a prosthetic acetabular cup.
usually develop lameness between 6 and 10 months of age.
A femoral prosthesis is implanted in the medullary canal
With chronic lameness there is muscle atrophy of the hip
 Of the femur. The prostheses may be secured with bone
and thigh muscles. Radiographs show deformation of the
cement, but some systems do not use cement and rely on
femoral head and neck, with joint incongruity (Figure
bony ingrowth for stability (Figure 32-19). Most dogs have
 32-20, A) In some cases there may be advanced OA or
excellent weight bearing almost immediately after surgery.
fractures of the femoral head and neck. If the condition is 
In the initial postoperative period NSAIDs, cryotherapy.
diagnosed early, a non-weight-bearing sling may be used
and PROM are indicated. One of the most common post-
for 3 to 4 weeks.° However, the treatment of choice is
operative complications is hip luxation,49 so muscle
generally FHO (Figure 32-20, B). Prognosis is good after
strengthening after a period of healing is important, espe-
surgery, provided appropriate rehabilitation is performed
cially because there is often preexisting muscle atrophy.
beginning immediately after surgery (see General Physical
Close confinement is enforced when the dog is unsuper-
Rehabilitation Management of Excision Arthroplasty).
vised during the frst postoperative month. During early
ambulation the dog is supported with a sling to prevent
Hip Luxation
adduction or abduction of the limb and dislocation of the
Coxofemoral luxation is common and usually a result
prosthesis and inadvertent falls. In some cases, PROM and
of automobile trauma. However, the presence of hip
560
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
凸
Figure 32-21  Craniodorsal hip luxation in a dog with osteoarthritis
associated with hip dysplasia. A, V-D view, B, Lateral view.
Figure 32-20 A, Young dog with Legg Calve Perthes disease, V-D
If the diagnosis is made within a few days of the injury
view. B, Radiograph taken after femoral head and neck excision. Note
the complete removal of the femoral head and neck.
and there is relatively normal coxofemoral anatomy with
no articular fractures, closed reduction and immobilization
in an Ehmer sling for 1 to 3 weeks may be successful. An
Ehmer sling theoretically maintains the femur in a more
stable position of abduction and intermal rotation. Eliminat-
dysplasia may diminish joint stability and predispose to
ing or minimizing  weight-bearing activity  minimizes
luxation with less severe trauma. Hip luxations usually
stresses on the periarticular tissues to allow them to heal.
have a craniodorsal displacement. The diagnosis can often
Open reduction and surgical stabilization are indicated if
be made by palpation of bony displacement, but radio-
closed reduction is not successful or articular fractures are
 graphs are indicated to evaluate for the presence of concur-
 present. Common surgical repair techniques include sutur-
rent fractures or hip dysplasia (Figure 32-21). The presence
 ing the joint capsule (capsulorraphy), creating a prosthetic
of these abnormalities may affect the treatment choice and
capsule with suture, or toggle pin fixation (see Figure
the prognosis.
32-16). In some cases a combination of techniques may be
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
561
used, or the greater trochanter may be relocated more dis-
tally and caudally to provide additional stability. After
surgery joint healing is often protected by immobilization
in the Ehmer sling for 1 to 3 weeks, depending on the
 degree of tissue damage and the type of repair.
If an Ehmer sling is used, the animal should be evalu-
ated at least weekly to monitor for skin irritation and relux -
ation. Rehabilitation is begun after the sling is removed.
Range of motion must be restored without causing the
joint to reluxate. Cryotherapy and NSAIDs are used to
minimize infammation in the early postoperative period.
Stretc hing and PROM activities are also important after hip
luxations. Range of motion should be limited to comfort-
able fexion and extension, with extermal rotation, abduc-
tion and adduction not performed at all during the healing
phase of a craniodorsal luxation. Muscle strengthening and
re-education begins with walking on a level surface or a
downhill grade. Uphill walking, stair climbing, dancing
exercises, and aquatic walking may be used to help with
hip extension and muscle strengthening during the latter
phases of rehabilitation. Walking on an inclined treadmill
Figure 32-22  Repair of a severely comminuted femoral fracture
 may promote active hip motion, although the inclination
with a plate-rod technique. A severe fracture configuration suggests 
may need to be greater than 5% to cause much increase in
 a large amount of soft tissue trauma as well.
hip ROM.?′ In the case of ventral hip luxation, limb abduc-
tion should be avoided, and hobbles may be helpful post-
reduction to prevent excessive abduction. In all cases
fracture repair in veterinary medicine may be used to sta-
activity is gradually increased, but aggressive activities
bilize fractures of the femur, including plates, screws,
such as jogging, swimming. or uncontrolled play are
wires, pins, interlocking nails, and extermal skeletal fixators
limited until the joint has healed. This may take 1 to 3
(Figure 32-22). Implant failure can result either from single
months, depending on the degree of tissue damage.
catastrophic overload or from fatigue, implying a greater
Joint preservation may not be recommended if there are
number of normal weight-bearing cycles than the implant
irreparable fractures involving the joint, hip dysplasia with
can bear before fracture healing is complete. In general,
very poor joint congruency. severe OA, or significant
plates, interlocking nails, and some extermal fixators tend
damage to the articular cartilage. In these cases a joint
to be more biomechanically stable than intramedullary pin
salvage procedure may be a better choice. Common salvage
 and cerclage wire constructs.
 procedures include FHO or THR.
Extemal coaptation with splints or casts is contraindi-
cated for stabilization of femur fractures because coapta-
 good, although OA is a common sequela. If damage to the
tion cannot adequately immobilize the hip joint. In addition
articular cartilage is noted at the time of surgery, long-term
coaptation on the limb may only extend as proximally as
problems with OA may be expected. If the OA becomes
the mid-thigh, and if so, it can create a fulcrum effect to
severe, a salvage procedure may be indicated.
increase movement at the fracture.
 The rehabilitation plan should be based on a number of
Thigh Conditions
factors, including the location of the fracture (articular,
physeal, long bone), whether more than one limb or bone
is involved, pre-existing patient disease (obesity, OA),
 Femoral Fractures
degree of soft-tissue injury (low energy vs. high energy
Fractures of the shaft of the femur are probably the most
fracture), the presence or absence of open wounds, and the
 common fractures seen in veterinary practice. As such they
fixation method(s) used. It is vital that the therapist under-
 also have the highest incidence of complications, including
stand the nature of the fracture and the type of repair that
delayed or nonunion healing and osteomyelitis. Most com-
has been applied to know how much activity the dog should
plications are related to inadequate fixation or errors in the
have, and what types of complications may occur. For
application of the implants. The possible configurations of
ex ample, if a puppy with a two-piece spiral fracture stabi-
 su sam a e ud en ue ym p
ture to a highly comminuted fracture resulting from a
sudden loss of limb use with knuckling on the dorsum of
gunshot injury. Most of the implants that are available for
the paw and severe pain, the therapist should realize that
562
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
the pin may have migrated and entrapped the sciatic nerve.
PROM, and controlled activities are initiated following
This dog must be treated immediately if there is hope of
surgery. More active forms of rehabilitation such as tread-
 preventing permanent nerve damage.
mill walking, UWTM, leash walking, stairs, and swim-
Ideally rehabilitation of the fracture patient begins pre-
ming are added according to the nature of the injury,
operatively, beginning at the time of presentation. Cryo-
method used for fixation, stability of the repair, and tem-
therapy (cold packing) is an essential and simple modality
poral aspects of wound and fracture healing. The ROM
that can be applied in any practice setting. Cryotherapy
achieved by the hip joint is affected by the severity of the
generally consists of commercial or homemade ice packs
fracture and the amount of periarticular fibrosis that occurs.
that are directly applied over the closed fracture for 10
Although most dogs develop some degree of OA with
to 20 minutes, repeated every 2 to 4 hours if practical.
fractures of the femoral head or neck, most dogs do reason-
 Cryotherapy may decrease edema, hemorrhage and inflam-
ably well, although some are candidates for THR or FHO.
mation in the soft tissues surrounding the fracture site. Ice
In addition, if concurrent neurologic injuries are present,
packs may be applied during triage of the fracture patient,
appropriate balancing, proprioceptive, and strengthening
assuming that body temperature is above 98° F. Temporary
activities should be initiated.
stabilization (cast, Robert Jones bandage, or splint) may be
applied in some situations if adequate stability can be
 achieved. The combination of appropriate cryotherapy plus
Femoral Capital Physeal Fractures and
supportive bandaging can dramatically decrease soft-tissue
Femoral Neck Fractures
damage and swelling. facilitating surgical repair and
 Proximal femoral fractures may occur through the capital
decreasing muscle fibrosis postoperatively. As soon as the
femoral physis of immature dogs or across the femoral
patient is stable, analgesics should be administered both on
neck of skeletally mature dogs. Rarely do fractures of the
a humane basis and to facilitate postoperative rehabilita-
articular surface of the femoral head occur. The most
serious of the fractures of the proximal femur is the capital
up" phenomenon caused by untreated preoperative and
femoral physeal fracture, especially in dogs less than 5
 intraoperative pain.52
months of age. In this fracture the physis may close pre-
After surgery, the surgeon's opinion regarding risk of
maturely, causing a short femoral neck and a small femoral
implant failure should be communicated to the rehabilita-
 ds n f d n  u sns  p
tion team (Figure 32-23). In general NSAIDs, cryotherapy,
anatomic reduction and intermal fixation, these fractures
result in OA because of this incongruity.
 Femoral capital physeal fractures are typically repaired
with either lag screws or divergent K-wires (Figure 32-24).
Early repair and minimal soft tissue dissection result in
fewer complications. Although they are not generally asso-
ciated with the muscle contracture that can occur with
distal femoral fractures, because of the very small epiphy-
seal segment and possible tenuous repair, surgeons may
occasionally elect to place the limb in an Ehmer or 90-90
us yons Aeai rasns iae sep ti on L iy sus
should be removed as early as possible, and cryotherapy.
PROM, and early weight-bearing active ROM should
begin within a few days. Collapse of the fracture around
the pins can occur. If crepitus, loss of ROM, or increase in
pain occur during rehabilitation exercises postoperatively,
the surgeon should be contacted immediately or radio-
graphs obtained to assess for loss of reduction or implant
penetration into the articular space.
Distal Femoral Physeal Fractures
B
Although many different repair techniques are described
Figure 32-23  Repair of a severely comminuted femoral fracture
for distal femoral fractures, the most common is cross-
that involves the stifle joint. A, A-P view, B, Lateral view. Good com-
munication between the therapist and surgeon are important to
pinning. Distal physeal fractures can be difficult to reduce,
understand the estimated stability of the surgical repair In this case,
 particularly if they are more than 48 hours old. In addition,
the presence of a screw in the caudal aspect of the stifle joint may
distal femoral physeal fractures are predisposed to a
 also affect the therapeutic plan.
devastating postoperative complication characterized by
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
563
Figure 32-25 Inadequate postoperative management a distal
femoral fracture led to quadriceps muscle group contracture in
this cat.
commonly associated with distal femoral fractures in
young animals. The likelihood of quadriceps contracture is
greatly increased when the limb is immobilized in exten-
sion (e.g., with a cast or splint) following repair of a distal
physeal fracture. Splinting in extension for as little as 5 to
7 days may result in quadriceps contracture. Chronic
disuse can lead to demineralization of the long bones
within the affected limb. There may also be disuse atrophy
of the articular surfaces of the stifle and periarticular fibro-
sis. Severe cases can exhibit genu recurvatum or stifle joint
ankylosis. Advanced cases of contracture carry a poor
 prognosis and commonly result in a nonfunctional leg.
Surgical release of the fibrous tissue in combination with
intense physical rehabilitation can be attempted.'3 After
Figure 32-24 Capital femoral physeal fracture in a skeletally
fibrosis has occurred attempts to break down the scar tissue
immature dog. A, V-D view prior to surgery, B, V-D view after surgery.
by performing ROM exercises, even under anesthesia, may
result in refracture of the femur. Surgical release of the
contracture without intense rehabilitation will result in ref-
quadriceps contracture. A frequent scenario is that the sur-
onmation of scar tissue within a few weeks. This complica-
gical repair is performed, immediately postoperatively the
tion has been successfully managed with a combination of
animal seems to have good ROM of the stife joint, but by
surgical release, dynamic stife fexion apparatus, and an
the time of suture removal there is excessive stife exten-
 intensive passive and active ROM exercise program.$3 Gen-
sion and severe loss of ROM. Rehabilitation following
erally the prognosis is poor and the end result can be an
distal femoral fracture repair is focused on maintaining
stife fexion and hip extension (see Quadriceps Contrac-
fracture repair.
ture for more detail on rehabilitation). With a stable repair
 This problem is best addressed by preventing its occur-
and good rehabilitation, distal femoral physeal fractures
rence, and prevention of quadriceps contracture depends
are associated with a good prognosis.
on several factors. The fracture should be repaired as
soon as possible, preferably within 24 hours. Gentle tissue
Quadriceps Contracture
dissection and the use of minimally invasive techniques
Quadriceps contracture, also called quadriceps tie-down, is
that minimize tissue trauma (e.g., fuoroscopic guidance
characterized by scarring of the quadriceps muscle group
of pins) should be employed to facilitate early limb use.
with adhesions to the distal femur, so the stife is unable
Although the ends of the cross-pins may be bent to prevent
to fully fex and the limb is carried in extension (Figure
migration, excess pin protrusion into the soft tissues may
32-25). Quadriceps contracture can occur secondary to
cause more pain and inhibit rehabilitation exercises. Some
severe muscle trauma or Neospora, but it is most
surgeons prefer to countersink the cross pins so there is
564
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
mobilization and tissue mobilization techniques may be
useful to help prevent fibrosis of the various tissue layers
to one another. It is important that the process not be
painful for the animal and vigorous manipulations are
avoided. Cryotherapy is generally continued for at least 72
hours. If the animal resents ROM or tends to hold the limb
in extension, a 90-90 fexion sling may be applied intermit-
tently for the first 3 days.
 Many animals begin to bear some weight on the limb
within 1 to 2 days after surgery, and short, frequent leash
walks should be encouraged. Cryotherapy may be replaced
with heat therapy after the acute infammatory phase of
wound healing is over, which is typically about 3 to 5 days.
Heat causes vasodilation of the cutaneous blood vessels,
improves muscle and connective tissue extensibility, and
 increases the pain threshold. Because of these tissue
Figure 32-26  The 90-90 flexion sling is similar to an Ehmer sling.
effects, heat can be very useful before stretching, ROM,
The goal of the 90-90 is to keep both the stifle and hock joints
 and exercise sessions. Some therapists recommend using
the hip abducted and internally rotated, and the major limb joints
   a aa 
are typically fully flexed.
Early active exercises should be performed, primarily
with very slow leash walks and balancing exercises that
encourage active contraction and relaxation of the muscles,
less interference with ROM. The fracture must be anatomi-
and fexion and extension of the stife. Gentle tug-of-war
cally reduced. For any distal femoral fracture, rehabilita-
may encourage limb use, but caution should be used to
tion must begin the day of or the day after surgery. If there
ensure that excessive force is not placed on the limb. If the
is any question about the possibility of performing appro-
animal is leash trained, treadmill walking may cautiously
priate rehabilitation (e.g., the animal is going home the day
be attempted. It is recommended that an attendant help
 after surgery and it is difficult for the owners to manage),
support the animal and be immediately available in case of
the limb should be bandaged in a fexed position to main-
     an  d   
tain the quadriceps muscle in a stretched position during
under the contralateral rear foot is also useful to encourage
the acute postoperative infammatory phase. This can be
limb use. Finally, swimming is useful to encourage active
accomplished by use of a 90-90 fexion sling for 72 hours
fexion and extension of the stifle joint, but the incision
 postoperatively, and this may greatly decrease the risk of
should be sealed with no drainage or discharge. If the
contracture (Figure 32-26).54 If feasible the sling should be
animal is released from the hospital within a few days of
removed on a daily basis and PROM and stretching exer-
surgery, a recheck evaluation should be performed within
cises performed. Cryotherapy can be applied with the sling
a few days to ensure that stifle ROM is not becoming
in place.
reduced. If ROM is preserved and limb function is improv-
If rehabilitative care is readily available, a more physi-
 ing, the animal should be rechecked weekly until the time
 ologic program may be employed. Immediately postopera-
of radiographic healing, usually by 4 weeks.
tively, before anesthetic recovery, cryotherapy is performed
Muscle Strain
 and followed by gentle passive ROM exercises. Aggressive
 treatment of pain, often achieved using a combination of
A strain is a tear or rupture of some part of the muscle-
NSAIDs and opioids, is mandatory to successful rehabili-
tendon unit, which is caused by excessive stress on the
tation efforts and this should begin before recovery from
tissues. The injury may occur in the muscle belly, muscu-
anesthesia. After the animal has recovered, cryotherapy is
Jotendinous junction, tendon, or teno-osseous junction, but
continued three to six times daily. Immediately after cryo-
typically affects the musculotendinous region. Mild muscle
therapy, gentle massage is used, working from the distal
strain (grade 1) may cause low-grade infammation with
aspect of the limb toward the proximal limb for 2 to 3
minimal alteration in strength, ROM, or gait. There may
minutes. Although the stife is the primary area of interest,
be no obvious swelling or palpable pain. Healing may
it is important to treat the whole limb. Therefore gentle
occur within days. With moderate muscle strain (grade 2)
fexion and extension of the digits with some stretching is
there is more damage to muscle and fascia with diminished
done first, moving up to the hock, stife, and hip, using 15
strength and ROM. Moderate strains generally require one
to 20 repetitions per joint. For the stife, it may be helpful
to three weeks to heal. Severe muscle strains (grade 3) are
to use some gentle stretching (hold the joint at maximal
characterized by complete rupture of muscle fibers and
comfortable fexion or extension for 30 seconds). Patella
fascia, with total loss of muscle function. Healing may take
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
565
months, and in some cases a chronic recurring tightness
dense fibrous band within the muscle. It has been reported
may restrict full athletic function.
 in the semimembranosus, semitendinosus, biceps femoris,
Muscle strains occur commonly in human athletes, so
 gracilis, and sartorius muscles in the dog. It has been
it is likely that they are underdiagnosed in canine athletes.55
reported most commonly in German shepherds, but is also
It can be difficult to diagnose a muscle strain, especially
seen in Doberman pinschers, Rottweilers, and a number of
because dogs with muscle strains often have concurrent
other breeds.29.7 The etiology is unknown, but muscle
orthopedic problems. Diagnosis may be made by eliciting
 trauma is suspected in some cases. The onset is insidious
pain when the affected myotendinous unit is directly pal-
in some cases, leading to the speculation of chronic or
 pated or passively moved into a stretched position. Imaging
 recurrent muscle strain as a cause. The most common clini-
techniques such as diagnostic ultrasound or magnetic reso-
cal sign is nonpainful lameness, although pain may be
s  s      
elicited on palpation of the muscles. The gait is character-
Management of acute muscle injuries varies with the
ized by a shortened stride with intermal rotation of the stife
severity of injury. Large areas of muscle disruption or total
during the swing phase, and the stife joint may have
 muscle rupture should be surgically repaired.56 Grade 1 or
decreased extension. The condition can be bilateral. A
2 injuries are typically treated conservatively. This includes
fibrous band may be palpated in the affected muscle.
the use of analgesic agents, cryotherapy, and rest or con-
Surgical excision of the affected tissue may cause tem-
trolled activity. Stretching is typically avoided during the
porary resolution of signs, but the fbrosis typically recurs
acute phase of healing. Within the first week after injury
within a few months if intensive rehabilitation for several
or surgical repair, pulsed therapeutic ultrasound and laser
months is not performed. Rehabilitation with ultrasound,
may be used for their nonthermal effects on tissue repair.?
 PROM, cross-fiber friction massage, and controlled exer-
If muscle is surgically repaired, the area may be immo-
cise for several months has resulted in improvement and
bilized by splinting the limb for several weeks. During
acceptable clinical function.?9 If contracture begins to
this time, PROM of adjacent joints is indicated. After the
develop despite rehabilitation, a dynamic splint may be
muscle has healed, muscle lengthening may be promoted
used to apply chronic, passive stretch to the tissues. Main-
by the use of passive stretching and active ROM exercise.
taining tissue tension for 8 to 12 hours per day may help
Additionally, exercises may be chosen to strengthen the
delay the progress of contracture until the fibrous tissue
affected muscles. However, there are no established treat-
Suojuou ua-suoT ez'g uonisod paesuoa ue u sameul
ment guidelines for muscle strains in dogs and the effective-
and aggressive intervention may improve the chance of a
ness of physical rehabilitation has not been established.Ss
successful outcome, but the prognosis is generally consid-
Almost any muscle can sustain injury. Common muscles
ered to be guarded.
injured in racing greyhounds include the gracilis, tensor
fascia lata, pectorals, and triceps.°6 Gracilis muscle rupture,
Stifle Conditions
'spunouais Suionu u! .yaiun paddoup, se umouy osp
occurs from a single traumatic event and dogs often recover
Articular Fractures of the Stifle
after surgical repair.?9 The iliopsoas, pectineus, adductor,
and gracilis have been reported to be affected by muscle
Fractures of the femoral condyles occur relatively rarely.
strain in the hindlimb of dogs.Ss
Fractures of the patella may occur as a result of falling on
Eccentric muscle contraction may play an important role
the stife on a hard surface, or as avulsion fractures of
 in the development of acute muscle strain injury because
the quadriceps muscle. Physeal fractures of the proximal
a weightbearing force exceeding the force of muscle con-
tibial physis sometimes occur. Salter-Harris Type IMI and
traction is applied to the muscle, resulting in muscle length-
 IV fractures are more serious because the fracture line
ening while it is contracting against the load. This leads to
 involves the articular surface. As with any articular fracture
muscle damage. Inadequate warm-up, fatigue, or overtrain-
anatomic reduction, rigid fixation with screws and early,
ing may also be factors involved in muscle strains.?9 In
 gentle, diligent ROM and joint mobilization are necessary
addition, after a muscle has been injured it may be at risk
for success. Surgical fixation of articular fractures must be
for reinjury, particularly if the previous muscle strain has
strong enough to withstand early PROM exercises (Figure
not completely healed. Light activity is recommended to
32-27). Rehabilitation of fractures of the stife is similar to
increase blood supply and muscle temperature before vig-
that of fractures of the elbow (see Table 32-1).
orous exercise to reduce the risk of injury. Stretching may
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Stifle
also be performed before exercise, but stretching without
 an appropriate warm-up may be detrimental.
The presence of OCD in the stife is uncommon. The
lesions generally occur on the axial aspect of the lateral
Fibrotic Myopathy of the Thigh Muscles
femoral condyle. It is usually treated by arthrotomy Or
Fibrotic myopathy is a condition in which the muscle fibers
 arthroscopy to remove the osteochondral fragment(s), and
are replaced with fibrous connective tissue, resulting in a
to curette, forage, or micropick the subchondral bone
566
Section Vl
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 32-28  Arthroscopic view of the torn medial meniscus as it
 is shifted cranially within the joint. The caudal aspect of the medial
meniscus is commonly damaged because of stifle instability as a
 result of cranial cruciate ligament rupture.
Figure 32-27 Postoperative view of an articular fracture of the 
periarticular tissues may be thickened, particularly on the
distal femur. Consultation with the surgeon is recommended to deter-
medial aspect of the stife. This is termed medial buttress.
 Radiographs may be used to confirmm the presence of joint 
mine the type and amount of exercise that can be safely done without
jeopardizing the stability of the repair.
effusion, assess the severity of any degenerative changes,
and rule out other problems such as neoplasia.
Damage to the caudal pole of the medial meniscus often
to create an opportunity for vascular ingrowth and fibro-
occurs as a result of joint instability (Figure 32-28). The
cartilage formation. Altermatively, osteochondral grafting
lateral meniscus can also be damaged, but it is typically
may be an option. Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs,
 not as severely affected as the medial.58 Damage to the
cryotherapy, gentle PROM, and leash walks are advocated
meniscus rarely occurs as an isolated injury, but may be
for the first 2 to 4 weeks, depending on the severity of the
seen in approximately 45% of animals with CCL rupture.59
lesion. After that if the lameness is improving, leash
In some cases the meniscus may be normal at the time of 
the initial surgery for CCL rupture, but become damaged
added after 4 to 6 weeks (see Table 32-2).
at some time in the future. Clinical signs of a meniscal tear
may include lameness and an audible click during joint
Cranial Cruciate Ligament Rupture
motion. Partial or total meniscectomy via arthrotomy or
Cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) rupture is one of the most
arthroscopy is used to treat meniscal tear. If a meniscec-
common orthopedic conditions in dogs. Trauma-induced
tomy is required the prognosis is generally somewhat
acute rupture of the CCL results in gross instability of the 
worse than for stifes that have an intact meniscus. The
stife, and is often accompanied by a sudden non-weight-
rehabilitation program after meniscectomy is dictated by
bearing lameness, which improves gradually over the first
the procedure used to stabilize the joint. In some cases the
few weeks. However, most cases of CCL rupture occur as
meniscus is normal at the time of stife stabilization but is
a result of ligament degeneration. The animal may present
damaged months or years later. This is probably the most
with acute lameness or may have a more insidious lame-
common reason for an animal to develop acute lameness
ness as partial rupture of the ligament occurs over time. In
after CCL surgery.
either scenario osteoarthritic changes progress with time
Conservative treatment of CCL rupture by strict con-
and often result in diminished limb function.
finement for 4 to 8 weeks may be attempted, but the pro-
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture is diagnosed by pal-
gression of OA is greater. An extermal brace may be used
 pating cranial drawer motion (cranial subluxation of the
to support the stife, but there are no studies to document
tibia). Joint effusion may be evident and is best palpated
their efficacy in dogs. Knee braces similar to those used in
adjacent to the patellar tendon. In more chronic cases
people after cruciate ligament repair may provide support
drawer motion may be more difficult to elicit and the
 and improve proprioception and limb function, but they do
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
567
Table 32-4
Rehabilitation After Surgical Repair of Ruptured Cranial Cruciate Ligament
Goals
Trea tment
Control infammation
Cryotherapy immediately after surgery and then daily until inflammation resolves,
particularly after exercise
Maintain range of motion
Passive range of motion and/or joint mobilizations for 3 to 4 weeks. Consider aquatic
 and joint health
walking. Add cavaletti walking after several weeks, if repair is stable enough.
Control pain
Nonsteroidal antinflammatories ± other analgesics ± transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation within first postoperative week. Decrease pain management as indicated
by assessment of the dog.
Strengthen muscle
 Consider neuromuscular electrical stimulation in early postoperative time to limit 
atrophy. Begin with controlled slow leash walking. Consider aquatic walking after
incision has sealed. Progress to stair climbing and sit-to-stand exercises. Rate of
progression is typically more conservative following tibial plateau leveling osteotomy
as compared with an extracapsular suture. No explosive activity for 3 months.
not provide adequate stability and it is not clear that out-
capsule. Most commonly, the suture is passed around the
 comes are improved.6063 Surgery is accepted to be the
lateral (and sometimes medial) fabella and through a tunnel
treatment of choice, regardless of dog size. Many surgical
drilled into the proximal tibial crest. Modifications of this
techniques have been described to treat cranial cruciate
procedure involve stabilizing the suture with bone anchors
ligament rupture, but none have been proven to be supe-
or through bone tunnels. These procedures provide imme-
rior.65.66 Physical rehabilitation may be at least as important
diate ex tracapsular stabilization of the stifle, allowing early
as surgical technique in affecting functional outcome.6769
rehabilitation to be initiated. At some point, the prosthetic
The prognosis for CCL rupture is variable. In humans 
material may fatigue and break. The joint is stabilized
a trend toward more aggressive rehabilitation has shown
by periarticular fibrosis within 8 to 10 weeks, so if suture
improved outcomes following surgery for cruciate rup-
breakdown occurs several months postoperatively joint
tures.70 Postoperative rehabilitation programs for CCL
stability is not significantly affected. Nevertheless, it is
surgery in dogs improves joint ROM, reduces muscle
common for some degree of cranial drawer motion to be
spasms, and improves weight-bearing and overall joint
present weeks to months after surgery. The complication
 iae saNN yim Auo paan ssoa syes'uonoung
rate associated with this procedure is relatively low and
surgery had improved lameness scores, increased thigh
most are incisional complications.74
circumference, and decreased radiographic changes as
 Fibular head transposition is another type of extracap-
compared with untreated dogs.7 The focus of rehabilita-
sular stabilization. The fibular head is transposed cranially
tion in most cases is on improving stife extension and
and stabilized with a pin and tension band. The distal
increasing mass of the quadriceps, biceps femoris, and
portion of the lateral collateral ligament inserts on the
semimembranosus muscles.7 Some dogs recover with near
fbular head, so shifting it cranially causes it to function
normal function. However, some have moderate to severe
similar to a CCL, by limiting cranial drawer and intemal
OA at the time of diagnosis, requiring long-term manage-
rotation of the tibia. The repair provides immediate stabil-
 ment (see section on OA). Total stifle replacement surgery
ity of the stife joint, but some drawer motion may retum
is available, but is not commonly performed.?73
with time.
To simplify discussion of CCL rehabilitation, the surgi-
Physical  rehabilitation  of  extracapsular  techniques
cal repairs are grouped into three categories. The surgical
begins in the immediate postoperative period with cryo-
 procedures have been traditionally classified as extracap-
therapy, NSAIDs, and PROM to reduce infammation and
sular or intracapsular, based the location of the implant or
pain (Table 32-4). The common practice of placing a com-
 graft that is used to provide joint stability. A third approach
pression bandage immediately postoperatively may do
s   s  a   
little to limit swelling of the joint.?s Cold compression or
type of tibial osteotomy.
 microcurrent electrical therapy in combination with a com-
pressive bandage may be effective in limiting postoperative
Extracapsular Stabilization
edema.76.77 Electrical stimulation (TENS) may help with
Extracapsular procedures stabilize the joint by transposi-
pain management.?α After loss of the cruciate, even with
tion of the animal's own periarticular tissues or by securing
immediate surgery, the affected leg loses muscle mass
a synthetic material (usually suture) extermal to the joint
within 2 weeks and bone density within 4 weeks.69.79 It is
568
Section Vl
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
also important to establish normal ROM within 2 weeks to
osteotomy (CWTO), proximal tibial intraarticular osteot-
regain full stife extension. Physical rehabilitation can
omy (PTIO), chevron wedge osteotomy, and triple tibial
osis ie sst n u asaiu ue 
osteotomy (TTO). No one technique has been shown to be
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) may also be
superior.?2 A variety of complications have been reported
initiated to limit muscle atrophy.7 Controlled leash walks
for TPLO and TTA procedures, but the overall complica-
and active use of the limb are encouraged the day after
tion rates are similar.&3 The theory behind the osteotomy
surgery. Treadmill walking can be used to encourage
techniques is to alter the joint biomechanics to eliminate
weight bearing. Aquatic therapy can begin within 1 week
abnormal cranial tibial thrust motion during weight-bearing
postoperatively if the incision is sealed and has no drainage
activity. The TPLO procedure is performed by making an
Or discharge. Swimming or water walking may improve
osteotomy in the proximal tibia, rotating the proximal tibia
to level the weight bearing surface and change the joint
whether swimming or walking, also reduces the axial load
biomechanics, and stabilizing it with a bone plate until the
on the joint,39 thus potentially limiting stress on the surgi-
bone has healed (Figure 32-29). The TTA procedure is
cal repair. Some animals may fail their limbs in water, so
 performed by making an osteotomy in the cranial aspect
aquatic therapy could be counterproductive in those cases.
of the proximal tibia, allowing the tibial tuberosity to be
    s  n  s
transposed cranially and stabilized with a special wedge-
on stife extension. After the infammation has subsided,
shaped implant, thus shifting the alignment of the patellar
topical hot packs or continuous ultrasound may be used to
tendon and eliminating cranial tibial thrust.
limit pain, increase blood flow, and increase tissue exten-
The most common complication following TPLO is
sibility before the rehabilitation session. Cryotherapy may
implant-associated  infection.4  Patellar  tendinitis is  a
be performed at the end of each exercise session to limit
common complication that is seen in the first postoperative
infammation and pain. Hindlimb muscles can be strength-
month, and is identified by pain on palpation of the patellar
ened by stair climbing, incline or decline walking, sit-to-
tendon at its insertion on the tibial crest. The tendon is also
stand exercises, pulling a cart, or dancing. As strength and
be palpably thickened (Figure 32-30). Another complica-
endurance improve, the duration and intensity of the exer-
tion is avulsion of a portion of the tibial crest. Fracture of
cises can increase to include jogging, controlled ball
the tibial crest is also a reported complication of TTA.
playing, and swimming. However, explosive activity such
Although dogs may become very functional after TPLO
as jumping is not allowed for the first 3 months.
surgery, the limb may never be completely normal.&5
 The therapy of tibial osteotomy techniques is initially
Intracapsular Stabilization
the same as for extracapsular techniques, and involves
Intracapsular procedures replace the cranial cruciate liga-
cryotherapy, NSAIDs, and PROM in the immediate post-
ment in a nearly anatomic position with a graft, synthetic
operative period. Limited activity in the form of pro-
material, or a combination of these materials. Biologic
gressively longer leash walks, are begun in the initial
 grafts are favored over synthetic prosthetics because the
 postoperative period. Potential complications of patellar
latter tend to degenerate and cause chronic intraarticular
tendinopathy and tibial crest avulsion must be considered
 inflammation. Biologic grafts undergo a period of weak-
when developing the rehabilitation protocol. Excessive
ness until the tissue revascularizes and gains additional
stress on the patellar tendon should be avoided in the early
strength. Months may be required for the graft to regain
postoperative period until the tissues have a chance to
sufficient strength to function as a normal CCL. When
adapt to the altered joint biomechanics. The quadriceps
creating a therapeutic plan, the therapist must consider the
muscle-patellar tendon unit should be maintained in a rela-
material used for the surgery. Autografts and allografts are
tively shortened position to reduce tensile forces on the
generally strong when initially placed, but stretch under
tibial crest. Excessive fexion of the stifle during weight
tension. The tissue becomes weaker over the next 2 to 20
 bearing should be avoided. This includes jumping, running.
weeks while revascularization and incorporation occur.
stair climbing, or walking in a crouched position. The
 Utimate tissue strength is achieved following biointegra-
therapist must carefully monitor the patellar tendon and
tion of the graft. In general, the rehabilitation program is
tibial crest, and alter the treatment protocol if necessary.
similar to, but much more gradual than, extracapsular
Early detection and treatment of complications should
repair, and should not progress as rapidly because of the
result in an earlier retum to function and an improved
limited graft strength.
outcome as compared with allowing the conditions to
 progress to the point of clinical lameness and pain. These
Tibial Osteotomies
complications usually can be managed by NSAIDs, cryo-
Several tibial osteotomy techniques have been described,
therapy, extracorporeal shock wave therapy, and more
but the most commonly used is the tibial plateau leveling
restricted activity. Use of a hinged knee brace to limit
osteotomy (TPLO). Other techniques include the tibial
fexion of the stife may be considered, although its effi-
tuberosity advancement (TTA), closing wedge tibial
cacy has not been reported. After the tissues have healed,
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
569
Aquatic therapy may be useful to reduce weight-bearing
 stresses on the repair.39
Caudal Cruciate Ligament Rupture
Isolated rupture of the caudal cruciate ligament is rare. The
caudal cruciate ligament may rupture as a complication
of TPLO overrotation, but it is usually caused by severe
stife trauma that results in stife luxation. Treatment of
isolated caudal cruciate ligament rupture is surgical stabj-
lization with an extracapsular suture, and rehabilitation is
carried out as for extracapsular stabilization of cranial cru-
ciate ligament rupture. Treatment of caudal cruciate liga-
 ment ruptures that occurs in combination with damage to
other stife structures is discussed in the section on stife
luxation.
Stifle Luxation
Total derangement of the stife, with rupture of both cruci-
B
ate ligaments and one or both collateral ligaments, is a
Figure 32-29  A dog with a cranial cruciate ligament injury has had
result of severe trauma. The menisci are often damaged as
the stifle stabilized with a tibial plateau leveling osteotomy. A, A-P
well. Collateral ligament trauma is usually best treated by
view, B, Lateral view.
surgical repair. The repair may involve suturing stretched
 Or tom ligaments, or the use of prosthetic material (e.g..
suture and screws or bone anchors) to replace the tom
ligament(s). The cruciate ligaments are generally repaired
with an extracapsular technique. If the damage was severe
Or injury was sustained to other limbs, there will be
increased stress on the repaired stife. The repair may be
protected with a bandage or splint for the first 2 to 4 weeks.
Extemal coaptation and transarticular extermal fixation will
cause at least a temporary decrease in ROM, but may be
necessary.86.87 Hinged extermal fixators allow joint fexion
and extension. It is not clear whether the benefits of exter-
nal fixation outweigh the potential complications. If the
stife is not immobilized, immediate PROM helps to
prevent joint contracture, promote cartilage homeostasis,
and stimulate scar formation along normal lines of stress,
resulting in a stronger scar. If the stifle is immobilized
 postoperatively, the goal after bandage or brace removal is
to eliminate joint stiffness and re-establish ROM by imple-
menting passive and active ROM exercises.87 Therapeutic
ultrasound with simultaneous stretching also may be ben-
eficial. Weight-bearing activities are encouraged with
weight shifting, slow leash walks, and treadmill walking.
Aquatic therapy may also be helpful. Appropriate chal-
Figure 32-30 This dog became more lame several weeks after
lenges to the healing tissues enhance tissue remodeling and
TPLO surgery. The increased soft tissue density in the cranial aspect
strengthening. Endurance and strengthening activities may
of the joint is consistent with patellar tendonitis.
be initiated between 4 and 6 weeks. Near full returm to
activities should be achieved by 12 to 16 weeks.
The prognosis for stifle lux ation is fair. Long-term prob-
activity level can be gradually increased. The osteotomy
lems include decreased ROM, chronic instability, and
site must be given adequate time to heal (6-10 weeks) to
ongoing OA. Arthrodesis is an option for a chronically
 prevent complications related to bone healing and implant
unstable stife joint, but function is poor. Activity should
failure. As healing of the osteotomy site progresses, a
be restricted until there is radiographic evidence of
 gradually increasing protocol of limb use is prescribed.
fusion, which is usually in about 8 weeks. Increased
570
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
weight-bearing exercises and muscle reconditioning are
After surgery the tissues must be allowed to heal before
begun after the stife has fused (see General Physical
vigorous rehabilitation begins, particularly if the tibial
Rehabilitation Management of Joint Arthrodesis).
crest was transposed.
During the frst few weeks cryotherapy and NSAIDs
Patella Luxation
may be used for infammation (Table 32-5). Active use of
Although patella luxations may be traumatic in origin, they
the limb is encouraged, but initial activity should be limited
are most commonly associated with torsional deformities
to short leash walks, and no running, jumping, or playing
and malalignment of the femur and tibia. Medial luxations
are allowed. Passive ROM is beneficial for joint resurfac-
are more common than lateral luxations in all dog breeds
ing and cartilage healing, especially if a trochleoplasty was
and in cats." Concurrent cranial cruciate ligament rupture
 performed.90 Small breed dogs in particular are sometimes
is present in 15% to 20% of middle-aged and older dogs
reluctant to bear weight on the affected limb, even in the
with chronic patella luxation.40 Patella luxations are clas-
absence of apparent pain or complications. In these cases
sifed from grade I to grade IV, with IV being the most
weight-shifting activities or a syringe cap placed under a
severe. Grade I patella luxation indicates that the patella
stays in the trochlear groove but can be manually luxated,
whereas grade IV indicates a patella that is always luxated
 and cannot be reduced. The higher grades usually correlate 
with more severe clinical signs and severity of bony
abnonmalities.
 Surgery is only recommended when the patella luxation
 causes gait abnormalities or lameness; therefore surgery is
 generally not performed for grade I luxations. Surgery is
only recommended for grade II luxations if clinical signs
are causing limb dysfunction, but is usually indicated
for grade Iml and IV luxations. Surgical correction of
patella luxations usually requires reconstruction of both
soft tissues and bone. In almost all cases the tibial crest is
nism (Figure 32-3 1). Some type of trochleoplasty to deepen
the trochlear groove is performed if the trochlear groove is
shallow. A femoral osteotomy may be performed if severe
varus deformity of the femur is present. The most common
complications of patella luxation repair are patella relux-
B
ation and implant loosening or failure.9 Other reported
Figure 32-31 Medial lxation ofthe patella. (A)is the preoperative
complications include trochlear wedge migration, wound
radiograph and (β8) is the postoperative radiograph with pins present
dehiscence, tibial tuberosity fracture, and septic arthritis.
in the transposed tibial crest.
Table 32-5
 Rehabilitation After Surgical Repair of Patella Luxation
Goals
Treatment
Control inflammation
Cryotherapy immediately after surgery and then daily until inflammation resolves,
particularly after exercise
Maintain range of
Passive range of motion for 3 to 4 weeks. Consider aquatic walking.
 motion and joint
health
Control pain
Nonsteroidal antinflammatories ± other analgesics as needed after surgery. Decrease pain
management as indicated by assessment of the dog.
Strengthen muscle
Initially, activities such as weight shifting to encourage weight bearing. Start with
controlled leash walks. Limit activities that may put rotational stress on the stife.
 Motion should be confined to the sagittal plane. After 2-3 weeks, focus on increased
strength of hindlimb with walking, incline walking, sit-to-stands, dancing, etc.
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
571
normal foot may be instituted to encourage limb use.
Crural Conditions
Walking on an underwater treadmill may encourage
strengthening of the quadriceps muscles while maintaining
Avulsion of the Tibial Tuberosity
the motion in a sagittal plane. After several weeks strength-
ening exercises may be initiated. Motion should be limited
This condition most often occurs in immature dogs before
to the sagittal plane to avoid undue stress on the repair. The
the crest fuses with the main shaft of the tibia. Avulsion
 prognosis is generally fair to good for grades II and IMI, but
results in proximal and cranial displacement of distal
guarded for grade IV luxations.
portion of the tibial crest, or of the entire crest. This results
in patella alta and the dog is unable to fully extend the
stife. This fracture is best treated with a pin and tension
Rupture of the Patellar Tendon
band technique to reattach the bony fragment, although
Rupture of the patellar tendon is rare, but can occur with
minimally displaced fractures may be treated conserva-
direct trauma or with forceful quadriceps contraction
tively with rest and a lateral splint to limit stife fexion.
during forced fexion of the stifle. Patellar tendon rupture
Cryotherapy, NSAIDs, and limited weight bearing are ini-
is treated by surgical tendon repair. A transarticular exter-
tiated after surgery. Follow-up radiographs are made 3 to
nal fixator or splint may be placed for 2 to 3 weeks in an
 4 weeks after surgery to monitor the progress of fracture
effort to limit tension on the repaired tendon. However,this
healing and guide the initiation of a more aggressive
will not prevent tension created by contraction of the quad-
weight-bearing and muscle reeducation program.
riceps muscles. Superficial cold therapy is used in the
 postoperative period to reduce local inflammation. Pulsed
Tibial and Fibular Fractures
3-MHz therapeutic ultrasound applied directly over the
Fractures of the tibia and fibula are common in the dog.
tendon is appropriate to help stimulate collagen produc-
Depending on the fracture type and configuration, they
tion. Therapeutic laser may also be beneficial. Therapy
may be treated with closed reduction and extermal coapta-
may include PROM and light activity such as leash walking
tion, or open reduction with intermal or extemal fixation.
to maintain normal tissue length and encourage normal
Nonsteroidal antinfammatory drugs, cryotherapy. and
joint movement. Standing and balancing exercises can
 PROM are used to decrease pain and infammation and
promote proprioceptive input. However, active stife motion
 maintain ROM for the first 2 to 3 weeks. Massage may be
should be limited to prevent disruption of the weakened
performed initially to help resolve edema. Active weight-
tissue. Between 3 and 6 weeks controlled exercise should
bearing exercises are then initiated. The rate and progres-
be initiated. The tendon gains significant strength by 6
sion of activity are dictated by the severity of the fracture
weeks, but will not reach maximal strength for a year or
and stability of repair. Because relatively little soft tissue
 more.9 During the remodeling phase therapy is directed at 
covers the medial surface of the tibia, open fractures are
maintaining tissue mobility, preventing adhesions, and
quite common. In these cases, wound management and
improving proprioception and muscle strength.
bandaging also may be necessary. Osteomyelitis tends to
occur in the tibia more commonly than other bones and is
probably related to the high incidence of open fractures.
Traumatic Injuries of the Long Digital
Aquatic therapy is contraindicated in patients with open
Extensor Tendon
wounds.
Avulsion of the tendon of the long digital extensor muscle
is a rare condition that occurs in young dogs. Clinical signs
Tarsal, Metatarsal, and
include joint effusion and pain in the craniolateral aspect
Phalangeal Conditions
of the joint. If not treated OA and chronic low-grade lame-
ness may result. Treatment involves reattachment of the
Tarsal, Metatarsal, and Phalangeal Fractures
avulsed fragment of bone, or removing the fragment and
attaching the tendon to the proximal tibia or joint capsule.
Fractures of the distal fbula, tibia, or tarsal bones may
If the bony fragment is reattached, time is allowed for
occur as a result of trauma, such as athletic injury or auto-
union before starting aggressive rehabilitation. In the initial
mobile accidents. Repair of medial or lateral fractures of
postoperative period, pain and inflammation are treated
the malleolus are important because these serve as the
with NSAIDs and cryotherapy. Limited weight bearing
origins of the collateral ligaments. Metatarsal and phalan-
with muscle re-education and proprioceptive training are
geal fractures usually occur as a result of trauma, and
instituted as the fracture heals. If the fragment was excised
phalangeal fractures are often open fractures. Tarsal, meta-
and the tendon reattached, weight bearing, controlled
tarsal, and phalangeal fractures may be treated using closed
 activity can be started soon after surgery. The prognosis is
reduction and immobilization in a coaptation device, Or
good if surgical treatment is performed before OA is
with a variety of implants, including intramedullary pins,
apparent.92
wires, and plates and screws. A splint or light cast is usually
572
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
applied to the limb for several weeks after intermal fixation
be required after the wound is healthy. Ligament repairs
to protect the relatively small implants that must be used.
are typically protected during healing by rigid immobiliza-
As is the case for all articular fractures, it is important
tion in a cast, splint, or extermal fixator for at least 3 weeks.
to achieve anatomic reduction and rigid fixation with
This prevents the sutures from tearing out and prevents
screws, pins, or small bone plates. Also, early ROM is
elongation of the ligamentous fibers. Ligament repairs are
important following surgery. If a cast or splint is used, stife
generally not able to withstand full weight-bearing stresses
ROM can be preserved while the extermal coaptation is in
for several weeks. However, in joints rigidly immobilized
place. If possible, the cast or splint should be removed on
for 6 weeks, the ligaments fail to gain as much strength as
a weekly basis to enable PROM exercises to be performed
ligaments of joints that are not immobilized beyond 3
to maintain joint and tendon mobility. After performing
weeks.? A hinged transarticular extermal fixation will
 PROM exercises, the coaptation is reapplied to protect the
allow some joint motion while protecting the primary
fracture. Following permanent removal of the splint or
repair, but it is not known whether the long-tenm outcome
cast, remobilization of the joints is important, along with
is improved over joints that are rigidly immobilized.87
weight-bearing therapeutic exercises and muscle recondi-
After the cast or extermal fix ator is removed, remobilization
tioning. Sagittal-plane ROM exercises and joint mobiliza-
of adjacent joints, weight-bearing exercises, and muscle
tion work well to restore ROM to the area.
reconditioning are begun. Active or passive therapeutic
exercises that place varus or valgus stresses on the collat-
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Tarsus
eral ligaments should be avoided.
Tarsal OCD occurs less commonly than OCD in the shoul-
Arthrodesis may be indicated for shearing injuries if the
der. Lesions can occur on the medial or lateral ridge of the
degree of tissue loss, especially articular cartilage, makes
talus, and can be difficult to see radiographically and may
joint reconstruction impossible. Hyperextension injuries
be more readily diagnosed by CT or arthroscopy. The patho-
that result in subluxation or lux ation of the tarsometatarsal
physiology is the same as for OCD in other joints. Dogs
joint, or the proximal or distal intertarsal joints also require
with hock OCD may present with signs of OA such as joint
partial arthrodesis for a good outcome.4 Arthrodesis is
effusion, thickening of periarticular soft tissues, decreased 
performed by application of intermal or extemal fixation
ROM, and crepitus. It is usually treated by arthrotomy or
(Figure 32-32). If intermal fixation is used, the distal limb
 arthroscopy to remove the osteochondral fragment(s), and
is supported by a splint or cast for 6 to 8 weeks or until
curette, forage, or micropick of the subchondral bone to
 there is radiographic evidence of fusion. Remobilization of
allow vascular ingrowth and fibrocartilage formation. Large
adjacent joints, weight-bearing exercises, and muscle
cartilage faps in the hock are sometimes fixed in place in
reconditioning are begun after the cast has been removed
an effort to preserve joint congruency, but OA will progress.
 (see General Physical Rehabilitation Management of Joint
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs, cryotherapy, gentle
Arthrodesis).
PROM, and leash walks are advocated for the frst 2 to 4
weeks, depending on the severity of the lesion. After that
if the lameness is improving, leash walking is increased and
more aggressive activities are added after 4 to 6 weeks. The
prognosis for hock OCD is guarded because OA progresses
despite treatment (see Table 32-2). In severe cases arthrod-
esis may be performed.
Tarsal Luxation
 Most luxations of the tarsocrural joint occur with concomi-
tant avulsion of one or both malleoli, which is where the
collateral ligaments originate. Subluxation can occur with
rupture or avulsion of the collateral ligaments. Traumatic
shearing injuries commonly result in loss of skin, subcuta-
neous tissues, tendons, ligament, and bone from the medial
or lateral aspect of the joint. Depending on the type of
 damage, surgical repair of hock luxation or subluxation
may include imbricating, suturing, reattaching the liga-
ments, or replacing the ligaments with a prosthetic col-
lateral ligament technique. In some cases an extermal
fixator may be applied as the primary repair.93 Open
wounds are often present, which must be dressed or surgi-
Figure 32-32  Pantarsal arthrodesis as a treatment for a severe
cally repaired. If there is significant skin loss, a graft may
shearing injury of the hock.
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
573
Injuries of the Common Calcaneal
fixator or cast will allow weight-bearing forces to bypass
(Achilles) Tendon
the healing tendon. Three or more weeks of immobilization
The common calcaneal (Achilles) tendon consists of three
with a splint, cast, positional screw, or extermal fixator is
tendons that insert on the tuber calcanei: the gastrocne-
typical. The walking ring may then be gradually raised, so
mius; the common tendon of the biceps femoris, semiten-
that partial weight bearing is shared between the ring and
dinosus, and gracilis muscles; and the tendon of the
foot, until complete weight bearing by the foot occurs.
superficial digital fexor muscle. Rupture of the common
Some studies question which immobilization technique
calcaneal tendon can occur at the musculotendinous junc-
is superior.94.9s Rigid fixation should be used for the short-
tion, the midsubstance, near the tendon's insertion on the
est time necessary. Early partial weight bearing and joint
tuber calcanei, or the tuber calcanei may fracture. The
movement create stress on the reconstructed tissue to
tendon may be injured by sharp penetrating trauma or
promote parallel collagen alignment in the repaired tendon
chronic repetitive use. If the tendon is avulsed, the end may
 and increased early tendon strength.%.97 Extermal skeletal
be palpable 2 to 3 cm proximal to the tuber calcanei. The
 a  r n m pe   s
distal end of the tendon becomes enlarged and finm as
motion. Extermal fixators may also provide progressive
fibrous tissue develops. Diagnosis is made by physical
loading of the tendon by performing a staged removal.97
examination, ultrasound or other imaging, such as radio-
After 3 weeks controlled motion is recommended to
 graphs to identify avulsion fractures or other conditions.
promote remodeling of the peritendinous scar, which
An avulsed tendon may be sutured to bone tunnels in the
allows the tendon to glide. By 6 weeks the tendon has not
calcaneus. A large bone avulsion fragment may be fixed
attained full strength but should be strong enough to
with pin and tension band. In cases of ruptures at the mus-
support partial weight.91 The tendon may continue to
culocutaneous junction or in mid-tendon, the tendon is
slowly increase in strength for a year or more. During the
usually sutured primarily. Partial tendon ruptures may be
remodeling phase therapy is directed at maintaining tissue
managed by a cast or splint.
 mobility, preventing adhesions, and improving propriocep-
After tendon surgery, the hock is often immobilized in
tion and muscle strength.
a normal standing angle to prevent hock fexion and exces-
Pulsed, 3-MHz therapeutic ultrasound may be used to
sive tension on the repair (Figure 32-33). However, the
stimulate collagen repair.98 Therapeutic laser also may be
tendon will still be subjected to some tension from muscle
beneficial. After the period of immobilization, continuous
contractions.94 Therefore placing a walking ring under the
ultrasound or hot packs may be used to wanm the tissues
foot and incorporating this into a transarticular extermal
before stretching.99 Tendon strength and joint fexion may
improve over several months to a year. During this time
explosive motion that places large tensile forces on the
tendon (e.g., jumping) should be avoided. The long-term
 prognosis is good.
Luxation of the Superficial Digital
Flexor Tendon
The tendon of the superficial digital fexor muscle may
luxate medially or laterally from its location as it crosses
the calcaneus. It is a traumatic injury, but dysplasia of the
tuber calcanei may be a predisposing factor in some
cases. 100 Luxation of the tendon may be palpated while the
hock is fexed and extended. Treatment is surgical repair
of the torm retinaculum. The healing tissues are protected
by immobilization of the hock in a splint for 2 to 3 weeks.
After the splint has been removed, ROM and weight-
bearing exercises are begun. Tissue mobilization may be
applied to the area to prevent fibrosis of the tendon, which
could limit motion of the digits. The prognosis is good if
the repair is done early. Chronic tendinitis and bursitis may
decrease the prognosis.
Luxation of the Metatarsophalangeal and
Phalangeal Joints
Figure 32-33  A transarticular external fixator is sometimes used 
These conditions are the same as described for the front
to stabilize a repaired common calcaneal tendon.
feet.
574
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Table 32-6
 Rehabilitation of Joints with Osteoarthritis
Goals
Treatment
Weight management
 Dietary counseling and exercise program to achieve and maintain lean body weight.
 Pain management
Nonsteroidal antiinfammatories ± other analgesics as needed
± Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
± Laser
± Shockwave therapy
Hot or cold pack of joint
Hot pack, therapeutic ultrasound, or massage for muscle spasms
Strengthen periarticular
 Neuromuscular electrical stimulation if too weak or painful for active exercise
muscles
 Controlled, low-impact exercise (walking or aquatic exercise). Ongoing patient
assessments of lameness and pain are used to continually adjust the intensity of the
exercise program.
 Limit excessive joint stress
 Lifestyle changes, such as ramps instead of steps or jumping
Encourage controlled, low-impact activities.
Maintain or improve joint
 Passive range of motion and/or joint mobilization
range of motion and
 Active range of motion—therapeutic exercise (walking or aquatic)
 proprioception
Maintain or improve
Passive range of motion
cartilage health
Weight-bearing exercise with low-impact (walking or aquatic)
 Disease modifying osteoarthritic agents
Limit infammation
Nonsteroidal antiinfammatories to treat chronic or acute inflammation
Cryotherapy for episodes of acute inflammation
 Limit high-impact or uncontrolled activities 
Avoid obesity
 Diet containing omega-3 fatty acids, or fish oil supplement
Trauma of the Superficial and Deep Digital
 The goals of treating OA are to manage pain, maintain
Flexor Tendons
function and ROM, and maintain or regain normal activity
These conditions are the same as described for the front
(Table 32-6). These goals are primarily accomplished by
feet.
means of weight management, therapeutic exercise, physi-
cal modalities, and medications 101-13 Weight reduction is
General Physical Rehabilitation
essential for obese animals, and a lean body weight is
Management of Osteoarthritis
 maintained by counseling the owners on proper diet and
exercise. Weight reduction alone can cause a significant
Osteoarthritis may also be termed osteoarthrosis, degen-
erative joint disease (DJD), or spondylosis if in the spine.
that are more than 10% above their ideal body weight.102
It is a deterioration of joint health that usually occurs
Excess weight can cause increased mechanical stresses on
secondary to joint incongruity, instability, or some other
load-bearing joints. In addition, body fat has metabolic
disruption of the articular cartilage. Mechanical and bio-
activity that promotes infammatory reactions within the
chemical changes that occur within the joint result in
body, which may contribute to the pathophysiology of OA.
decreased cartilage resiliency, cartilage thinning, subchon-
A controlled, low-impact exercise program alone
dral sclerosis, synovitis, and osteophyte formation. Clini-
 improves pain and overall function scores in geriatric dogs
cal signs include joint pain, crepitus, and stiffness. Normal
with OA.io3 Regularly performed, low-impact exercises
ROM may be lost because of joint surface incongruity,
such as leash walking, walking in water, or swimming.
muscle spasm and contracture, periarticular fibrosis, or
help to maintain supporting muscle strength and joint
mechanical block from osteophytes or joint mice. The
function while minimizing joint stresses. Bursts of vigor-
joint(s) may be enlarged because of synovitis, synovial
ous activity, such as running or jumping, may exacerbate
effusion, osteophytes, or periarticular fibrosis. The pain
infammation and should be minimized. Certain activities
and stiffness may lead to lameness or decreased activity,
may be used to target specific muscle groups. For ex ample,
with a resultant loss of muscle mass and strength.
repeated sit-to-stand exercises or walking up stairs may
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
575
help strengthen the hindlimbs. Exercise sessions should be
stimulating hyaluronan synthesis, inhibiting periarticular
challenging. but should not be followed by any increase
fibrin formation, and inhibiting catabolic enzymes. Some
in pain. The exercise program must be tailored to the
of these agents may also function as antiinfammatory
individual and adjusted to account for the fuctuations in
agents or free radical scavengers. Injectable hyaluronic
clinical signs that are typically seen with OA.
acid or a polysulfated glycosaminoglycan (Adequan) may
Other techniques may be used to enhance the exercise
be of beneft for some arthritic animals. 12.11 Several oral
program. Use of a walking cart may be indicated in
formulations of DMOAs have been developed. Oral glu-
some cases with severe, chronic OA to allow independent
cosamine hydrochloride, chondroitin sulfate, avocado-
function and reduce the risk of falling. In cases of severe
soybean unsaponifiables, and manganese ascorbate may
muscle loss and weakness, neuromuscular electrical stimu-
have a synergistic effect in dogs to reduce inflammation
lation (NMES) may be used for muscle strengthening.
and lameness.114 S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) appears
Passive range of motion (PROM) and active range of
to be effective in humans with OA, but effectiveness in
motion (AROM) exercises are used to improve joint ROM
 dogs has not been confirmed.1s The oral forms of DMOAs,
and promote cartilage metabolism and diffusion of nutri-
known as nutraceuticals, are not regulated as drugs, so
ents. Swimming can be used to improve ROM, particularly
there may be considerable variation in product content
joint fexion.8l Walking up down hills or stairs may also
and quality. There are a number of compounds that are
promote AROM of the joints.104 Passive stretching alone
marketed as being effective in the treatment of OA, but
can improve ROM in dogs with OA.105 Joint mobilization
have not been proved to be effective by scientific studies.
may also help improve joint motion, cartilage health, and
Although the efficacy of most DMOAs is still unclear, the
manage pain. Joint compressions, joint mobilizations,
risk of adverse side effects appears to be low. Supplemen-
PROM, and AROM may be used to improve joint
tation of dog food with fish oil, or feeding a diet that con-
proprioception.
tains increased levels of omega-3 fatty acids can alleviate
Physical modalities may be incorporated into the thera-
signs of OAl1-118 Adipose-derived stem celtherapy shows
peutic program. Hot packs, therapeutic ultrasound, or
some promise as an adjunctive treatment to improve the
massage may be useful to reduce pain associated with
clinical signs of OA.119
muscle spasms and decrease joint stiffness. These modali-
Lifestyle modifications may be beneficial for some
ties can also be used to increase blood supply to the muscle
animals with OA. They should be housed in a warm, dry
in preparation for an exercise session. Transcutaneous elec-
area with good footing and provided with a padded area
trical nerve stimulation (TENS) has been shown to be of
for sleeping. Stair climbing and jumping may be mini-
mized by the use of ramps.
been used to treat OA, although there is little evidence to
The animal should be assessed routinely to alter the
support its  effectiveness. Extracorporeal shockwave
rehabilitation program as needed. Functional assessments
therapy also shows promise as a method to decrease pain
should be made. Radiographs are of minimal use because 
 in dogs with OA, however, the number of cases reported
they correlate poorly with limb function.120
 Joint replacement surgery is performed in a few major
inflammatory episodes associated with overuse or postex-
canine joints. The usual indication is to treat severe OA
ercise infammation.
 that cannot be adequately managed medically. Total elbow
A number of drugs and other substances are promoted
and stife replacement surgery is still in its infancy and is
for the treatment of OA. Nonsteroidal antinfammatory
not commonly performed.43 By contrast, total hip replace-
drugs may be used as needed for pain management and to
ment is commonly performed in surgical practices for
treat chronic inflammation or episodes of acute inflamma-
coxofemoral OA, articular fractures, or hip luxation. The
tion. It is advisable to maintain the lowest effective dose,
complication rate for total hip replacement is reported to
to minimize the risks of adverse side effects. The efficacy
be as high as 17%, depending on the system being used
of NSAIDs varies between individuals, so if the animal is
not responding well to one NSAID another may be more
dogs have a successful final outcome.
effective!0 It is advisable to stop one NSAID completely
before starting another because of the potential for adverse
General Physical Rehabilitation
side effects. Additional analgesics such as gabapentin or
Management of Excision Arthroplasty
amantadine may be needed in severely affected animals.
Although corticosteroids have an excellent antiinfamma-
Excision arthroplasty involves the surgical removal of part
tory effect, they also promote degenerative changes in the
of the joint, allowing a pseudoarthrosis (false joint) to form
 joint and should be avoided for chronic use.l
from fibrous tissue. This technique is generally limited to
Slow-acting disease-modifying osteoarthritic agents
the shoulder and hip joints. It is done as a treatment for
(DMOAs), or chondroprotective agents, have the potential
severe OA, irreparable fractures involving the joint, severe
to improve joint health by stimulating cartilage metabolism,
or recurrent joint luxation, or congenital joint defonmities.
576
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Elimination of the joint and the bony contact relieves
treadmill may promote active hip motion, although the
the joint pain. The goal is for fibrous tissue to create a
 inclination may need to be greater than 5% to induce much
pseudoarthrosis with no bony contact, which provides
increase in hip ROM.51 Walking up hills or steps can be
pain-free function. However, normal function and gait are
initiated to promote hip extension 104 and improve muscle 
not expected due to the biomechanical changes. After exci-
strength after the animal is ambulating well. Dancing exer-
sion arthroplasty early active use of the limb is encouraged
ssxa dr  s asn a s
to prevent excessive fibrosis and loss of motion of the
especially dancing backward. Although swimming is a
pseudoarthrosis. Adequate analgesia throughout the reha-
good conditioning exercise, it does not promote hip exten-
bilitation program is a key factor for a successful outcome.
sion.81 Walking in an underwater treadmill may promote
 Opioids may need to be combined with NSAIDs for pain
more functional activity if the water level is at the stife or
 control. Cryotherapy can also help reduce pain and early
lower. Cryotherapy may be used at the end of each therapy
session to reduce infammation. Most animals will toe-
during anesthetic recovery and continued daily until the
touch consistently within 1 to 2 weeks, partially weight
animal is using the limb well. Assisted weight bearing
bear in 3 weeks, and be actively using the leg by 4 weeks.
activity is initiated the day after surgery. Once the acute
The animal should regain near-normal walking and trotting
inflammation has subsided, hot packs or therapeutic ultra.
gaits, but full ROM is rarely achieved, with hip extension
sound are used to facilitate PROM and stretching. Massage
being the most limited. Prognosis for return to daily func-
may also be helpful before passive or active exercises. In
tion is generally good but varies with the surgical tech-
some cases weight shift exercises are used in the early
rehabilitation period to encourage weight bearing. Active
 Large animals tend to have more difficulty with recovery
weight-bearing activities are progressed to higher levels as
than small animals, and obese animals tend to have more
tolerated by the animal, to improve limb use and muscle
difficulty than athletic animals. Adherence to a rehabilita-
strength.
tion program may also affect the outcome, so it is impor-
Femoral head and neck ostectomy (FHO) is the most
tant to manage pain during the rehabilitation period to
common excision arthroplasty (see Figure 32-20, B). After
facilitate animal compliance.
FHO the femur tends to be located more dorsally than
normal so there is a functional shortening of the limb,
which can cause gait abnormalities. In addition the hind-
General Physical Rehabilitation
quarters may appear to be asymmetric. Rehabilitation
Management of Joint Arthrodesis
after FHO follows the same guidelines as for any excision
arthroplasty, but there is an emphasis on regaining hip
Arthrodesis is the surgical fusion of a joint that is done to
extension (Table 32-7). In addition to PROM for hip exten-
salvage limb function when there is severe joint damage or
sion, ground treadmill or underwater treadmill exercises
 in certain cases of nerve damage to a distal limb. To create
may be used to promote active hip motion. Sit-to-stand
bony fusion the joint must be rigidly immobilized after
exercises may be used soon after surgery to strengthen
removing the articular cartilage and placing a bone graft.
hindlimb muscles, without encountering the pain associ-
The joint is usually fused in a functional standing angle
ated with full hip extension. Walking on an inclined
(see Figures 32-13 and 32-32). Goniometric measurement
Table 32-7
 Rehabilitation After Femoral Head and Neck Ostectomy
Goals
Treatment
Control infammation
 Cryotherapy immediately after surgery and then daily until infammation resolves,
particularly after exercise
Maintain range of
 Passive range of motion from immediately postoperatively until using the limb well. After
motion
the inflammation of surgery has subsided, daily hot packs or ultrasound in conjunction
with stretching. Particular attention is paid to hip extension and also abduction.
Incorporate dancing and incline walking into exercise program after the first week or two.
Control pain
Nonsteroidal antiinfammatories and additional analgesic medication for first the few weeks,
as needed. Modalities as needed.
Regain limb function
 Encourage weight bearing the day after surgery. Consider neuromuscular electrical
stimulation. Begin with controlled slow leash walking and sit to stand exercises. Walk in
aquatic treadmill initially to decrease weight bearing on the limb.
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
577
of the contralateral joint may be used as a guide if this limb
If a fixator must cross a joint, but is not intended to fuse
is normal. The joint is most commonly stabilized with a
the joint, it is preferable to incorporate hinges in the fixator
bone plate, but pins, screws, or an extermal fixator may be
frame. The hinges can be locked into a rigid position for
used. Arthrodesis of joints that are located more distally
the animal's daily function. However, the hinges can be
on the limb are associated with better limb function
unlocked daily to allow the therapist to perform PROM on
and prognosis than arthrodesis of more proximal joints.
the immobilized joint.
Arthrodesis is performed most commonly on the carpal
and tarsal joints.
Because of the massive infammation and edema that
General Physical Rehabilitation
 can result from the surgical procedure, a pressure bandage
Management of Amputation
is maintained during the immediate postoperative period.
 A cold-compression bandage or continuously circulating
Limb amputation may be performed as a treatment for
cold pressure wrap is preferred. Nonsteroidal antinfam-
neoplasia or for severe soft tissue, orthopedic, or neuro-
matory drugs are also used to minimize the infammatory
logic disorders. Dogs and cats typically do well after fore-
reaction. The repair is often supported by extermal coapta-
limb or hindlimb amputation. In many cases, the animal is
tion (cast or splint) if intermal fixation was used. This rigid
already ambulating on three legs as a result of the condition
support is usually applied in 3 to 5 days, after the edema
 Of the affected limb. The other limbs should be thoroughly
and swelling have resolved. The extermal coaptation is
evaluated for the presence of orthopedic or neurologic con-
usually maintained for 6 to 8 weeks or until there are
ditions. If desired the affected limb may be placed in a
radiographic signs of fusion. During this time, PROM or
sling before surgery to allow functional assessment of the
joint mobilization may be performed on adjacent joints.
remaining limbs. Some animals can adapt to amputation
Muscle strengthening exercises may be instituted. Although
of more than one limb. They may require the assistance of
other joints in the limb can compensate to some degree,
a custom cart or prostheses, but some animals learm to walk
the gait will never be normal. As the arthrodesis heals, gait
with two legs (Figure 32-34).
training should be performed to restore the gait to the most
The animal should be encouraged to stand on the first
normal gait patterm possible.
postoperative day, but may need supportive assistance.
Therapeutic exercise may begin with standing and walking.
and progress to more challenging activities that help the
General Physical Rehabilitation
animal adapt to the new center of gravity. Uneven terrain
Management of External Fixators
or balance boards may be used to improve limb strength
 and proprioception. Most animals do well after amputa-
Rehabilitation is very important in patients with extermal
tion, whether it is a forelimb or hindlimb.125 Animals that
fixators. During surgical planning the surgeon should place
are overweight or have impaired function of other limbs
pins through safe corridors, without crossing large muscle
may have more difficulty adapting to an amputation, espe-
masses, neurovascular bundles, or entering joints. A pin
cially forelimb amputation.
inadvertently placed through a large muscle mass (as can
Occur with fixation of the femur) or major tendon (e.g..
Achilles tendon), may cause enough pain or mechanical
difficulty that the patient will not tolerate ROM exercises
or be willing to bear weight on the limb. It may be neces-
sary to penetrate some muscle mass, so analgesia and
careful attention to pin tract maintenance is important. The
frame itself can present a problem in that it may be difficult
the frame itself, allowing it to act as a thermal conductor.
Passive range of motion, stretching, and massage can
be applied to the soft tissues associated with an extermal
fixator. Patients with extermal fixators may be reluctant to
fully fex and extend the joints in the initial postoperative
period. Active exercises that encourage limb fexion include
walking over cavaletti rails or other objects, and walking
on a land treadmill. Fixators are often used because there
are open wounds that make intermal fixation less desirable,
Figure 32-34  Double amputees can sometimes learn to walk on
and patients with open wounds should not be exercised in
two legs. However, use of a cart allows more normal body posture,
an aquatic environment.
578
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Historically limb prostheses have been used rarely in
10. Rees JD, Wilson AM, Wolman RL: Current concepts in the
companion animals. This is partly owing to the fact that
management of tendon disorders, Rheumatology 45:508-
animals quickly adapt to walking with three legs. It may
521, 2006.
be argued that a three-legged quadruped will develop com-
11. Brosseau L et al: Deep transverse friction massage for treat-
pensatory problems, but the average pet-quality animal
ing tendinitis, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2,
2009.
functions with no obvious clinical impainments. In recent
12. Stobie D et al: Chronic bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs: 29
years there has been more demand for animal prostheses
cases (1985-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 207(2):201-207,
to replace the distal extremities. Most prostheses are
1995
designed with a sleeve that is custom fit to the residual
13. Bruce WJ et al: Bicipital tendinitis and tenosynovitis in the
 limb. It is critical that the prosthesis fit appropriately and
dog: a study of 15 cases, N Z Vet J 48:44-52, 2000.
that keen attention is paid to skin contact sites on a twice-
14. Wall CR, Taylor RA: Arthroscopic biceps brachii tenotomy
daily basis to help prevent skin breakdown and wounds. It
as a treatment for canine bicipital tenosynovitis, J Am Anim
is vital that an experienced animal prosthetist be involved
Hosp Assoc 38:169-175, 2002.
15. Cook IL, Kenter K, Fox DB: Arthroscopic biceps tenodesis:
with construction of a prosthetic. It is also usually neces-
sary to remove the prosthesis during periods of rest to help
technique and results in six dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
41:121-127, 2005.
prevent excess stress on tissues. Despite these precautions,
wounds over the stump are common and require diligent
16. Bergenhuyzen AL et al: Long-term follow-up after
arthroscopic tenotomy for partial rupture of the biceps
care. Another method of creating a prosthesis involves
brachi tendon, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot 23(1):51-55,
surgical implantation of a prosthetic device into the bone
2010.
of a limb. Bone grows into the porous metal of the pros-
17. Kreigleder H: Mineralization of the supraspinatus tendon:
thesis to form a more stable, osseointegrated prosthesis.
 Clinical observations in seven dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Trau-
There have been a few case reports involving the use of
matot 8:91-97, 1995.
 an osseointegrated prosthesis for the tibia.126.127 Common
18. Ebenbichler GR et al: Ultrasound therapy for calcifc
complications include infection, which generally necessi-
tendinitis of the shoulder, N Engt J Med 340:1533-1538,
tates removal of the prosthesis.
1999.
19. Danova NA, Muir P: Extracorporeal shock wave therapy for 
supraspinatus calcifying tendinopathy in two dogs, Vet Rec
REFERENCES
152(7):208-209, 2003.
 1. Richardson DC, Zentek J: Nutrition and osteochondrosis,
 20. Laitinen OM, Flo GL: Mineralization of the supraspinatus
Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 28(1):115-135, 1998.
tendon in dogs: a long-term follow-up, J Am Anim Hosp
2. Olivieri M et al: Arthroscopic treatment of osteochondritis
Assoc 36:262-267, 2000.
dissecans of the shoulder in 126 dogs, Vet Comp Orthop
21. Lafuente MP et al: Surgical treatment of mineralized and
Traumatot 20(1):65-69, 2007.
 nonmineralized supraspinatus tendinopathy in twenty-four 
3. Levine D, Taylor RA, Millis DL: Common orthopedic con-
dogs, Vet Surg 38:380-387, 2009.
ditions and their physical rehabilitation. In Millis DL,
22. Muir P et al: Force-plate analysis of gait before and after
Levine D, Taylor RA, eds: Canine rehabilitation & physical
surgical excision of calcified lesions of the supraspinatus
therapy, St. Louis, 2004, Saunders.
tendon in two dogs, Vet Rec 139:137-139, 1996.
4. Trostel CT, McLaughlin RM, Pool RR: Canine lame-
 23. Bardet JF: Diagnosis of shoulder instability in dogs and
ness caused by developmental orthopedic diseases: osteo-
cats: a retrospective study, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:42-54,
chondrosis, Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 24(11):836-854,
1998.
2002.
 24. Cook JL et al: Measurement of angles of abduction for
5. Rudd RG, Whitehair JG, Margolis JH: Results of manage-
diagnosis of shoulder instability in dogs using goniometry
ment of osteochondritis dissecans of the humeral head in
and digital image analysis, Vet Surg 34:463-468, 2005
dogs: 44 cases (1982 to 1987), J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 25. Marcellin-Little, DJ, Levine D, Canapp SO: The canine
26:173-178, 1990.
 shoulder: selected disorders and their management with
6. Gilley RS, Wallace LJ, Hayden DW: Clinical and patho-
physical therapy, Clin Techn Small Anim Pract 22:171-182,
logic analyses of bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs, Am J Vet
2007.
Res 63:402-407, 2002.
 26. Cook JL et al: Treatment of dogs diagnosed with medial
 7. Davidson EB et al: Histopathological, radiographic, and
shoulder instability using radiofrequency-induced thermal
arthrographic comparison of the biceps tendon in normal
capsulorthaphy, Vet Surg 34:469-475, 2005.
dogs and dogs with biceps tenosynovitis, J Am Anim Hosp
 27. Pucheu B, Duhautois B: Surgical treatment of shoulder insta-
Assoc 36:522-530, 2000.
bility, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 21(4):368-374, 2008.
 8. Wilson JJ, Best TM: Common overuse tendon problems: a
28. Taylor J, Tangner CH: Acquired muscle contractures in the
review and recommendations for treatment, Amer Acad
dog and cat. A review of the literature and case report, Vet
Fam Physicians 72:811-818, 2005.
Comp Orthop Traumatot 20:79-85, 2007.
9. Sharma P, Maffulli N: Tendon injury and tendinopathy:
29. Steiss JE: Muscle disorders and rehabilitation in canine
healing and repair, J Bone Joint Surg 87-A(1):187-202,
athletes, Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 32(1):267-285,
2005.
2002.
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
579
 30. Devor M, Sorby R: Fibrotic contracture of the canine infra-
47. Cetinkaya M, Yardimcia AC, Saglam M: Carpal laxity syn-
spinatus muscle, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 19:117-121,
drome in forty-three puppies, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot
2006.
20(2):126-130, 2007.
31. Bennett RA: Contracture of the infraspinatus muscle in
48. Kealy RD et al: Five-year longitudinal study on limited food
dogs: a review of 12 cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:481-
consumption and development of osteoarthritis in coxofemo-
487, 1986
ral joints of dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210(2):222-225, 1997.
32. Edge-Hughes LM: Anatomy, biomechanics, physiology.
49. Hummel Dw, Lanz Ol, Were SR: Complications of cement-
diagnosis and treatment of teres major strains in the canine.
less total hip replacement. A retrospective study of 163
In 3rd International Symposium on Rehabilitation and
cases, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 23(6):424-432, 2010.
Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Research Trian-
50. Gibson KL, Lewis DD, Pechman RD: Use of external
gle Park, NC, 2004.
coaptation for the treatment of avascular necrosis of the
33. Martin RB et al: Prevalence of incomplete ossification of
femoral head in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 197(7):868-
the humeral condyle in the limb opposite humeral condylar
870, 1990.
fracture: 14 dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 23(3):168-
51. Lauer SK et al: Effects of treadmill inclination on electro-
172, 2010.
 myographic activity and hind limb kinematics in healthy
34. Cook JL, Tomlinson JL, Reed AL: Fluoroscopically guided
hounds at a walk, Am J Vet Res 70:658-664, 2009.
closed reduction and internal fxation of fractures of the
52. Hellyer RW, Fails AD: Pain management for the surgical
lateral portion of the humeral condyle: Prospective clinical
patient. In Slatter D, ed: Textbook of small animat surgery,
study of the technique and results in ten dogs, Vet Surg
Philadelphia, 2003, Saunders.
28:315-321, 1999.
53. Liptak JM, Simpson DJ: Successful management of quad-
35. Palmoski M, Perricone E, Brandt KD: Development and
 riceps contracture in a cat using a dynamic flexion appara-
reversal of a proteoglycan aggregation defect in normal
tus, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 13:44-48, 2000.
canine knee cartilage after immobilization, Arthritis Rheum
 54. Aron DN, Crowe DT: The 90-90 fexion splint for preven-
22:508-517, 1979.
tion of stife joint stiffness with femoral fracture repairs,
36. Trostel CT, McLaughlin RM, Pool RR: Canine elbow dys-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:447-454, 1987.
plasia: anatomy and pathogenesis, Comp Cont Educ Pract
55. Nielsen C, Pluhar GE: Diagnosis and treatment of hind limb
Vet 25(10):754-761, 2003.
muscle strain injuries in 22 dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Trau-
37. Trostel CT, McLaughlin RM, Pool RR: Canine lameness
matol 18(4):247-253, 2005.
caused by developmental orthopedic diseases: fragmented
56. Eaton- Wells RD: Muscle injuries in the racing greyhound.
medial coronoid process and ununited anconeal process,
In Bloomberg MS, Dee JF, Taylor RA, eds: Canine sports
Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 25(2):112-120, 2003.
medicine and surgery, Philadelphia, 1998, Saunders.
38. Jackson AM et al: Joint kinematics during underwater
57. Spadari A et al: Sartorius muscle contracture in a German
treadmill activity. In 2nd International Symposium on
shepherd dog, Vet Surg 37(2):149-152, 2008.
Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medi-
58. Ralphs SC, Whitney WO: Arthroscopic evaluation of
cine, Knoxville, TN, 2002.
menisci in dogs with cranial cruciate ligament injuries: 100
39. Tragauer VL, Levine D: Percentage of normat weight bearing
cases (1999-2000), J Am Vet Med Assoc 221(11):1601-
during partiat immersion at various depths in dogs. In 2nd
1604, 2002.
International Symposium on Rehabilitation and  Physical
59. Lampman TJ, Lund EM, Lipowitz AJ: Cranial cruciate
Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Knox ville, TN, 2002.
disease: cutrent status of diagnosis, surgery, and risk for
40. Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Brinker, Piermattei, and Flo's
disease, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 16:122-126, 2003.
handbook of small animat orthopedics and fracture repair,
60. Risberg MA et al: The effect of knee bracing after anterior
ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, Saunders.
cruciate ligament reconstruction, Am J Sports Med 27(1):76-
41. Conzemius MG: Nonconstrained elbow replacement in
83, 1999.
dogs, Vet Surg 38(2):279-284, 2009.
 61. Fleming BC et al: The infuence of functional knee bracing
42. Nuisimer BA, Ekes AM, Holm MB: The use of low-load
on the anterior cruciate ligament strain biomechanics in
 prolonged stretch devices in rehabilitation programs in the 
weightbearing and nonweightbearing knees, Am J Sports
Pacific northwest, Am J Occup Ther 51(7):538-543, 1997.
Med 28(6):815-824, 2000.
43. MeNair PJ, Stanley SN: Effect of passive stretching and
 62. McDevitt ER et al: Functional bracing after anterior cruci-
jogging on the series elastic muscle stiffness and range of
ate ligament reconstruction, Am J Sports Med 32(8):1887-
motion of the ankle joint, Br J Sports Med 30(4):313-317,
1892, 2004.
1996.
63. Birmingham TB et al: A randomized controlled trial
44. Draper DO et al: Immediate and residual changes in dorsi-
comparing the effectiveness of functional knee brace and
fexion range of motion using an ultrasound heat and stretch 
neoprene sleeve use after anterior cruciate ligament recon-
routine, J Athtet Train 33(2):141-144, 1998.
struction, Am J Sports Med 36(4):648-655, 2008.
45. Willer RL et al: Partial carpal arthrodesis for third degree
64. McDevitt ER et al: Functional bracing was no better than
carpal sprains. A review of 45 carpi, Vet Surg 19(5):334-
nonbracing after anterior cruciate ligament repait, J Bone
340, 1990
Joint Surg (Am) 32:1887-1892, 2005.
 46. Andreoni AA et al: Ground reaction force profiles after
65. Aragon CL, Budsberg SC: Applications of evidence-based
partial and pancarpal arthrodesis in dogs, Vet Comp Orthop
Bop sy u iedei Xinful jusueal aionio peueo ouiopau
Traumatot 23(1):1-6, 2010.
Vet Surg 34:93-98, 2005.
580
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
66. Au KK et al: Comparison of short- and long-term function
with surgically corrected cranial cruciate ligament rupture,
and radiographic osteoarthrosis in dogs after postoperative
J Am Vet Med Assoc 222(6):739-743, 2003.
 physical rehabilitation and tibial plateau leveling osteotomy
82. Boudrieau RJ: Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy or tibial
or lateral fabella suture stabilization, Vet Surg 39(2):173-
tuberosity advancement? Vet Surg 38:1-22, 2009.
180, 2010.
 83. Lafaver S et al: Tibial tuberosity advancement for stabiliza-
67. Marsolais GS, Dvorak G, Conzemius MG: Effects of post-
tion of the canine cranial cruciate ligament-deficient stife
 operative rehabilitation on limb function after cranial cruci-
joint: surgical technique, early results, and complications in
ate ligament repair in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 220(9):
101 dogs, Vet Surg 36:573-586, 2007.
1325-1330, 2000.
84. Priddy NH et al: Complications with and owner assessment
68. Monk ML, Preston C, McGowan CM: Effects of early
of the outcome of tibial plateau leveling osteotomy for treat-
intensive postoperative physiotherapy on limb function
ment of cranial cruciate ligament rupture in dogs, J Am Vet
after tibial plateau leveling osteotomy in dogs with def-
Med Assoc 222(12):1726-1732, 2003.
ciency of the cranial cruciate ligament, Am J Vet Res
 85. Moeller EM et al: Long-term outcomes of thigh circumfer-
67(3):529-556, 2006.
ence, stife range-of-motion, and lameness after unilateral
69. Bockstahler B et al: The effect of physicat therapy on.
tibial plateau levelling osteotomy, Vet Comp Orthop Trau-
postoperative rehabilitation of dogs after cranial cruciate
matot 23(1):37-42, 2010.
figament repair. In 2nd International Symposium on Reha-
 86. Lauer SK et al: In vivo comparison of two hinged transar-
bilitation and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medicine,
ticular external skeletal fixators for multiple ligamentous
Knox ville, TN, 2002.
injuries of the canine stife, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot
70. Wilk KE, Reinold MM, Hooks TR: Recent advances in the
21(1):25-35, 2008.
rehabilitation of isolated and combined anterior cruciate
87. Jaeger GH et al: Use of hinged transarticular external fixa-
ligament injuries, Orthop Clin North Am 34:107-137, 2003.
tion for adjunctive joint stabilization in dogs and cats: 14
71. Johnson JM et al: Rehabilitation of dogs with surgically
cases (1999-2003), J Am Vet Med Assoc 227(4):586-591,
treated cranial cruciate ligament-deficient stifes by use of
2005.
electrical stimulation of muscles, Am J Vet Res 58(12):1473-
 88. Bound N et al: The prevalence of canine patellar luxation,
1478, 1997.
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot 22(1):32-37, 2009.
72. Millis DL et al: Changes in muscle mass following transec-
89. Arthurs GI, Langley-Hobbs SJ: Complications associated
tion of the cranial cruciate figament and immediate stijfle
with corrective surgery for patellar luxation in 109 dogs, Vet
stabilization. In 27th Annual Conference of the Veterinary
Surg 35:559-566, 2006.
Orthopedic Society, Val d'Isere, France, 2000.
 90. Roush JK: Canine patellar luxation, Vet Clin Vorth Am Sm
73. Liska WD et al: Custom total knee replacement in a dog with
Anim Pract 23(4):855-867, 1993.
femoral condylat bone loss, Vet Surg 36:293-301, 2007.
91. Montgomery RD: Healing of muscle, ligaments, and tendons,
74. Casale SA, McCarthy RJ: Complications associated with
Semin Vet Med Surg (Sm Anim)4(4):304-311, 1989.
-1 ae ronio euio 1g <itns sins peignogeg e
92. Roe SC: Injury and diseases of tendons. In Bloomberg MS,
ment injury in dogs: 363 cases (1997-2005), J Am Vet Med
Dee JF, Taylor RA, eds: Canine sports medicine and
Assoc 234(2):229-235, 2009.
surgery, Philadelphia, Saunders, 1998.
75. Unis MD et al: Effect of bandaging on post-operative swell-
93. Diamond D, Besso WJ, Boudrieau RJ: Evaluation of joint
ing after tibial plateau levelling osteotomy, Vet Comp
stabilization for treatment of shearing injuries of the tarsus 
Orthop Traumatot 23(4):240-244, 2010.
in 20 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:147-153, 1999.
76. Rexing J et al: Effects of cold compression, bandaging, and 
94. Lister SA, Renberg WC, Roush JK: Efficacy of immobiliza-
microcurrent electrical therapy after cranial cruciate liga-
tion of the tarsal joint to alleviate strain on the common
ment repair in dogs, Vet Surg 39(1):54-58, 2010.
calcaneal tendon in dogs, Am J Vet Res 70(1):134-140,
77. Drygas KA et al: Effect of cold compression therapy on
2009.
 postoperative pain, swelling, range of motion, and lameness 
 95. Nielson C, Pluhar GE: Outcome following surgical repair
after tibial plateau leveling osteotomy in dogs, J Am Vet
of Achilles tendon rupture and comparison between post-
Med Assoc 238(10):1284-1291, 2011.
operative tibiotarsal immobilization methods in dogs, Vet
78. Johnston KD et al: The effects of TENS on osteoarthritic
Comp Orthop Traumatot 19(4):246-249, 2006.
pain in the stife of dogs. In 2nd International Symposium
 96. King M, Jerram R: Achilles tendon rupture in dogs, Comp
on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medi-
Cont Educ Pract Vet 25(8):613-620, 2003.
cine, Knoxville, TN, 2002.
97. Sivacolundhu RK et al: Achilles mechanism reconstruction
79. Francis DA et al: Bone and muscle loss from disuse
in four dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 14:25-31,
following cranial cruciate ligament transection and stife
2001.
 stabilization surgery. In 2nd International Symposium on
98. Saini NS et al: A preliminary study on the effect of ultra-
Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Veterinary Medi-
sound therapy on the healing of surgically severed Achilles 
cine, Knoxville, TN, 2002.
tendons in five dogs, J Vet Med A Physiot Pathot Clin Med
80. Milis DL et al: A preliminary study of early physical
49(6):321-328, 2002.
99. Loonam JE, Millis DL: The effect of therapeutic ultrasound
rupture in dogs, Vet Surg 26(5):434, 1997.
on tendon heating and extensibility. In 3Oth Annual Confer-
81. Marsolais GS et al: Kinematic analysis of the hind limb
ence of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Steamboat, CO,
 saop pue saop Ayeoy un suien pue Suuums Suunp
2003.
Chapter 32
Common Orthopedic Conditions and Physical Rehabilitation
581
100. Reinke JD, Mughannam AJ: Lateral luxation of the super-
114. Anderson MA: Oral chondroprotective agents. Part 1.
ficial digital fexor tendon in 12 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp
Common compounds, Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 21(7):601 
Assoc 29:303-309, 1993.
609, 1999.
101. Mlacnik E et al: Effects of caloric restriction and a moderate
115. Imhoff DJ et al: Evaluation of S-adenosyl l-methionine in
or intense phy siotherapy program for treatment of lameness
a double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical
in overweight dogs with osteoarthritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc
trial for treatment of presumptive osteoarthritis in the dog,
229(11):1756-1760, 2006.
Vet Surg 40(2):228-232, 2011.
102. Impellizeri JA, Tetrickand MA, Muir P: Effect of weight
116. Fritsch D et al: Dose-titration effects of fish oil in osteoar-
reduction on clinical signs of lameness in dogs with hip
thritic dogs, J Vet Intern Med 24(5):1020-1026, 2010.
osteoarthritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 7(1):1089- 1091, 2000.
117. Fritsch DA et al: A multicenter study of the effect of dietary
103. Hudson S, Hulse D: Beneft of rehabilitation for treatment
supplementation with fish oil omega-3 fatty acids on car-
of osteoarthritis in senior dogs. In 3rd International
profen dosage in dogs with osteoarthritis, J Am Vet Med
Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy in Vet-
Assoc 236(5):535-539, 2010.
erinary Medicine, Research Triangle Park, NC, 2004.
118. Roush JK et al: Evaluation of the effects of dietary supple-
104. Durant AM, Millis DL, Headrick JF: Kinematics of stair
mentation with fish oil omega-3 fatty acids on weight
ascent in healthy dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 24(2):
bearing in dogs with osteoarthritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc
99-105, 2011.
236(1):67-73, 2010.
105. Crook TC: The effects of passive stretching on canine joint
119. Black LL et al: Effect of adipose-derived mesenchymal
motion restricted by osteoarthritis in vivo. In 3rd Interna-
 tional Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy
chronic osteoarthritis of the coxofemoral joints: a random-
in Veterinary Medicine, Research Triangle Park, NC,
ized, double-blinded, multicenter, controlled trial, Vet Ther
2004.
8(4):272-284, 2007.
106. Adamson CP, Taylor RA: Preliminary functional outcomes
120. Gordon WJ et al: The relationship between limb function
of extracorporeal shockwave therapy on ten dogs with
and radiographic osteoarthrosis in dogs with stife osteoar-
various orthopedic conditions. In 30th Annual Conference
throsis, Vet Surg 32:451-454, 2003.
of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Steamboat, CO, 2003.
121. Guertero TG, Montavon PM: Zurich cementless total hip
107. Francis DA et al: Clinical evatuation of extracorporeat
replacement: retrospective evaluation of 2nd generation
 shock wave therapy for management of canine osteoarthri-
implants in 60 dogs, Vet Surg 38:70-80, 2009.
tis of the eibow and hip joint. In 3lst Annual Conference
122. Bergh MS et al: Complications and radiographic findings
 of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Big Sky, MT, 2004.
following cemented total hip replacement, Vet Comp Orthop
108. Towle JM, Fleck TJ: Clinicat resutts of radial shockwave
Traumatot 19(3):172-179, 2006.
therapy for the treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs. In 56th
123. Grisneaux E et al: Effects of postoperative administration
Convention of the Canadian Veterinary Association, Quebec
of ketoprofen or carprofen on short- and long-term results
City, Quebec, 2004.
of femoral head and neck excision in dogs, J Am Vet Med
109. Dahlberg J et al: The evaluation of extracorporeal shock-
Assoc 223(7):1006-1012, 2003.
wave therapy in naturally occurring osteoarthritis of the
124. Off W, Matis U: Excision arthroplasty of the hip joint in
stife joint in dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 18(3):147-
dogs and cats. Clinical, radiographic, and gait analysis fnd-
152,2005
ings from the Department of Surgery, Veterinary Faculty of
110. McLaughlin RM: Management of chronic osteoarthritic
the Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Germany.
pain, Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 30(4):933-949,
1997, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot 23(5):297-305, 2010.
2000.
125. Carberry CA, Harvey HJ: Owner satisfaction with limb
 111. Johnston SA, Budsberg SC: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
amputation in dogs and cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
drugs and corticosteroids for the management of canine
23:227-232, 1987.
osteoarthritis, Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 27(4):841-
126. Dry gas KA et al: Transcutaneous tibial implants: a surgical
861, 1997.
procedure for restoring ambulation after amputation of the
112. Todhunter RJ, Lust G: Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan in
distal aspect of the tibia in a dog, Vet Surg 37:322-327,
the treatment of osteoarthritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 204(8):
2008.
1245-1251, 1994.
127. Marcellin-Little DJ: Assistive ambulation devices. In 3rd
 113. Kuroki K, Cook JL, Kreeger JM: Mechanisms of action and
International Symposium on Rehabilitation and Physical
potential uses of hyaluronan in dogs with osteoarthritis,
Therapy in Veterinary Medicine, Research Triangle Park,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 221(7):944-950, 2002.
NC, 2004.
33
Common Conditions and
Physical Rehabilitation
of the Athletic Patient
Sherman O. Canapp Jr. and Deborah Gross Saunders
he diagnosis and treatment of common conditions
 treatments for injuries involving muscles, tendons and liga-
of athletic and sporting dogs are discussed in this
ments. Regenerative medicine has been used for several
 chapter. Most of these conditions involve injuries
 years to treat these types of injuries in horses and more
of the soft tissues such as muscles, tendons, or ligaments.
recently in dogs.
Bone and cartilage can also be involved (e.g. subluxations
Regenerative medicine therapy encompasses several
or traumatic fragmentation of the medial coronoid process.
therapies, including platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and stem
cell therapy (SCT). These therapies aim to induce
Muscle Strains
healing through self- regeneration rather than scar tissue
formation.
 Muscle strains are the most frequent injury in human sports
Tissue repair is achieved through a complex response
and can be minor, with tearing of a few muscle fibers with
predominately mediated by growth factors and cytokines.
pain and local spasm, to complete muscle rupture.' Acute
PRP, an autologous blood concentrate of platelets above
muscle injuries rarely have been reported in the canine
the physiological baseline, contains bioactive proteins and
veterinary literature, and discussion of chronic muscle dis-
several growth factors including:
orders in dogs is limited to a handful of classic syndromes
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
 Or inflammatory conditions. However, the reports of muscle
 Transforming growth factor-B1 (TGF-B1)
strains in human sports medicine are bountiful and well
Transforming growth factor-B2 (TGF-B2)
documented in terms of evaluation and treatment.?-4 It
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
seems likely, given the similarities of the human and canine
Basic fibroblastic growth factor (bFGF)
musculoskeletal system, injuries common in the human
Epidermal growth factor (EGF)
athlete would be common in their canine athlete counter-
In addition, PRP contains factors that include antibacte-
part. The low reported prevalence of muscle injury in dogs
rial and fungicidal proteins, metalloproteinases ADP, ATP,
is probably owing to a failure to diagnose the condition.
calcium ions, histamine, serotonin and dopamine, that may
Inflammation and edema play a large role in muscle strains.
also affect tissue infammation.?
Supportive care to treat the inflammation and swelling is
Stem cells, specifically mesenchymal stem cells (MSC)
often provided; however, in most cases little thought is
found in bone marrow and adipose tissue, can differentiate
given to the damage done to the involved muscles and their
into multiple cell lines including bone, cartilage, and
subsequent rehabilitation. The strength of muscle contrac-
fbrous connective tissue." In addition, MSC secrete cyto-
tion may be greatly affected by even a minor strain injury.
kine and growth factors that reduce inflammation, inhibit 
Some muscle fibers heal, but normal microscopic structure
 programmed cell death of the cells within the tissue, recruit
is not restored and scar tissue persists.' Healing of the
circulating stem cells to the area, and integrate and refonm
muscle by scar tissue predisposes it to reinjury and possibly
tissue.
to muscle contracture or permanent shortening.
Synergy between stem cells and PRP has been
reported.12-18 Certain growth factors and cytokines released
Regenerative Medicine Therapy for
Musculoskeletal Injury
from platelets bind to receptors on the surface of the stem
cell and initiate a cascade involving signal transduction,
 Regenerative medicine therapy for treatment of injuries
 gene expression and stem cell proliferation. PRP also pro-
and defects is not a new concept. However, its application 
vides a delivery vehicle or scaffold to support cell survival
for musculoskeletal injuries has received significant atten-
 and proper differentiation.1'9
tion in recent years because of its use in several prominent
Anecdotal reports of faster recovery, improved function
sports figures. In many human sports medicine clinics,
and reduced recurrence have been encouraging, however,
regenerative medicine therapies are offered as "off-label"
there have been relatively few high-level clinical studies
582
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
583
evaluating efficacy. Studies are currently underway to vali-
crosses the shoulder joint (Figure 33-2). The biceps fexes
date use of regenerative medicine therapy for these types
the elbow and extends and stabilizes the shoulder joint
injuries in humans, horses and dogs. Regenerative medi-
during standing or during the weight-bearing phase of
cine therapy should be considered for treatment of some
locomotion.?2
conditions in this chapter. Rehabilitative therapy modali-
ties to promote the activity of and prevent damage to the
Cause
injected cells is paramount to successful treatment.
Repeated strain injury appears to be the primary cause of
BT in the performance dog. This includes two-on/two-off 
Forelimb Conditions
contacts, landing vertically on the forelimbs from a mis-
judged jump, overstretching of the muscle, quick turms, and
repetitive contractions of the muscle with the shoulder
involve the shoulder. The shoulder joint is able to withstand
fexed and/or the elbow extended. Injury to the tendon can
large forces and provide extraordinary mobility while
Occur in a number of ways, including strain from overload-
maintaining the stability and control necessary to enable
ing, degeneration, or disruption.?3 A single less than
precise function of the forelimb during activity. More
maximum load may injure some of the fibers without com-
than 25 muscles are required for shoulder motion, which
 plete failure of the tendon, but the blood supply to the
involves components of fexion, extension, rotation, abduc-
tendon proper is poor, leading to a longer healing time.21
tion, and adduction.?0 Given the muscular contribution and
Repetitive strain injury may initiate actual degeneration of
complexity of this intricate network of interlinked support
the tendon.?l As the area continues to be reinjured, the
 mechanisms, the potential for muscle injuries causing per-
tendon may  weaken sufficiently  for inflammation or
formance issues and lameness is significant (Figure 33-1).
microtears (tendinopathies) in the connective tissue in or
When muscle strains occur during activities, muscle fibers 
around other tendons to form, ultimately leading to shoul-
can be disrupted, most commonly near the muscle-tendon
der joint instability.24
junction.20 These injuries are typically characterized by
initial infammation and pain, followed by healing with
Diagnosis
marked scar tissue, impeding the ability of the tendon to
Performance dogs with BT commonly have difficulty with
quick turming to the affected side and are reluctant to jump.
muscle group of the forelimb, but the muscles at particular
Agility dogs may also have issues performing two-on/
risk in performance dogs are the biceps brachii and the
two-off contacts and knocking bars with their forelimbs.
supraspinatus.
On gait analysis of dogs with BT often have a shortened
stride and a weight-bearing lameness (subtle to severe) that
Bicipital Tenosynovitis
becomes worse with activity. Pain may be elicited by direct
One of the most common shoulder conditions seen in
 performance dogs is bicipital tenosynovitis (BT), which
involves the biceps brachii muscle and its tendon that
Supraspinatus
Medial
 glenohumeral 
ligament ~
Biceps
brachi tendon
Joint capsule
Transverse
 humeral ligament 
Synovium
Biceps
Humerus
brachii muscle
Figure 33-1 Dog going through weaves demonstrating biome-
chanical forces acting on the shoulder.
Figure 33-2  Normal canine shoulder anatomy (medial view).
584
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 33-3 Biceps stretch test.
Figure 33-5  Arthroscopic image demonstrating severe bicipital
tenosynovitis.
Figure 33-6  Laser therapy of the biceps tendon.
Figure 33-4 Normal arthroscopic image of the canine biceps
tendon.
should include controlled activity, nonsteroidal antinflam-
matory drugs (NSAIDs), and cryotherapy. Intraarticular
palpation over the biceps tendon. Pain and spasm may be
injections of hyaluronic acid or steroids, or intra-tendinous
noted when fexing the shoulder while at the same time
 injections of platelet rich plasma (PRP), stem cell therapy
extending the elbow (Figure 33-3). Radiographs are of
minimal assistance when the injury is in its acute phase,
Regenerative medicine therapy should be considered if a
but may reveal mineralization of the tendon when the con-
core lesion is present. To promote healing and decrease
dition is chronic.?4 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
adhesion formation, laser therapy or pulsed ultrasound
ultrasound may be used to identify the condition in acute
 may be of use to assist healing to (Figure 33-6).?° Initiating
 and chronic situations.23.24 Shoulder arthroscopy is recog-
low-load, pain-free, high-repetition exercise and range of
 nized as superior to other diagnostic procedures for diag-
 motion (ROM) movements early in the healing process is 
nosis of bicipital tenosynovitis (Figures 33-4 and 33-5).?
important. Pain relief may be achieved with transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation.?° Acute tendon injuries should
Treatment
 not be stretched because of the potential for producing
Acute cases of bicipital tenosynovitis may be treated
more microtears caused by the chemical changes in the
by conservative medical management and rehabilitation
tissue.20 Pain-free, passive ROM movements (fexion and
therapy. Components of conservative medical management
extension of the limb while the dog is not weight bearing)
Chapter33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
585
 and gentle wobble board activities (all directions, front to
convey to the owner and handler that the progression of
back and side to side), and altermating leg lifts are recom-
conservative management of BT may be lengthy and
mended first, with progression to active ROM exercises
nothing should be done to aggravate the condition. The dog
(weight-bearing exercises that cause fexion and extension
should be pain free and not exhibit any lameness.
of the limb). All exercises in the acute stage are aimed at
 Regenerative medicine therapy may also be considered
increasing the strength of the shoulder and scapular stabi-
in the treatment of chronic BT, however, modification of
lizers. Balance and proprioceptive exercises are required
the rehabilitative therapy protocol is necessary to promote
and are imperative to the healing process. An active dog
healing and prevent damage to the injected cells.
requires stabilization of this region and strength of the slow
 Surgical treatment is recommended for biceps avulsion-
twitch muscle fibers before resuming activity. Deep fric-
tears and chronic cases of BT that are not responsive to
medical management or rehabilitation therapy. Surgical
  as   ss  
options include tenodesis (releasing and reattaching the
across the bicipital tendon (perpendicular to the fibers) for
tendon at a distal location on the proximal humerus) or an
5 minutes, daily if possible. The goal is to prevent adhesion
arthroscopic tendon release.?7 Controlled activity is an
formation and help realign the fibers of the infamed
important component during the postoperative period and
tendon. After the cross-friction massage, cryotherapy and
should include leash walks of increasing duration and end-
laser therapy are recommended before further treatment. A
stage eccentric exercises, such as walking and trotting
strengthening program consisting of controlled leash
down hills. Short periods of off-lead activity are allowed
walking, stepping over cavaletti rails, wobble board use,
after the lameness has resolved. Nonsteroidal antiinfam-
and stabilizing exercises should follow. Examples of stabi-
 matory drugs may be used to decrease pain and inflamma-
lization exercises include balancing on a well-controlled
tion following surgery. Modalities as described for the
rocker board, standing on a therapy ball, weight shifting
acute treatment of BT may be used postoperatively to
exercises, wheel-barrowing the dog so its weight is on the
improve comfort and function and facilitate progression to
forelimbs, walking in figure eights, and walking in circles.
the retraining phase of recovery.
Leash walks of increasing duration and end-stage eccentric
Toward the end of rehabilitation therapy sport-specific
exercises, such as walking and trotting down hills may then
retraining should begin. Examples of retraining techniques
be introduced. Short periods of off-lead activity are allowed
for BT may include starting with low, straight-line jumps
after leash walks have substantially increased without the
with very wide sweeping turms that progress over time
returm of lameness. In the acute stages, it is imperative to
to higher jumps with tighter angles. Do not include the
reinforce the owner or handler not to perform any activity
 A-frame and weave poles until late in the retraining period.
that produces lameness. Many owners of perfonmance dogs
Alterations in contact controls from a two on/two off to
 are eager to retum to sports and often push their dogs too
running or four on the foor may be necessary. Be sure to
quickly.
start with turns toward the injured limb and progress
With chronic BT the infammatory process must be
 to tums toward the uninjured limb.
reinitiated to break down scar tissue and remodel the
Dogs that will be retuming to jumping activities should
tendon fibers into the proper orientation, which increases 
start with low-level activities before returming to the
the tendon's load capacity. Because of the need to reiniti-
sport.426 In jumping activities, the biceps muscle and tendon
ate the infammatory response, NSAIDs or intraarticular
act eccentrically to control the landing of the body. After
corticosteroids are not recommended for chronic tendi-
cavaletti work has been employed, low-level jumping can
nopathies. Appropriate therapy for chronic tendinopathies
be initiated. The jump heights should be set lower than the
includes deep cross-friction massage, heat, ultrasound
dog's normal jump height. For example, if the dog normally
jumps 22 inches in competition, the jump height should be
friction massage is applied for approximately 10 minutes,
set at 16 inches. Three or four jumps should be set up and
two to three times per week. Acupuncture and laser to
the surface should be padded or the exercise should be
increase circulation and for pain control may be beneficial
performed in sand. Three to five repetitions should be per-
as well. The exercise progression is similar to that recom-
formed of the jump sequence—the dog going over the
mended for acute tendinopathies, but stretching after treat-
jumps—-and then the dog should be reevaluated. The jump
ment is advised. Active ROM exercise such as walking for
sequencing should not cause any lameness and should only
be performed three times per week with at least a 48-hour
exercises, such as walking and trotting down hills, should
break in between. Plyometrics should be progressed by
be added followed by short periods of off-lead activity
increasing the jump height and the number of repetitions.
provided lameness is completely resolved.
Once the dog is up to its normal jump height on a controlled
 Because of the chronic nature of the tendon changes, the 
surface, additional training surfaces can be added.
 dog usually takes longer to recover and progress through
 Following a warm-up, make sure to perform active
the healing and exercise stages. It is again imperative to
stretching techniques. Following agility work, use an
586
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
appropriate cool down with cryotherapy and passive stretch-
tums and repetitive eccentric contractions (contractions
ing techniques (including shoulder fexion with elbow
during lengthening of the muscle), as well as concentric
extension). Treadmill walking and the use of an underwater
contractions (contractions with shortening of the muscle)
treadmill are also useful for the rehabilitation of BT. In
with the muscle in a lengthened state.
acute stages exert caution with swimming because the
shortened position of the biceps tendon with rapid joint
Diagnosis
 motions may aggravate the condition.
commonly have weight-bearing lameness on one side that
Supraspinatus Tendinopathy
becomes worse with activity and often is resistant to treat-
In humans and dogs several degenerative disorders of
ment. The supraspinatus muscle may be atrophied and
the supraspinatus tendon have been identified, including
direct palpation over the tendon and fexion of the shoulder
rotator cuff tears, calcifying tendinitis or tendinosis
may cause pain (Figure 33-8). Concurrent BT or shoulder
(microtears), and tendinosis as a result of overuse.28.29 In
instability may be present, so a thorough shoulder examina-
humans degeneration of the supraspinatus tendon is believed
tion is required. Magnetic resonance imaging readily dem-
to be a contributing factor in the development of rotator cuff
onstrates the condition in the acute phase (Figure 33-9).
tears.?9 There is good evidence that overuse is likely an
 Plain radiographs and computed axial tomography (CT),
important factor in this disorder. At the cellular level
which reveals a cross-section of an intermal body structure)
affected tendons contain discontinuous, disorganized fibers,
may reveal mineralization in chronic cases. Musculoskel-
and typically, no acute infammation is detected.?9 In chronic
etal ultrasound is this author's preferred diagnostic tool for
cases a rapidly growing nodule develops that can impinge
this condition. This technique provides a non-invasive
On the biceps brachii tendon and cause pain.30 The supra-
definitive diagnosis of ST and allows for serial evaluations
spinatus muscle extends the shoulder and advances the
to assess response to treatment. Arthroscopic exploration
limb. The muscle is important to stabilize and prevent col-
is recommended and may demonstrate impingement of the
lapse of the shoulder joint and is active during 65% to 80%
 biceps tendon secondary to supraspinatus tendon swelling
 of the time when the dog is standing (Figure 33-7).22
as well as concurrent pathologies, including medial shoul-
der instability in severe cases.
Cause
aq op sueadde saop aoueuuouad ui Anfu sun jo asneo au
Treatment
related to repeated strain injury. This includes hitting the
 Controlled activity, retraining, and preventive techniques
ground or agility contacts on an outstretched forelimb,
for acute and chronic ST is similar to that used for
slipping, overstretching. or overuse of the muscle, quick
bicipital tenosynovitis. Similar to the rehabilitation of BT,
rehabilitation should be initially aimed at reducing the
infammation and increasing the strength of the shoulder
and scapular stabilizers. After the infammation has
decreased and the core strength of the shoulder complex
 has improved, more dynamic activities may be initiated.
Supraspinatus
Teresminor.
Biceps
brachi tendon
Infraspinatus
Figure 33-8 Palpation of the supraspinatus tendon point of
Figure 33-7 Normal canine shoulder anatomy (ateral view)
insertion.
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
587
had a history of failed response (unresolved discomfort or
Sagittal viet
lameness) to rest and NSAID therapy (134). Seventy-five
failed to respond to rehabilitation therapy and 6 received
intra-articular injections (hyaluronic acid - 2; prednisolone 
sodium succinate - 4), which also did not resolve lame-
flam
ness. A unilateral forelimb lameness presentation was
more common than bilateral (124 and 61, respectively).
Lameness was graded from 0 (sound) to 6 (non-weight
bearing lame). The average lameness score was 2.9 (median
 3). Duration of lameness ranged from one week to greater
than a year. 29.7% of dogs had a chronic (>1 year) lame-
 ness. Of those with lameness less than one year,the average
duration was 15.2 weeks (median 13 weeks). Pain on direct
palpation of the supraspinatus was found in 59% of dogs.
Pain or spasm on shoulder extension and abduction was
noted in 63.1% and 71.3%, respectively. Pain or spasm on
fexion was recorded in 74.6% of dogs and pain on biceps
stretch (shoulder fexion with elbow extension) was
recorded in 47.5% of dogs. Shoulder radiographs were
Figure 33-9 Magnetic resonance image of a supraspinatus
tendinopathy.
performed on 161 dogs. Of these, mineralization was noted
in 35 cases. Of dogs diagnosed with bilateral disease on
Treatment for acute cases consists of conservative
presentation (61), mineralization was noted in 8 cases.
 medical management (controlled activity and NSAIDs)
MRI of the shoulder was performed in 30 cases. Findings
and rehabilitation therapy (manual therapy, modalities,
indicative of a supraspinatus tendinopathy on MRI include
ROM with progression to stretching and strengthening
hyperintensity of signal on T1 and STIR sequences of the
exercises), and acupuncture as described for BT.?0 Cross-
ST at its insertion on the greater tubercle. Diagnostic ultra-
friction massage may be performed to the supraspinatus
sound was performed in 140 cases. In most cases the supra-
tendon in the acute phases for 5 minutes daily and 10 to
 spinatus appeared enlarged (44.3%) with irregular fiber
15 minutes in chronic cases.
pattem (46.4%) and mixed echogenecity (80.7%). Shoul-
As with BT the infammatory process should be reiniti-
 der arthroscopy was performed in 131 cases. A supraspi-
ated in chronic cases and follow a similar rehabilitation
natus bulge was noted in 90.8% of dogs. Of these,
protocol. Shockwave and ultrasound therapy have also
impingement of the biceps tendon was noted in 59.5% of
been described as valuable modalities for the treatment of
dogs. While 43.5% of dogs had bicipital tenosynovitis,
chronic calcified supraspinatus tendinopathies.31
only 13% had actual pathology of the biceps tendon.
Regenerative medicine therapy should be considered,
Pathology of the subscapularis was observed in 91.6% of
especially in cases in which a core lesion has been identj-
 dogs. MGL pathology was present in 51.1% of dogs. A tear
fed. Under ultrasound guidance, cells can be directly
of the labrum was noted in 29.8%, cartilage defects were
injected into the affected tendon. In more severe cases a
 noted in 32.8% and bone lesions in 8.3% of dogs. Seventy-
pasn aq uea Aderau su papaau aq Aeu uooafui puoas
four cases were treated with regenerative medicine therapy.
as the primary treatment of ST, however, arthroscopic
Final evaluations were performed on 64 dogs. Of these,
evaluation of the shoulder is recommended as concurrent
lameness resolved in 90% of cases and improvement was
pathologies of the joint are common. In these cases,
 noted in the remaining 10%.
arthroscopic treatment of concurrent pathologies can be
Surgical treatment is warranted for chronic cases that
 combined with intraarticular regenerative medicine therapy
do not respond to conservative medical management and
to promote healing and speed recovery. Appropriate modi-
rehabilitation therapy. Surgical treatment should include
fication of the rehabilitative therapy protocol is necessary
arthroscopic exploration to identify and treat possible
to prevent damage to the injected cells.
concurrent BT or shoulder instability, or removal of abnor-
 Results of a pilot study of 185 dogs with a confirmed
uaaq sey Aiains og yoeoidde uado ue ysnoun anssn [eu
diagnosis of supraspinatus tendinopathy (ST) by ultra-
considered the treatment of last resort in humans with
sound or MRI performed by one of the authors (SC) pro-
tendinosis because of the small reported difference in treat-
vides  support  of regenerative medicine therapy  for
ment success between surgical intervention and conserva-
 treatment of ST. Performance and sporting dogs accounted
tive management. Rehabilitation therapy, as described for
for just over one third (67) of the population, while com-
BT, following surgical intervention is essential in returming
panion animals accounted for the remaining two thirds
the canine athlete to performance.
(118). Of the performance/sporting dog population, 48%
The retraining protocol for this condition mirrors that
participated in agility. At presentation, a majority of dogs
of retraining following rehabilitation of BT.
588
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Infraspinatus Contracture
however, if contraction has already occurred, tenectomy or
Contracture of the infraspinatus muscle is a rare condition
 myectomy may be necessary.45
 most often affecting large breed dogs, particularly working
Electrophysiologic studies of affected dogs indicate that
dogs (i.e., hunting dogs, herding dogs) and other very
infraspinatus contracture is a primary muscle disorder
active dogs.3 Infraspinatus muscle contracture was frst
rather than a neuropathy. Histologically, affected tissues
reported in the Dutch literature in 19703 and is one of the
 demonstrate degeneration and atrophy of skeletal muscle
two most frequently reported contractures in the dog, along
with fibrous tissue replacement. These findings support the
with quadriceps contracture 34.3s Unilateral contraction of
hypothesis that acute traumatic events caused incomplete
the infraspinatus muscle is most common; however, bilat-
rupture of the infraspinatus muscle, leading to fibrosis and
eral contractures have also been reported.36.37 Most cases
contracture.
are working or hunting dogs that present with an acute
Diagnosis
The infraspinatus lies within the infraspinous fossa and
After an acute onset of a painful non-weight-bearing lame-
extends caudally somewhat beyond the fossa. It arises from
 ness, the initial pain and lameness improve over a period
the fossa, the scapular spine, and the caudal border of the
of 1 to 4 weeks, after which a characteristic circumducted
scapula, and at the shoulder joint becomes a strong tendon
gait abnormality develops in the forelimb. The initial injury
that crosses the caudal part of the greater tubercle. The infra-
to the infraspinatus muscle is not fully recognized or cor-
spinatus is the outward rotator and abductor of the humerus
rectly interpreted in most cases, at least not with regard to
and a fexor or extensor of the shoulder joint depending on
its potential as a precursor of myopathy. Affected dogs
the position of the joint when the muscle contracts.
most often present with mature contractures and adhesions
of the tendon of insertion of the infraspinatus muscle to
Cause
the adjacent joint capsule. As a consequence most or all of
Causes reported include repetitive microtrauma, blunt
the intermal rotation of the humerus in relation to the
trauma, and osteofascial compartment syndrome.41.42 Com-
scapula is lost. This lack of rotation is a reliable clinical
partment syndrome is a disease process seen in people;
sign for diagnosis of the disorder. The humerus may also
however, it can also occur in dogs and horses.43 The pathol-
be held in slight abduction and extermal rotation.
 Ogy to muscle tissue is caused by an increase in pressure
Acutely the shoulder is swollen and very painful. The initial
in a confined, inelastic space that leads to muscle inflam-
 trauma usually resolves with rest and supportive treatment.
mation with no room to expand.43 Muscle necrosis occurs 
 However, the affected limb begins to show signs of contracture
when the pressure rises to greater than 30 mm Hg (normal,
several days to weeks after the initial trauma. Physical exami-
-2 to 8 mm Hg) in a single compartment with no relief.43
nation of a chronic case usually indicates a bright, alert dog.
A compartmental pressure greater than 120 mm Hg may
without signs of any systemic illness. There is usually a
lead to complete and irreversible nerve block.*4 Causes for
weight-bearing lameness of the affected forelimb and a char-
an increased pressure within a compartment include hem-
acteristic gait. Palpation and manipulation of the contracted
orrhage, postischemic tissue swelling, extemal pressure
limb does not usually elicit a pain response.38.40 The remaining
(bandage), or intramuscular injection.32 In elastic barriers 
shoulder muscles, mainly the supraspinatus*0 and deltoid
that predispose to compartment syndrome there are struc-
muscles, may show signs of disuse atrophy or be contracted
tures such as fascia and bone.43 Four different compart-
ments have been described in the dog: femoral, craniolateral
 the shoulder joint is appreciated.* The affected forelimb is
 crus, caudal crus, and caudal antebrachial.43.4
usually held with the shoulder in abduction and the elbow in
It may be possible that compartment syndrome may
adduction against the thoracic wall (Figure 33-10). The distal
play a role in the contracture of the muscles of the shoulder
forelimb and carpus are extermally rotated and held in abduc-
joint. If an injury is sustained to the infraspinatus muscle
tion.36.40 Gait abnormalities usually consist of weight-bearing
that leads to moderate cellular infammation, the muscle
lameness and circumduction3.3840 of the affected forelimb
begins to swell and has no room to expand. Infammation
with a characteristic fiplike action of the paw when placing
within the boundaries of the deltoids, scapula, and sur-
the foot.36.40 When the patient is placed in lateral recumbency
rounding fascia increase the compartmental pressure and
with the affected limb up, a true infraspinatus contracture will
inhibit venous blood fow, initially causing congestion.
cause the distal forelimb to remain in an abducted and exter-
Then arterial blood fow and innervation are affected, as
nally rotated position off the foor and away from the body.
well as diminished cellular response to damaged tissue. It
 Siems et al. reported a series of ultrasonographic find-
is the unforgiving pressure that leads to further cellular
 ings of two concurrently traumatized infraspinatus muscles
damage. Cellular swelling caused by pressures rising to
 in the same dog; one resolved without complications, and
greater than 30 mm Hg is what seems to lead to necrosis
 the other resulted in contracture.39 The primary ultrasono-
and/or fibrosis of the affected muscles. Early treatment
 graphic description of a contracted infraspinatus muscle is
is focused on surgical decompression by fasciotomy;
increased echogenicity when compared with a normal
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
589
present for more than a few weeks before the surgery is
performed, atrophy of other forelimb muscles may be
present. General conditioning exercises for the limb, such
as progressive walking, wheel-barrowing, and aquatic
therapy, should be used to gradually returm these muscles
to normal size and strength. The use of neuromuscular
electrical stimulation may also be considered if the atrophy
is severe and the dog is having difficulty using the limb
because of weakness.
Medial Shoulder Syndrome and Medial
Shoulder Instability
Medial shoulder syndrome (MSS) is one of the most
common causes of forelimb gait related issues and lame-
ness in perfonmance dogs. This condition may be consid-
Figure 33-10 Characteristic posture of a dog with contracture of
ered somewhat similar to rotator cuff injuries in people
the infraspinatus muscle.
(including ligament disruption; tendinopathy; labral and
capsular tears or disruption). In human athletes, an over-
supraspinatus muscle3639 Magnetic resonance imaging
head throwing motion involves intricate motion combined
is another diagnostic modality that may be useful for
with proper stabilization. During this activity, the shoulder
diagnosing the condition in both the acute and chronic
must be lax enough to allow extremes of motion but secure
phases.
enough to provide stabilization.426 The same is true for the
canine athlete. Many routine maneuvers performed by
Treatment
dogs also involve extremes of ROM and require appropri-
Physical rehabilitation of acute or subacute infraspinatus ten-
ate stabilization. In dogs with medial shoulder instability
dinopathies may be used to maintain joint motion and prevent
(MSI), lameness may be as subtle as performance-related
contracture. Continuous ulrasound and stretching exercises
problems such as refusing tight tums or as severe as a
may help maintain the length and mobility of the affected
weight-bearing lameness. MSI involves multiple compo-
tissues. Mature contractures most likely require surgical
nents of the shoulder joint. Definitive diagnosis requires a
release. Mature contractures are treated with a tenotomy of
thorough orthopedic evaluation and advanced diagnostic
the tendon of insertion of the infraspinatus muscle and release
tests. Medial shoulder instability is diagnosed when sig-
of capsular adhesions of the tendon. Infraspinatus muscle
nificant shoulder laxity is present. Early identification and
 contracture carries an excellent prognosis with tenectomy of
treatment offer the best long-term result and prevent further 
the infraspinatus tendon.40.46 Lateralor cramiolateralapproaches
shoulder instability and progression of osteoarthritis.
to the shoulder both provide good exposure of the infraspina-
tus tendon.34041 Complete transection of the infraspinatus
Anatomy
tendon with removal of a length of the tendon is required to
Anatomically, the shoulder joint is one of the least stable
restore motion in the affected limb amd most often proves
joints in the dog, relying on soft tissue structures for stabil-
curative with an immediate release of contracture and retum
ity and function (Figure 33-11).4 In dogs the glenohumeral
to function of the shoulder joint.36.40 It is common to find
(shoulder) joint has the widest ROM and is capable of
adhesions to the infraspinatus tendon and joint capsule during
movements in any direction, but its primary movements
surgery; however, after they are dissected away they seldom
 during ambulation are fexion and extension.*6 The gleno-
 humeral joint relies heavily on capsuloligamentous support
be applied, and rehabilitation therapy should start when
to provide stability because its anatomic conformation
sutures are removed to prevent the formation of further
does not provide a stable socket.*6 The humeral head and
adhesions.40
glenoid cavity of the scapula make up the ball and socket
The postoperative management after adhesion release
of the shoulder joint. The glenoid provides little coverage
includes full weight bearing and gentle, pain-free passive
of the humeral head. The joint capsule, ligaments, and sur-
ROM, massage, and stretching exercises of the shoulder,
rounding muscles and tendons all contribute to the stability
elbow, and carpus two to three times daily to maintain
of the shoulder. Insult or injury to any portion of the
ROM and promote normal alignment of the healing tissues.
Cryotherapy may be used after exercise. Excessive activity
cause shoulder joint pathology resulting in pain and dys-
such as unrestricted running or playing should be avoided
function.47
The components that are most commonly
in the first several weeks to avoid tissue damage and
affected by MSS and MSI include the craniomedial joint
recurrence of fibrous tissue. If the contracture has been
capsule, medial glenohumeral ligament, subscapularis
590
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
tendon, supraspinatus tendon, labrum, and less commonly
the biceps tendon (shown in Figures 33-12 and 33-13).
Depending on the severity and chronicity of the condition,
the cartilage may also be affected.
Supraspinatus
Cause
Currently, the exact cause of MSS in dogs is unknown,
 Medial
 glenohumeral 
although it is suspected to be related to chronic repetitive
ligament
Biceps
activity or overuse rather than trauma. Overuse of the
brachi tendon
shoulder support structures leads to degeneration of the
Joint capsule
tissues, lowering the tensile strength of the tissues and
Transverse
humeral ligament 
predisposing them to fraying, disruption, and eventually
 complete breakdown.120 Sporting athletes that participate
Synovium~
in activities such as agility undergo extreme stresses on
their muscles, ligaments, and tendons. Repetitive activities
Humerus·
Biceps
brachii muscle
formed regularly during practice and at weekend trials
place the shoulder near its end range of abduction (as
shown in Figure 33-14), and stress the soft tissues of the
medial shoulder complex. Additionally, events such as
Figure 33-11  Normal canine shoulder anatomy (relevant to MSl).
slipping on wet surfaces, mishaps on the dog walk, teeter,
a
b
d
Figure 33-12 A, Arthroscopic view of the cranio-
A
medial compartment of the shoulder joint. Glenoid
(a), canial arm of the medial collateral ligament
(MCL) (b), subscapularis tendon (c), and humeral
head (d). B, Arthroscopic view of the centromedial
 compartment of the shoulder joint. Glenoid (a), cen-
tromedial area of the MCL (b), and humeral head (c).
C, Arthroscopic view of the caudomedial compart-
ment of the shoulder joint. Glenoid (a), caudomedial
area of the MCL (b), and humeral head (c).
 D, Arthroscopic view of the cranial compartment of
the shoulder joint. Cranial arm of the MCL (a), inser-
tion of the subscapularis tendon (b). and humeral
head (c). (From Beale, B:; Hulse, D.: Schulz, K.: whitney.
B
C
W.: Smalf Animal Arthroscopy, 2003, Saunders.)
D
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
591
B
Figure 33-13  Abnormal arthroscopic images of an agility dog with MSI.
be noted in the affected shoulder muscle(s) on physical
ex amination. Forelimb circumference may be decreased in
the affected forelimb when compared with the contralateral
unaffected forelimb. Dogs with MSS typically have restric-
tion and decreased range of motion in shoulder extension.
The most consistent physical exam findings in dogs with
MSS are shoulder spasm and discomfort on abduction of
the affected shoulder. If a concurrent supraspinatus tendi-
nopathy is present, pain may be noted when placing the
shoulder into fexion (direct stretch of the supraspinatus)
or on direct palpation of its point of insertion.
Figure 33-14  A shoulder in the end range of abduction.
Because preoperative diagnosis of MSS is critical for 
 clinical decision making, a palpation technique has been
or A-frame may also contribute to the trauma inflicted on
developed known as the shoulder abduction test.4α Although
the shoulder while participating in agility. Over time there
this test was originally described in dogs under sedation in
may be a cumulative effect of the microtrauma occurring
lateral recumbency, it is noted by the author that this test
to the ligaments, tendons, and joint capsule, leading to a
may be performed with similar consistent results on dogs
decrease in performance.
 a a  o s  a
nents of the craniomedial shoulder, the elbow and shoulder
Diagnosis
must be placed in full extension with concurrent abduction
History and Clinical Signs. Presenting complaints and
of the forelimb. The scapula at the level of the acromion
clinical signs in dogs with MSS may vary from subtle, such
 process must be stabilized with the evaluator's opposite
as missing cues or refusing tight turms during performance,
hand to achieve a passive stretch of the craniomedial shoul-
to an overt intermittent unilateral lameness. It is not uncom-
der components. A goniometer is held such that one arm
mon for the history to include identification of restrictions,
of the goniometer runs parallel to the spine of the scapula
spasm, and trigger points, or mild atrophy in the affected
so that the center of rotation of the goniometer is centered
shoulder by a therapist (veterinary rehabilitation therapist,
over the shoulder joint and the free arm of the goniometer
veterinary massage therapist, or veterinary chiropractor)
extends over the axis of the humerus in contact with the
during routine sessions. Dogs with chronic conditions typi-
skin. With the elbow and shoulder held in extension, the
cally have a history of poor response to rest and NSAIDs,
forelimb is abducted to its physiologic limit and the mea-
and increased lameness after exercise and heavy activity.
surement obtained as shown in Figure 33-15. In severe
Orthopedic Examination. Findings from gait evalua-
cases, which clinically appear to be much less common, a
tion may range from a mildly shortened stride in the
slight "thud" or subluxation may be felt when abducting
affected forelimb at a walk and a trot to significant weight-
the shoulder. The procedure should then be performed on
bearing lameness. Depending on chronicity, atrophy may
the contralateral shoulder for comparison. Using this
592
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
as DogLeggs@) and rehabilitation therapy is required in
all cases.
 Physical therapy for orthopedic conditions has a strong
scientific background in human medicine. Many studies
have shown the benefits of rehabilitation following rotator
cuff surgery. The canine rehabilitation therapist should be
aware of treatment techniques used in people and apply
similar goals, principles, and techniques to dogs. Be aware
that not all exercises work for every patient; some exercises
require trial and error to achieve desired results. Some dogs
tolerate the shoulder support system quite well, whereas
others face a difficult time with the system. Some owners
become frustrated with the shoulder support system and
the restraint of the dog. Home education and owner com-
 pliance play a significant role in the postoperative manage-
Figure 33-15  Abduction test.
ment of MSS and MSI stabilization; therefore it is essential
to reinforce the importance of the stabilization and the
compliance of the program. Behavioral activities for the
palpation technique, it has been reported that a nonmal
dog are beneficial.
mean shoulder abduction angle is approximately 30
Mild Medial Shoulder Syndrome (MSI). Patients with
degrees.43 Although this report revealed that dogs with
mild MSS most commonly have arthroscopic findings
 medial shoulder instability had abduction angles signifi-
consisting of mild pathology (inflammation without
 cantly larger than 30 degrees,4β a more recent study showed
fraying, disruption, or laxity of the MGL, subscapularis 
an inconsistent correlation between abduction angles and
tendon, joint capsule) are placed in a shoulder support
medial  compartment  pathology  identifed  arthroscopi
system/hobbles, such as DogLeggs@, and entered into a
 cally.4 This is also the author's clinical observation. Dogs
rehabilitation program.  The rehabilitation program is
with MSS rarely show evidence of "instability," but rather
restricted and consists of stabilization exercises only
show signs of dysfunction and pain associated with cranio-
 during the initial period. Cessation of activities, running.
medial pathology, including varying degrees of subscapu-
and jumping are required and leash walks must be
lar tendinopathy; medial glenohumeral ligament (MGL)
enforced. The length of leash walks depends on the dog's
disruption; craniomedial capsular lesions;, and labral tears.
endurance, pain, and inflammatory level. Quality over
Because MSS is usually a unilateral problem, the contra-
quantity should be emphasized with leash walks, and the
lateral shoulder usually does not show signs of dysfunc-
owner should not push the dog to lameness with daily
 tion, pain, or spasm on abduction.
walks. Additional rehabilitative exercises include balance
Advanced Diagnostics. In addition to history, signal-
board, lifting of the opposite forelimb and hindlimb,
ment, gait analysis, physical examination, orthopedic and
weight shifts, standing on a balance ball, walking in figure
neurologic ex aminations, and abduction angle tests, further
eights and circles, and scapular stabilization work on a
diagnostic tests used to differentiate causes of shoulder
balance ball or disk. Stretching the shoulder in extension
pathology currently consist of hematology, biochemical
is permissible, but any abduction movements should be
profile, urinalysis, arthrocentesis, imaging modalities, and
avoided. Modalities such as laser, cryotherapy, and moist
arthroscopy. Considered the gold standard, arthroscopic
heat are beneficial to reduce the inflammation and muscle
evaluation of the shoulder provides a definitive diagnosis of 
spasms, respectively. Neuromuscular electrical stimulation
may be used if there is a significant amount of atrophy
direct observation of all major intraarticular structures with
and are usually targeted at the muscle belly of the
magnification, "dynamic"’ evaluation of tissues during
supraspinatus and infraspinatus. The teres major is often
shoulder ROM tests, and "palpation" of intraarticular
restricted and painful as a result of the compensatory sta-
tissues using arthroscopic instrumentation.
 bilization and may benefit from laser therapy and massage.
Compensations in the cervical and thoracic regions should
Treatment
be addressed if present. In addition, underwater treadmill
 Patients are placed into one of three treatment categories;
activity may be initiated. Typically water heights should
mild, moderate, or severe based on the results of the ortho-
be above the elbow to decrease the stress placed on the
pedic ex amination, abduction angle tests, and arthroscopic
elbow. Swimming is only advised if the dog is able to
scoring. Use of a shoulder support system/hobbles (such
swim in a controlled fashion without shoulder abduction.
 As the dog progresses and the weakness in the shoulder
Shoulde urt sytm,Dle RetoA.
complex has improved, a gradual return to activity may
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
593
Figure 33-16 A, Dog wearing the shoulder support system following B, arthroscopic treatment for MSl.
be initiated. An increase in forelimb circumference should
the most shrinkage without causing necrosis of the tissue
occur over time, along with increased active and passive
is between 65° and 75°C. This treatment causes a signif-
shoulder extension, and decreasing lameness. This may
cant decrease in mechanical stiffness for the first 2 weeks,
take from 2 to 8 weeks depending on the dog, severity of
and then, after the tissue undergoes active cellular repair
 injury, activity level, and commitment to rehabilitation. At
from the surrounding uninjured tissue, the mechanical
this point a gradual retum to activity may be initiated. The
properties returm to near normal by 6 to 12 weeks.52 To
agility dog's jumping style and contact style may need to
protect the tissues during this period dogs are placed in a
be adjusted.
shoulder support system/hobbles (such as DogLeggs@),
Moderate Medial Shoulder Syndrome (MSS). Dogs
such as those shown in Figure 33-16, for 3 months, and
with moderate MSS most commonly have arthroscopic
 entered into a rehabilitation therapy program.
findings that include subscapularis tendinopathy (disrup.
 During the initial phases of the postoperative period,
tion, fraying, core lesion), medial glenohumeral ligament
treatment is minimal and focuses on stabilization activities
pathology (fraying or disruption), craniomedial joint 
and PROM. Modalities aimed at reducing infammation
capsule focal synovial proliferation and/or disruption, and
should not be used to maintain the inflammatory process.
labral pathology (fraying, disruption, or tears). Additional
Active range of motion is not performed on the shoulder
findings occasionally include a bulge of the supraspinatus
complex until 8 weeks postoperatively. Passive range of
tendon with impingement on the biceps tendon. Depending
motion is performed on the digits, carpus, and elbow. Joint
on the tissues involved and the severity of disease, dogs in
compressions may be performed to the digits, carpus, and
the moderate category are treated arthroscopically with a
elbow during the initial period, but the shoulder region
should be avoided. If restrictions are present in the digits,
thermal capsulorrhaphy (RITC), suture imbrications (fiber
carpus, or elbow, appropriate joint mobilizations to increase
wire), or stabilization using a specialized fiber band and
ROM may be perfonmed.4 However, joint mobilizations
buttons technique (TightRope@, Arthrex Co., Naples,
should not be performed to the shoulder. Restrictions in
FL)4749.50 The current technique for radiofrequency treat-
the contralateral limb, spine, and hindlimbs should be
ment has been altered significantly since the previous
evaluated and treated appropriately with ROM, joint mobi-
report for the treatment of MSI in dogs because of the
lization, massage, laser, and other modalities. Leash walks 
detrimental effects that can occur with aggressive applica-
 are permitted but are restricted.
tion. Currently a single pass striping technique versus mul-
The hobbles must be worm at all times. Weight-shifting
tipass paintbrush technique has been developed based on
exercises may be added 4 weeks after surgery, as well as
current application in humans.$l In addition, a monopolar
stretches of the cervical region. Sit-to-stands are also
(vs bipolar) radiofrequency generator and probe using a
beneficial at this time. The dog should remain in the
default setting of 25 W and 70° C with high fuid fow
shoulder support system or hobbles at all times, with the
egress has been employed to protect the surrounding
exception of rehabilitation. Typically the dog is seen
tissues and cartilage. Radiofrequency-induced thermal
every other week for the first 8 weeks to monitor
progress and ROM. At that point, weekly therapy is nec-
capsule tissue, which causes the collagen to denature and
essary and should consist of stabilization work, ROM,
the capsule to shrink. The optimal temperature to achieve
balance  and proprioception exercises, and  endurance
594
Section Vl
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
work. The underwater treadmill and more dynamic activ-
TightRope@ stabilization (Arthrex) may be indicated. Fol-
ities are not introduced until approximately 12 to 14
lowing surgical repair dogs are placed in a non-weight-
weeks postoperatively, although standing in water before
bearing Velpeau sling for 2 weeks followed by a shoulder
that period is beneficial if the dog remains in its hobbles
support system (such as DogLeggs@) for 2 to 3 months.
and does not thrash around in the water.
Rehabilitation therapy is required for a longer period of
At 12 to 16 weeks postoperatively full ROM of the
time because recovery following primary reconstruction
shoulder joint should be present without any soft tissue
ranges from 4 to 6 months. Fortunately, severe cases are
tendermess. Underwater treadmill therapy may begin at this
less common and are usually caused by trauma rather than
stage. Also, appropriate modalities may be used if needed
repetitive activities, as seen in the mild and moderate
on any region. During the fnal stages of rehabilitation,
categories.
approximately 12to 16 weeks, the hobbles may be removed
Traumatic Fragmented Medial Coronoid Process
for controlled activity. Initially, short periods of exercise
(5-15 minutes) are recommended without the hobbles and
Traumatic fragmented medial coronoid process (TFMCP),
the activity should be controlled. For example, the dog may
sometimes called jump down syndrome, is a condition in
be off leash in a small fenced area. The goal is to remove
the elbow joint of dogs that appears to occur commonly in
the hobbles completely, unless the dog is in danger of slip-
performance dogs. Unlike the classic condition of frag-
ping on the foor or during aggressive play. This may take
mented medial coronoid process (FMCP), which affects
several weeks to achieve. During rehabilitation, activities
the elbow joints of skeletally immature large to giant breed
such as swimming. side stepping, cavaletti work, and
dogs, TFMCP appears to have no age or size limitations.
hill walking may be added. All of the activities must be
monitored and controlled. The activity may progress to
Anatomy
tight turms, crawling activities, walking through tunnels,
The elbow joint as a whole is a trochlea arthrosis or gin-
advanced balance activities, and increased endurance
glymus (hinge) joint, allowing fexion and extension of the
activities, such as leash walking and underwater treadmill.
humerus over the radius and ulna. In dogs, the caudal
The goals of the individual dog should be evaluated, and
aspect of the head of the radius rotates in the radial notch
if the dog is returming to a sport such as agility, specific
 of the ulna during pronation and supination.22 The normal
agility activities should be added 15 or 16 weeks postop-
elbow joint is characterized by a smooth transition from
eratively. Trotting, running, and jogging should be intro-
the ulnar articular surface to the radial surface. The medial
duced on different surfaces and different intervals.
coronoid process of the ulna is level with or slightly below
Transitioning from a walk to a trot to a jog and back is an
 the surface of the radius (Figure 33-17).
exercise that helps with proprioception and strength.
Jumping can be introduced with a low-level jump in a
Cause
straight line. The dog's normal jump height should be
The cause of TFMCP is poorly understood. It is possible
reduced by 50% to 75% depending on the height of the
that abnormal repetitive loading, such as landing from a
dog. For example, if the dog normally jumps 26 inches,
jump, hitting contacts or a fyball box, may lead to micro-
the initial jump height should be 12 inches. Begin with one
fractures of the bone undermeath the cartilage (subchondral
jump and progress to a series of three to five jumps in a
fractures).3 Additionally, increased repetitive loading can
row, spaced about three times the body length of the dog
arise from contraction of the biceps/brachialis muscle
from each other. The dog should be jumped three to five
times for three repetitions, two to three times per week. If
no problems persist, the repetitions and the height can be
 gradually increased. Tums in the jumps may be added
setting consecutive jumps in a semicircle or a pinwheel. As
the dog progresses, tighter turns can be added with a
 gradual retum to normal activities.
Severe Medial Shoulder Syndrome (MSS) and Medial
Shoulder Instability (MSI). Dogs with severe MSS or
Humerus
MSI typically have signs of craniomedial compartment
laxity with shoulder abduction angles greater than 65
Coronoid
degrees. Arthroscopic findings usually include complete
process
tears of the medial glenohumeral ligament and severe dis-
ruption of the subscapularis tendon, joint capsule and
Radius
labrum. For this type of injury reconstruction of the
Ulna
medial compartment by direct tissue reapposition using
synthetic capsulorrhaphy, bone/soft tissue anchors, and/or
Figure 33-17  Normal canine elbow anatomy.
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
595
complex. When the biceps/brachialis contracts, a force is
Orthopedic Examination. On physical  examination
generated that rotates the medial coronoid into the radius.
discomfort is usually noted on direct palpation of the
These microcracks disturb the mechanical properties of 
medial compartment of the elbow joint, specifically the
bone, and if not repaired properly through normal healing
medial coronoid process. Discomfort may also be noted
mechanisms, fatigue fractures develop. Additionally, loss
on hyperfexion of the elbow. Most dogs with TFMCP
of osteocytes (bone cells), indicated by decreased osteo-
are reluctant to allow full elbow fexion. In chronic cases,
cyte density, has been strongly associated with the pres-
full fexion may not be obtained. Crepitus may be noted
ence of microdamage after fatigue loading.3 These studies
when placing the elbow through ROM. Some investigators
imply that excess load may lead to fatigue microdamage
suggest that the carpus should be placed in a fexed,
of the subchondral trabecular bone and eventual fracture,
extermally rotated position while the elbow is extended
which may play an important role in the pathogenesis of
to exacerbate the pain response. Joint effusion may be
 sr on sodsd  aq e s d
detected as a fuctuant swelling distal to the lateral or
tion if they have elbow dysplasia. Dogs with elbow dys-
 medial epicondyle of the humerus. Depending on the
plasia may have asymmetric growth of the radius and
chronicity, atrophy may be noted in the affected forelimb
ulna during development, resulting in elbow joint incon-
muscles.
gruity. Elbow incongruity, such as radioulnar step defects,
Advanced Diagnostics. In addition to history, gait
humeroulnar incongruence/conflict, and varus deformity
 analysis, physical examination, and orthopedic and neuro-
of the humerus, causes abnormal contact pattems in the
logic examinations, further diagnostic tests used to dif-
elbow, specifically at the coronoid-trochlear articulation,
ferentiate causes of elbow pathology currently consist of
which is theorized to increase the load on the medial
hematology, biochemical profle, urinalysis, arthrocente-
coronoid process (MCP).4 Regardless of the etiology, if
sis, imaging modalities, and arthroscopy. Unfortunately,
left untreated as a continual lameness, secondary osteo-
radiographs may be of little value in early cases because
arthritis may progress, as noted by damage to the cartilage
of difficulty identifying the fragment or line of separation
such as softening, fibrillation, fissuring, and erosions as
using standard radiography." In chronic cases, however,
well as additional subchondral bone microcracks and frag-
radiographs may reveal secondary evidence of bony
mentation. The free fragments may contribute to frictional
remodeling consistent with osteoarthritis. These changes
abrasion ("kissing lesions") of the opposing surface,
 may include sclerosis of the ulnar notch and remodeling
including the medial aspect of the humeral condyle and
along the anconeal process and MCP.$6 Advanced diagnos-
radial head.
tic imaging modalities such as CT scans, MRI, nuclear
scans, and arthroscopy may allow confinmation of the con-
Diagnosis
dition.°6 Arthroscopic evaluation of the elbow joint allows
History and Clinical Signs. Dogs with TFMCP may
direct observation of all major i ntraarticular structures
be presented with a history ranging from a subtle intermit-
with magnification, “"dynamic’ evaluation of tissues during
tent off-loading of the forelimb to significant unilateral or
elbow ROM tests, and "palpation" of intraarticular tissues
bilateral forelimb lameness. This lameness is typically
using arthroscopic instrumentation.$ Arthroscopic explo-
exacerbated with exercise and heavy activity. The onset of
ration of the elbow provides a definitive diagnosis of
lameness is insidious. As lameness persists, it may increase 
 TFMCP when a fragment or cartilage fissure is observed
in severity. Affected dogs often place the carpus in an
(Figure 33-18). In a small percentage of cases advanced
exaggerated valgus position (turmed out) when sitting or
imaging (nuclear scan, CT, MRI) may indicate fragmenta-
standing, and circle the foreleg outward and move the
tion of the MCP, but arthroscopic observation does not
elbow away from the midline (circumduct the antebra-
reveal a fissure or fragment. In such cases the fissures
chium and abduct the elbow) during the swing phase of
(microcracks) are believed to be within the coronoid
the stride. The history of dogs with TFMCP typically
process beneath the cartilage surface.
includes a lack of response to rest and NSAIDs. Many
Treatment
dogs with TFMCP are mistakenly treated for shoulder
pathology because the attending veterinarian elicits a pain
 Treatment of TFMCP is multimodal and includes a com-
response when the shoulder is extended. The authors
bination of medical and surgical management as well as
believe the pain response actually arises from the elbow
because when the veterinarian performs an extension
may be possible to relieve pain and maintain limb function,
maneuver of the shoulder, the elbow is usually simultane-
as well as to returm the dog to a near-normal level of activ-
ously extended. Extension of the elbow causes tension in
ity and competition.
the biceps/brachialis muscle complex. Tension in the
Arthroscopy is an excellent modality for diagnosing
biceps/brachialis exerts pressure on the medial coronoid
TFMCP as well as a minimally invasive means of treat-
and overlying inflamed joint capsule causing the pain
ment. Arthroscopic removal of the fragments is recom-
response.
mended not only to remove the inciting cause of lameness
596
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
times, decreased risk of infection, and shorter recovery
 e s n  m p s
fully opening the joint (arthrotomy).
Following arthroscopic treatment, dogs are typically
 prescribed NSAIDs for 14 days to help decrease inflam-
mation and discomfort. Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
(PSGAG), an injectable joint protective agent, is also
recommended following arthroscopic treatment and is
administered intramuscularly twice a week for up to
4 weeks. Polysulfated glycosaminoglycans have been
shown to decrease the amount of degradative enzymes
(which stimulate inflammation and cartilage erosion) as
well as promote repair and regeneration of cartilage.59 In
addition, an oral joint protective agent such as glucos-
amine, chondroitin sulfate, and avocado/soybean unsapon-
ifiables (ASU) is recommended as a daily supplement for
life. The antinflammatory properties and pain-reducing
effects of these supplements have been studied.6061 There
is also evidence that they may have a chondroprotective
Figure 33-18 Arthroscopic image of a taumatic fragmented
medial coronoid process in an agility dog.
effect.60.61
As with any rehabilitation therapy program, rehabilita-
tion after elbow arthroscopy should follow a sequential and
 progressive multiphased approach.6 The ultimate goal of 
elbow rehabilitation is to returm the patient to its previous
functional level as quickly and safely as possible. However,
each case is uniquely different, and several factors-
including duration of injury/lameness before surgery.
secondary  osteoarthritis and surgical  intervention—all
influence the rate at which the patient proceeds through the
 healing process.
The elbow is predisposed to fexion contractures because
of the intimate congruency of the joint articulations,
the tightness of the joint capsule, and the tendency of the
 cranial capsule to develop adhesions following injury. The
biceps/brachialis complex also attaches to the capsule and
crosses the elbow joint before becoming a tendinous struc-
ture and inserting on the ulna. Injury to the elbow may
cause excessive scar tissue fonmation of the brachialis
muscle as well as functional splinting of the elbow. Rees-
tablishing full elbow extension is the primary goal of early
ROM activities to minimize the occurrence of elbow
fexion contractures.63-65
Figure 33-19  Arthroscopic treatment of a traumatic fragmented
Additional goals of this stage are to protect healing
medial coronoid process.
tissue, decrease pain and infammation, restore weight
tion therapist must not overstress healing tissues during
but also to help slow the progression of osteoarthritis.
this phase. It is important that the owner restrict the dog's
Arthroscopic treatment may include a combination of tech-
activity to short leash walking only with no running.
niques such as fragment removal, debridement of diseased
jumping, and rough play.
tissues, creation of vascular access by abrasion arthro-
Cryotherapy (Figure 33-20) may be performed during
plasty, forage, microfracture, and subtotal coronoid ostec-
and inflammation. The primary physiologic effects include
(Figure 33-19). Arthroscopy allows for superior visual-
vasoconstriction, reduced cellular metabolism and perme-
ization of structures in the joint and is also believed to have
ability, decreased motor and sensory nerve conduction
less soft tissue trauma, shorter surgery and hospitalization
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
597
Figure 33-20 Cryotherapy of the elbow immediately post
Figure 33-21 Range of motion of canine elbow following
arthroscopy.
arthroscopic treatment.
may be applied around the entire elbow joint for a duration
 of 10 to 20 minutes, three to six times daily
Range of motion is perfonmed to the entire forelimb:
toes, carpus, elbow, and shoulder (Figure 33-21). Slow
controlled movements are performed with slight over pres-
sure at end range. Range of motion activities are usually
performed two to three times daily. Range of motion activi-
ties are performed for all planes of elbow and carpus
motions to prevent the formation of scar tissue and adhe-
sions. Grade I and II joint mobilizations (Figure 33-22)
may be performed during the early phase of rehabilitation
as tolerated.7 Joint mobilizations increase circulation,
proprioception, and healing and may decrease swelling.
Pain-free grade ll posterior glides with oscillations are
performed in the midrange of motion to assist in regaining
full elbow extension. Aggressive mobilization techniques
 Figure 33-22 Joint mobilization of the elbow in a dog following
are not used until later stages of rehabilitation when pain
arthroscopic treatment.
has subsided. Grade I and II mobilization techniques are
also used to neuromodulate pain by stimulating articular
receptors.78.79 Grade IIl and IV joint mobilizations also
is applied to the carpus and distal antebrachium. The
should be performed to all joints that are hypomobile or
amount of pressure applied should be of low magnitude
restricted in any direction. Common regions of decreased
to enable the dog to perfonm the stretch for the entire
mobility may also include the scapula, cervical/thoracic
 duration without pain or muscle spasm. The aggressiveness
spine, or pelvis.
of stretching and mobilization techniques is dictated based
Manual therapy, including soft tissue massage/
on healing constraints of involved tissues as well as the
mobilization and stretching of the surgical forelimb, non-
amount of motion and end feel. If the dog has decreased
surgical forelimb, cervical spine, and hindlimbs may be
motion and a hard end feel without pain, aggressive
necessary because of compensations that occur before and/
stretching and mobilization techniques may be used. Con-
Or secondary to surgery. If the dog continues to have dif-
versely, a dog exhibiting pain before resistance or empty
ficulty achieving full extension using ROM and mobiliza-
end feel should be progressed slowly with gentle
tion techniques, a low load, long duration (LLLD) stretch
stretching.
may be performed to produce a creep of the collagenous
Several modalities may be used to aid in the healing
tissue, which results in tissue elongation.30-83 The dog lies
process during this stage and serve as an adjunct to manual
in lateral recumbency with a towel roll placed under the
 treatments and therapeutic exercises. Laser therapy (Figure
brachium to act as a cushion and fulcrum. Light pressure
33-23) mediates a variety of events including release of
598
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 33-23  Laser therapy of the elbow following arthroscopic
treatment.
 growth factors, cytokine reactions, and cell replication; the
Figure 33-24  Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation of the 
ultimate effect of these events is accelerated tissue
elbow following arthroscopy.
healing.84.8 Laser treatment dosage is provided in Joules
(energy). A typical treatment of 4 to 6 Joules per cm? is
applied covering the entire treatment area. Laser therapy
can be performed daily for the frst week, and then
decreased to every other day during week two. After week
two, laser may be applied on an as needed basis.
 Utrasound therapy is a commonly used modality in
human medicine.86 Ultrasound has a direct effect on cells
and in laboratory studies, to stimulate healing. A treatment
schedule may include daily treatment for up to 10 days,
followed by less frequent sessions as the condition
 improves. Continuous wave ultrasound produces heating
Of the tissues, which may be beneficial before stretching.
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)
(Figure 33-24) is used commonly for pain relief. The
 primary effect of pain relief is obtained through two main
 mechanisms: the inhibition of the pain via the gate theory.
and via descending inhibitory mechanisms (release of
endogenous opiates).87 A recent study in dogs showed sig-
nificant improvement in ground reaction forces (weight
Figure 33-25  Three-legged standing.
bearing) immediately after treatment that lasted for up
t0 3 hours. Treatments initially may be applied three to
seven times per week and then decrease in frequency as
 pain and lameness subside.
intermal/extermal rotation are performed to begin reestab-
After the acute infammatory phase has passed, moist
lishing proprioception and neuromuscular control of the
heat, warm whirlpool, and ultrasound may be used at the 
 Onset of treatment to prepare the tissue for stretching and
surgery, beginning with 5 to 10 minutes, three times a day,
to improve the extensibility of the joint capsule and mus-
with increasing duration to 20 minutes as tolerated, by the
culotendinous structures.
end of the acute phase. Other weight-bearing exercises are
The early phases of rehabilitation must also focus on
initiated at this time and are performed on a daily basis.
retarding muscular atrophy through therapeutic exercises.
 Some examples include the following:
Altermating rhythmic stabilization drills for forelimb fexion/
· Leg standing—Lift nonsurgical forelimb and shift
extension/horizontal  abduction/adduction   and   shoulder
weight to surgical limb (Figure 33-25).
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
599
· Down to stand—Ask patient to lie down and then to
The next phase involves a progression of activities to
stand. Use treats as needed.
prepare the dog for returm to off-lead activity and sport par-
 Rocking on all fours—Dog stands on all four limbs.
ticipation. The goals of this phase are to gradually increase
Gently rock the dog from side to side and diagonally,
strength, power, endurance, and neuromuscular control, to
with 3-cm perturbations in each direction. Promotes
achieve a gradual returm to sport. Specific criteria that must
weight bearing and proprioception to the affected limb.
be met before entering this phase include full nonpainful
When the dog exhibits full ROM, minimal pain and tender-
ROM, no pain or tendermess, and strength and muscle mass 
ness, and improved lameness progression, the goals should
that is 70% of the contralateral forelimb.
 be focused to enhance elbow and upper extremity mobility,.
Advanced strengthening activities during this phase
improve muscle strength and endurance, and reestablish
include exercises emphasizing high-speed and eccentric
neuromuscular control of the elbow complex.
muscle contraction and plyometric activities. Elbow
Stretching exercises are continued to maintain full
fexion exercises using elastic bands (Thera-Bands") are
elbow fexion and extension. Mobilization techniques
progressed to emphasize eccentric control. Elbow fexion
may be progressed to more aggressive grade II and IV
can be performed with elastic bands to emphasize slow
techniques, as needed, to apply a stretch to the capsular
and fast speed concentric and eccentric contractions. The
tissue and improve end range. Flexibility progresses
elastic bands are placed on the cranial aspect of the mid
during this phase to focus on the carpus, elbow, and shoul-
 humerus and the practitioner stands behind the dog while
der, including—fexion, extension, intermal and extermal
ambulating to offer eccentric resistance.
rotation.
Plyometric drills are an extremely beneficial fonm of
 Also during this stage emphasis is placed on increasing
 exercise for training the upper extremity musculature.74
strength and proprioception of the affected limbs. Strength
The physiologic principles of plyometric exercise use an
exercises may include longer leash walks, including up
eccentric prestretch of the muscle tissue, thereby stimulat-
and down hills, stepping over objects such as poles/sticks,
ing the muscle spindle to produce a more forceful concen-
and walking over uneven surfaces such as sand, mulch,
tric contraction. Plyometric exercises are performed using
or tall grass. Initiate walking in circles and figure eights
 jumps during the later stages of this phase to train the upper
by starting with moderately sized circles, and decrease
extremity musculature to develop and withstand high levels
the diameter weekly until tight circles are achieved.
of stress. Examples of these activities include the use of a
Walking in a figure eight patterm may be done around
single jump exercise, then a series of jump grids consisting
cones placed 5 to 6 feet apart depending on the size
of four jumps, initially placed in a straight line, then in an
of the dog. Additional therapeutic exercises include the
arc, and progressing to a serpentine or threaded confi gura-
following:
tion. Another example is simply jumping on and off a box
· Ladder—Use an extension ladder on a level foor or
at several different angles.
cavaletti rails. Walk the dog slowly through ladder or
 Increasing time, distance, speed, or terrain during leash
rails to ensure individual weight bearing on all limbs.
walks aids strengthening. Steeper hills and stairs may aid
Wheelbarrow exercises—Elevate both rear legs and
in advanced strengthening. Proprioception and stabiliza-
have the dog walk forward on the front limbs only.
tion exercises may be advanced with the use of wobble
Begin for short distances and increase as tolerated.
 boards, BOsU?, and/or therapeutic ball exercises (Figure 
· Hydrotherapy—The use of underwater treadmill or
33-26). Placing the dog on an unstable surface such as
swimming may be effective during this stage as well.
these further challenges the patient's proprioception as
NOTE: Full ROM of the elbow should be present and
well as improves strength of the proximal forelimbs.9 Pro-
there should be no palpable tendermess/inflammation of
gression of these exercises may include gentle rocking
the elbow or shoulder. Hydrotherapy sessions are per-
from side to side and having the patient follow a treat in
formed two to three times/week and are initiated slowly,
 all directions. Eccentric exercises such as walking through
beginning with 5 minutes, and increased 1 to 2 minutes
a tunnel and walking backward also may be added. This
per session as tolerated.
will challenge the cranial muscles of the shoulder and
Neuromuscular control exercises are initiated in this phase
elbow.
to enhance the muscles' ability to control the elbow joint
The final phase of elbow rehabilitation, the retum to
during athletic activities. These exercises include proprio-
activity phase, allows the dog to retum progressively to full
ceptive neuromuscular facilitation exercises with rhythmic
off-lead activity and competition using an interval training
stabilizations and slow reversal manual resistance elbow/
returm to sport program. Sport-specific functional exercises
carpus fexion exercises. One method includes having the
are performed to prepare the dog for the stresses involved
dog weight bearing and manually shifting the dog back and
with each particular activity or sport.
forth from a cranial to caudal direction on varying surfaces,
Before a dog is allowed to begin the return to activity
and ambulating on uneven surfaces while applying manual
phases of rehabilitation, the dog must exhibit full ROM,
forces.
no pain or tendemess, have equal forelimb muscle
600
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 33-26 Proprioception and stabilization exercises may be
advanced with the use of a BOSU.
symmetry, no signs of lameness at a walk, trot, or when
Figure 33-27  Manual balance perturbations in all directions are
performing tight circles at a trot, and a satisfactory clinical
initiated on uneven surfaces such as a wobble board.
examination.
If healing of all tissues has occurred appropriately
advanced strengthening techniques may be encouraged
such as jumping (on/off a couch or over a jump). Longer
agility training, and sport-specific training. Greater balance
walking or trotting sessions may be necessary to build up
perturbations on the BOSU or therapy ball; quick direc-
strength and cardiovascular endurance. Gradual off-leash
 tional changes, pivoting, figure eight exercises at submaxi-
activities may be initiated at this time. The duration of
mal effort initially, then progressing to greater speeds;
exercises may be increased, and additional manual balance
cardiovascular endurance; and a continuation of strength
perturbations in all directions may be initiated on uneven
training should be targeted.93
surfaces, such as wobble boards (Figure 33-27), BOSU,
 Or therapy ball. Lifting one limb while performing these 
activities further increases the difficulty.
Hindlimb Conditions
After achieving the previously mentioned criteria to
returm to sport, a formal interval sport program is initi-
The most common hindlimb orthopedic/sports medicine
ated.% For the performance dog, training is initiated three
conditions afficting performance and working dogs are
times per week with a day off between sessions. Each
iliopsoas muscle strain and cranial cruciate ligament (CCL)
step increase in activity is performed at least twice on
insuffciency. Cranial cruciate ligament insufficiency is
separate days before the dog is allowed to progress to the
presented elsewhere in this text. Presented in the following
next step. Full activity should be performed without pain
are the most common muscular injuries/conditions of the
Or significant increase in clinical signs (lameness, joint
hindlimb: iliopsoas strain and gracilis and semitendinosus/
effusion, and discomfort on ROM). If the dog experiences
semimembranosus contracture. Iliopsoas strain is seen
worsening clinical signs at a particular step of the program,
much more frequently than gracilis or semitendinosus/
the owner/trainer is instructed to regress to the prior step
semimembranosus contracture. Because contracture of
until the signs subside. It is important for the performance
the gracilis or semitendinosus/semimembranosus is less
 dog to perform active stretching before training and per-
common, it is often undiagnosed until significant pathol-
formance and to do mild wamm-up activity, such as jogging.
 Ogy is established. Diagnosis and treatment in the early
This provides an adequate warm-up. but also ensures
stages of the disease process can significantly inhibit the
maintenance of necessary ROM and fexibility of the
 progression, emphasizing the need for early identification.
forelimb.
 Advanced strengthening and proprioception must be
Hiopsoas Strains
Acute, Stretch-Induced Injuries
Advanced training and rehabilitation may be accomplished
Iliopsoas strain is an overstretching injury. It is estimated
with activities such as plyometrics, sprinting. jumping.
that muscle injuries account for more than 30% of all
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
601
injuries seen in a typical human sports medicine practice,
with highly athletic activities such as agility.94 These inju-
 and has been reported to be the most common injury seen
ries often occur at or near the muscle-tendon junction.
au sdai oel t sanond erauas ueg u!
Eccentric contraction, in which the muscle is contracting
that muscles that cross multiple joints or that have complex
while it is stretched, is thought to be an important factor
architecture have increased susceptibility to strain injury.?
in the development of these acute strain injuries.95 Trau-
 Strain injuries result from either excessive stretching or
matic incidents that result in active eccentric muscle con-
stretching when the muscle is being activated.*4 The
traction, such as slipping into a splay-legged position,
injured muscle is weaker and has reduced tension, increas-
jumping out of a vehicle, aggressive agility training, or
ing the risk of reinjury.794 Appropriate treatment and allow-
roughhousing with other dogs, are often reported to pre-
 ing for complete healing is a imperative to prevent reinjury.
cipitate acute lameness. It is not uncommon to find concur-
rent orthopedic problems or a recent history of surgical
and inducing healing followed by muscle strengthening.
treatment for another orthopedic condition, such as cranial
endurance and fexibility. A complete program should
cruciate ligament rupture.
also include educating owners on proper warm-up and
stretching techniques to further reduce the incidence of
Diagnosis
reinjury.
The history for dogs with iliopsoas strains commonly
includes a lameness ranging from a subtle intermittent off-
Anatomy
loading of the hindlimb to significant unilateral hindlimb
The psoas major and the iliacus muscles combine to fonm
lameness that is exacerbated with activity. These dogs
the iliopsoas muscle (Figure 33-28). The psoas major
commonly demonstrate performance issues such as knock-
muscle arises from the transverse processes of the lumbar
ing down the bars of jumps with the hindlimbs or slowing
vertebrae at L2 and L3 and the bodies of L4-7, and the
in the weave poles.
iliacus muscle arises from the ventral surface of the
 On direct palpation, tightness, discomfort, and spasm
ilium. They have a common insertion on the lesser trochan-
of the myotendinous unit may be noted (Figure 33-29).
ter of the femur. The action of this muscle is to move the
Pain and spasm may also be noted when stretching
pelvic hindlimb forward relative to the trunk via hip
the myotendinous unit by either placing the hip in exten-
fexion.22
sion with abduction or by simultaneous extension of
the hip with intermal rotation of that pelvic hindlimb
Cause
(Figure 33-30).
Iliopsoas muscle strains occur as the result of excessive
 Radiographs are of little value in the early phase of
force acting on the muscle, and are commonly associated
the condition but may reveal mineralization just cranial
llium-
Internal iliac fascia~
External iliac fascia
(iliac lamina) -
 Inguinal ligament -
lliopsoasmuscle
Femur
Figure 33-28 Illiopsoas anatomy.
602
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 33-29  Palpation of the iliopsoas.
Figure 33-31 Laser therapy for an iliopsoas strain.
Treatment
Acute iliopsoas strains should be treated conservatively.
Skeletal muscle relaxants may be administered in severe
cases to reduce pain and muscle spasms. Medical man-
agement may also include NSAIDs, cryotherapy, and
controlled activity. Rehabilitation can be very effective
in treating iliopsoas strains. Treatments may include laser
therapy to increase circulation, remove waste products, and
promote healing (Figure 33-31). Pain-free PROM and high-
repetition exercise also are recommended. Acute strain
 injuries should not be stretched because microtears may
occur. Core strengthening exercise is essential in the returm
 of the athletic dog to competition and a pain-free lifestyle.
 Exercises using a therapy ball should be performed to
increase the dog's core muscles, including the lower back
Figure 33-30 Iliopsoas passive stretch.
and abdominal muscles. Because the iliopsoas originates
from the lumbar spine, the lumbar spine and lumbosacral
area may need to be treated in acute cases. Passive range
of motion, interferential electrical stimulation, stabiliza-
to the lesser trochanter in chronic cases. The use of
tion exercises, and gradual increases in weight bearing
advanced imaging modalities to demonstrate lesions of the
of the involved limb are recommended. Active ROM
affected muscle and/or tendon can increase confidence in
 and strengthening exercises are added next. Strengthen-
the diagnosis. Ultrasonography is a relatively inexpensive
ing exercises might include stepping over cavaletti poles,
noninvasive imaging modality for canine musculoskeletal
hemi-standing (lifting both front and hindlimbs on one
evaluation with the additional advantages that general
side of the dog's body while balancing on the contralat-
anesthesia is not required and response to treatment can be
eral limbs), standing with the front paws on an elevated
monitored with follow-up imaging. This imaging modality
surface, and use of the wobble board. Hill walking should
depends on the expertise of the operator, which may limit
be added to increase the strength of the pelvic limb mus-
its practical application in some settings. Advanced diag-
culature. A steep hill of approximately 20 to 40 degrees
nostics such as CT scan and MRI may be used to identify
 in incline should be used to slowly walk the dog up the
iliopsoas strains and both are widely used to diagnose
hill. It is important that the dog walks, and does not bunny
acute, stretch-induced muscle injury in human patients.%
 hop or trot, up the hill. Slow walking promotes an equal
 Although CT is valuable for imaging soft tissue lesions,
balance of each hindimb and focuses on the hamstring
the use of MRI has greatly increased the ability to detect
and the gluteal muscles. The dog should be walked up the
subtler lesions.
hill approximately 100 feet and then slowly walked down.
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
603
The downward motion works the iliopsoas muscle in an
jumps with tighter angles. Do not include higher jumps and
eccentric fashion. This can be repeated three to five times
weave poles until late in the retraining period. It has been
and repeated a few times during the week. Acupuncture
 deduced from human rehabilitation that stretching without
may be helpful to assist with pain control and to promote
an appropriate warm-up is detrimental to both the dog's
healing. including the lumbar and lumbosacral region.
tissues and its performance. In fact it is much more impor-
 Joint mobilization and other manual therapy may also be
tant to do an appropriate warm-up than stretching if time
needed to assist with lumbar spine ROM and motion of
does not permit both. Following training and performance,
the coxofemoral joint.
make sure to implement iliopsoas stretching techniques
In chronic iliopsoas strains it is important to reinitiate
(hip extension with abduction) and use an appropriate
the inflammatory process to assist in remodeling of the
 cool-down with ice therapy (5 minutes on, 5 minutes off,
tendon fibers. Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs should
5 minutes on).
be avoided with chronic iliopsoas strains as they impair the
 Regenerative medicine therapy consisting of a combina
inflammatory response. Rehabilitation therapy is recom-
tion of stem cells and platelet rich plasma may be consid-
mended with chronic iliopsoas strains. Modalities might
ered for those cases refractory to conservative medical
include heat, ultrasound, and laser, followed by massage
management and rehabilitation therapy. Injections should
therapy. Be sure to check for pain or discomfort in the
be performed with ultrasound guidance to ensure proper
lumbosacral joint and lumbar region (lower spine) during
placement of cells. This author has had success with this
manipulation. Chronic iliopsoas strains may arise from a
 treatment followed by an appropriate rehabilitative therapy
 problem with mechanics; therefore working on correcting
 program. In more severe cases, additional injections may
the mechanics of movement may help to reduce the strain
be needed.
on the iliopsoas and contribute to its healing. If movement
Surgical treatment may be warranted for those that do
mechanics are not corrected, the condition may not
not respond to conservative medical management and
improve. The exercise progression is similar to that for
rehabilitation therapy. In cases where there are irrevers-
acute iliopsoas strains, but initiating stretching (hip exten-
ible changes to the myotendinous unit, such as fbrosis
sion with abduction) after modalities and massage
is
(forming excess fibrous tissue while healing) of the
advised, as are longer walks. In chronic muscle strain inju-
muscle-tendon junction, surgical treatment by tenotomy/
ries it usually takes longer to recover and progress through
tenectomy (releasing the tendon) or reattachment may be
the stages of healing and exercise because of the chronic
 indicated.7 Surgical intervention should also be consid-
nature of the changes in the myotendinous unit. Education
ered when the strain injury recurs at regular intervals,
of owners/trainers is extremely important because they
although the lesion should be first confirmed with ultraso-
should be instructed to move the dog slowly through the
 nography, CT, or MRI imaging. Good to excellent results 
phases of recovery. Core strengthening and activities
have been reported with dogs retuming to function,
focusing on strengthening of the gluteals and hamstrings,
 although performance dogs may work at a lower level.
as well as the eccentric strength of the iliopsoas, should be
Gracilis and Semitendinosus/Semimembranosus
emphasized. The underwater treadmill, hiking, and hill
work are all appropriate. With regard to aquatic therapy.
Myopathy/Contracture
swimming may aggravate the iliopsoas injury because it
Muscle contracture is defined as "The abnormal shorten-
forces the body to maintain the hip in a shortened or fexed
ing of muscle tissue, rendering the muscle highly resistant
position with more rapid movement of the limbs than
to stretching:8 A contracture can lead to permanent dis-
occurs with walking on an underwater treadmill.
 ability.* There is a significant difference between muscle
When retuming to agility training, weave poles and
contraction and muscle contracture. Contraction refers
tight turms at full jump heights should be avoided during
to the normal physiologic process of muscle shortening,
the early stages of retraining. The risk of reinjury to a
resulting in work. Contracture refers to the abnormal
 previously strained muscle is well established in human
pathologic process resulting in fibrosis and permanent
patients when a previous minor injury often predates a
damage to a muscle. It is important to remember that a
major strain injury. The risk of more significant strain is
muscle can have a significant amount of scar tissue from
 increased when preexisting strain injury has not completely
prior injury and still not be considered a contracture based
healed. This also appears to be the case in canine patients,
on its ability to function. The pathologic process of muscle
in whom pain from iliopsoas strain injuries may recur.
contracture is characterized by replacement of most or
Appropriate wanm-ups, stretching. and retraining are
all of the entire muscle and/or associated tendon with
extremely important in preventing injury and in returming
fibrous connective tissue. This process can take weeks to
the dog to a competitive performance level. Examples of
months and leads to shortening of the affected muscle or
retraining techniques for iliopsoas strains include starting
muscle group. A muscle contracture can also severely
with low, straight-line jumps, and later incorporating very
affect the associated joints by fixing them in fexion or
wide sweeping turms that progress over time to higher
extension. In most cases, response to treatment and
604
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
prognosis is better for muscle contractures of the forelimb
insertion on the caudal surface of the femur distal to the
than the hindlimb.
pectineus, and to the proximo-medial aspect of the tibia. It
Canine muscle contracture is reported to affect several
is responsible for extension of the hip and fexion of the
different muscles, is associated with a number of predis-
stifle joint in the free non-weight-bearing limb.
 posing factors, and has a varied prognosis depending upon 
which muscle is affected. Most patients suffer some
Cause
form of trauma weeks to months before the contracture is
Skeletal muscle tissue cells have a very limited ability for
present. The clinical signs include lameness, pain, weak-
regeneration.10 Repair to damaged muscle tissue begins
ness, decreased ROM, firmness noted throughout the entire
        
muscle, and usually a characteristic gait. Predisposing
 cesses: regeneration of injured tissue by parenchymal cells
factors for muscle contracture include compartment syn-
of the same type, and replacement by connective tissue
drome, infection, trauma, repetitive strains, fractures, infec-
(fibroplasia).1o The balance of the two dictates the amount
tious diseases, immune-mediated diseases, neoplasia, and
of new skeletal muscle tissue or scar tissue produced. It
ischemia. Contractures of the gracilis and semitendinosus/
appears to be this limitation for skeletal muscle cell regen-
semimembranosus may occur individually or concurrently.
eration that drives the formation of scar tissue and inevi-
History associated with a contracture of the gracilis and/or
table fibrosis after skeletal muscle trauma instead of
semitendinosus/semimembranosus typically consists of a
regenerating new cells to replace the damaged muscle.
single or repeated strain injury"9 with a gait abnormality
The exact cause of fbrotic myopathy is usually unknown.
developing after. Gait abnormalities usually start abruptly
The fbrotic myopathy may result from acute trauma,
and progress over a period of 6 weeks to months,40.99 at
chronic repetitive trauma, autoimmune disease, drug reac-
which time the condition becomes static. Locomotion fol-
tions, infections, neurogenic disorders, and vascular abnor-
lowing gracilis contracture is characterized by raising the
malities.1oz Fibrosis and contracture may also result from
affected leg in a jerky fashion with the hock hyperfexed
 ischemia secondary to indirect trauma.102.103 Histologic
 and rotated laterally, the metatarsus rotated medially, and
examination reveals dense, collagenous connective tissue
the overall stride shortened.40.s A shortened stride with a
 in place of muscle.102
rapid medial rotation of the paw, extermal rotation of the
Muscle strains can be characterized by tearing of muscle
hock, and intermal rotation of the stifle mid-stride is noted
fibers, most often at or near the musculotendinous junction,
with contracture of the semitendinosus.9 There appears to
that result from excessive force or stress to the muscle.104
be some breed and age predilection; however, the sex of
Indirect muscle injuries in humans often occur subsequent 
the animal does not have an appreciable influence. Gracilis
 to rapid acceleration during athletic activities.104 The type 
muscle and semitendinosus/semimembranosus contracture
 and severity of injury directly correlates to how healing
most often affects highly active German shepherd dogs and
will occur; predominantly by regeneration of functional
shepherd-related breeds between the ages of 3 and 7
myofbrils or scar tissue formation."7 Fibrosis and contrac-
ture with minimal regeneration results when muscle
forming German shepherd is repetitive strain injury leading
damage is severe. Fibrous scar tissue provides tensile
to secondary contracture.
strength and is involved in the natural healing process of
muscle tissue, however, when excessive, scar tissue limits
Anatomy
 regenerative healing and interferes with muscle contraction
 The gracilis is a broad muscular sheet that arises from the 
and relaxation resulting in mechanical lameness of varying
pelvic symphysis, extends superficially along the caudal
degres,9.10,103.105.106
aspect of the inner surface of the thigh and tapers to its end
along the entire length of the cranial border of the tibia.
 dogs. Therefore it is reasonable to suspect the same mecha-
An aponeurosis expands out into the crural fascia. From
nism of injury may play a role. Findings from a 2002 study
the caudal border, a well-developed reinforcing band
 of canine athletes appears to support this theory suggesting
extends to the calcanean tendon with attachment to the
that excessive activity can lead to muscle strains with
tuber calcaneus. The gracilis is responsible for adduction
resulting infammation, edema, localized hemorrhage, and
of the thigh, extension of the hip, fexion of the stife, and
eventually fibrosis.100
extension of the hock.
Muscle injuries in dogs may be underestimated because
Arising from the tuber ischium, the semitendinosus
of the failure to establish a definitive diagnosis, poor rec-
inserts distally on the medial surface of the tibia, with a
ognition of muscule damage when accompanied by con-
second insertion by means of a fascial attachment to the
current, more severe trauma, and problems with the
tuber calcaneus. It is responsible for extension of the hip
classification of muscle trauma.9.0.10 Muscle injuries are
and tarsal joints and flexion of the stifle joint in the free
said to account for only 5% of reported musculoskeletal
non-weight-bearing limb. The semimembranosus also
 disease.0 Lameness is usually more intense in the acute
arises from the tuber ischium then extends distally with
phase and improves with time. When injured muscle
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
605
undergoes fibrous contraction, mechanical lameness may
with fibrous connective tissue was confimmed histologi-
remain. 00.105.108
cally. A definitive etiology could not be established. Myec-
tomy of the entire gracilis muscle still has a poor prognosis
Diagnosis
because the gait abnormality may returm within 3 to 5
The unique and consistent presentation of gracilis and/or
 months due to semitendinosus involvement.6.40
semitendinousus/semimembranosus contracture allows for
Aggressive rehabilitation following surgery is necessary
effective diagnosis by way of a thorough history, observa-
tO achieve optimal results. Rehabilitation therapy may
tion of gait and physical examination.
consist of continuous ultrasound therapy, manual therapy
Most contractures have a history of acute injury or
and a  home  therapeutic exercise program including
lameness weeks to months before the onset of contracture.
massage and ROM/stretching. Although rehabilitation
The lameness and initial swelling usually subside with
therapy may significantly improve the gait abnormality and
supportive treatment. However, clinical signs of the con-
function of the hindlimb in chronic cases, it may not lead
tracture occur a few weeks later. In most cases there is a
to complete resolution of clinical signs. The sooner the
distinctive hind limb gait abnormality in affected dogs.
condition is recognized, and treatment is initiated, the
The gait is characterized by a shortened stride with a rapid,
better the outcome. Working shepherds with this condition
elastic medial rotation of the paw, intermal rotation of the
may continue to remain on active duty; however, a contin-
hock with extermal rotation of the calcaneus and intermal
ued rehabilitation and home maintenance program is
rotation of the stife during the mid to late swing phase of
crucial. Several altermative therapies are currently under
the stride.
investigation including shockwave therapy and botox
 On physical examination a firm mass within the gracilis,
injections. Stem cell therapy is also being considered due
semitendinosus, or semimembranosus muscle(s) and a
to its anti-fibrotic benefits.
taut, fnm band along the caudomedial aspect of the
Education for all German shepherd and shepherd-
thigh are typically palpable. A stretch of the gracilis-
 related breed owners and handlers is an important compo-
semitendinosus muscle complex (hip fexion and stife
nent to prevention. Appropriate warm-up, active stretching
extension with limb abduction) may elicit pain and spasm.
followedby cool-downs and passive stretching andmassage
Stife extension may be significantly limited in severe
should be performed whenever possible before working
cases.
and events.
 A complete chemistry panel and CBC are usually within
normal limits, although creatinine phosphokinase (CK)
may be elevated. Radiographs of the hindlimb are typically
Conclusion
normal; however, an increased radiopacity may be observed
between the muscle and the lower tendon junction in some
Sporting dogs can have a wide range of sport-related con-
cases. A slightly echogenic muscle may be noted on ultra-
ditions and injuries. A sound knowledge base of structure
sound; however, established fbrosis tissue will appear
and biomechanics and of the sport aids in successful reha-
hyperechoic. Magnetic resonance imaging also may be
bilitative management. In addition, rehabilitative needs
useful for diagnosing this condition in both the acute and
may change as the patient progresses through therapy and
chronic phases. Histopathologic examination of the con-
returms to activity. Therefore appropriate and successful
tracted muscle reveals replacement of degenerating myo-
rehabilitative management requires constant reevaluation
fibers with connective tissue. The findings are consistent
of the patient and modification of the rehabilitation therapy
with primary myopathy caused by polyphasic muscular
program to address those changing needs.
damage (degeneration, segmental necrosis, phagocytosis,
and fibrosis).
REFERENCES
 1. Maganaris C, Narici M, Almekinders L et al: Biomechanics
Treatment
and pathology of overuse tendon injuries: ideas on inser-
Medical management before or in lieu of surgery was
tional tendinopathy, Sports Med 34:1005-1017, 2004.
attempted in a previous report with no apparent response.
2. Yard EE, Schroeder MJ, Fields SK et al: The epidemiology
Fifteen dogs had one or more surgical procedures. Although
of the United States high school soccer injuries, 2005-2007,
transection, partial excision, or complete resection of the
Am J Sports Med 36(10) :1930-1937, 2008.
3. Feeley BT, Powell JW, Muller MS et al: Hip injuries and
affected muscle resulted in resolution of lameness follow-
labral tears in the national football league, Am J Sports Med
ing surgery, lameness recurred 6 weeks to 5 months (mean,
36(11):2187-2195, 2008.
2.5 months; median, 2 months) following surgery. Adjunc-
4. Arrington ED, Miller MD: Skeletal muscle injuries, Orthop
tive medical treatment did not prevent recurrence. Variable
Clin North Am 26(3):411-422, 1995.
replacement of the affected muscle with fibrous connective
5. Taylor J, Tangner CH: Acquired muscle contractures in the
tissue (predominantly along the caudolateral border of the
dog and cat. A review of the literature and case report, Vet
muscle) was evident grossly, and replacement of myofibers
Comp Orthop Traumatot 20:79-85, 2007.
606
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
6. Eaton-Wells RD: Muscle injuries in the racing Greyhound.
 27. Wall CR, Taylor R: Arthroscopic biceps brachi tenotomy
In Bloomberg MS, Dee JF, Taylor RA, eds: Canine sports
as a treatment for canine bicipital tenosynovitis, J Am Anim 
medicine and surgery, Pp 84-91, Philadelphia, 1998, WB
Hosp Assoc 38:169-175, 2002.
Saunders Co.
28. Sano H, Ishii H, Yeadon A et al: Degeneration at the inser-
7. Garrett WE Jr: Muscle strain injuries, Am J Sports Med
tion weakens the tensile strength of the supraspinatus
24(Supp1 6):S2-S8, 1996.
tendon: a comparative mechanical and histological study of
8. PROCEEDINGS ACVS 2012
the bone-tendon complex, J Orthop Res 15:719-726, 1997.
9. Kon E, Filardo G, Di Martino A et al: Platelet-rich plasma
29. Fransson BA, Gavin PR, Lahmers KK: Supraspinatus ten-
(PRP) to treat sports injuries: evidence to support its use.
dinosis associated with biceps brachii tendon displacement
Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc.
in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1416, 1429-1433, 2005.
10. Zaidi N, Nixon AJ: Stem cell therapy in bone repair and
30. Danova NA, Muir P: Extracorporeal shock wave therapy for 
regeneration, Ann NY Acad Sci 1117:62-72, 2007.
supraspinatus calcifying tendinopathy in two dogs, Vet Rec
11. Caplan AI, Dennis JE: Mesenchymal Stem Cells as Trophic
152:208-209, 2003.
Mediators, Journat of Cellular Biochemistry 98: 1076-1084,
31. Devor M, Sorby R: Fibrotic contracture of the canine infra-
2006.
Apes Aq uogusaaid pue AsonoisAydoyed :aosnu smeuids
12. Izadpanah R, Trygg C, Patel B et al: Biologic properties of
surgical intervention, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot 19:117-
mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone marrow and
121, 2006.
adipose tissue, J Cell Biochem 99:1285-1297, 2006.
 32. Pettit GD: Infraspinatus muscle contracture in dogs, Mod 
13. Butler DL, Grood ES, Noyes FR et al: Biomechanics of
Vet Pract 61:451-452, 1980.
ligaments and tendons, Exerc Sport Sci Rev 6:125-181,
33. Dillon EA, Anderson LJ, Jones BR: Infraspinatus muscle
1978.
contracture in a working dog, N Z Vet J 37:32-34, 1989.
14. Zhang J, Wang JH: Platelet-rich plasma releasate promotes
34. Fossum TW: In Merchant T, Barber R, editors: Smalf
 differentiation of tendon stem cells into active tenocytes,
animal surgery, ed 2, St. Louis, 2002, Mosby.
Am J Sports Med 38(12):2477-2486, 2010.
35. Harasen G: Infraspinatus muscle contracture, Can Vet J
15. Torricelli P, Fini M, Filardo G et al: Regenerative medicine
46:751-752, 2005.
for the treatment of musculoskeletal overuse injuries in
 36. Bloomberg M: Muscles and Tendons. In Slatter DH, editor:
competition horses, Int Orthop 35(10):1569-1576, 2011.
Textbook of small animal surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1985,
16. Alderman DD, Alexander RW, Harris GR et al: Stem Cell
Saunders.
Prolotherapy in Regenerative Medicine: background, research
37. Leighton RL: Tenotomy for infraspinatus muscle contrac-
and protocols, Journat of Prolotherapy 3(3):689-708, 2011.
ture, Mod Vet Pract 58:134-135, 1977.
17. Chen L, Dong SW, Liu JP et al: Synergy of tendon stem
38. Siems JJ, Breur GJ, Blevins WE et al: Use of two-
dimensional real-time ultrasonography for diagnosing con-
Res 2011;D01:10. 1002/jot.22033.
tracture and strain of the infraspinatus muscle in a dog, J
18. Xie X, Wang Y, Zhao C et al: Comparative evaluation of
Am Vet Med Assoc 212:77-80, 1998.
MSCs from bone marrow and adipose tissue seeded in PRP-
39. Denny HR: The Shoulder. In Mead O, editor: A guide to
derived scaffold for cartilage regeneration, Biomaterials
canine and feline orthopaedic surgery, ed 3, Boston, 1993,
33(29):7008-7018, 2012.
Blackwell.
19. Richardson LE, Dudhia J, Clegg PD et al: Stem cells in
40. Carberry CA, DR Gilmore: Infraspinatus muscle contrac-
ture associated with trauma in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
tendon after injury, Trends Biotechnot 25(9):409-416,
188:533-534, 1986.
2007.
41. Pettit GD, Chatburn CC, Gerald A et al: Studies on the
 20. Marcellin-Little DJ, Levine D, Canapp SO: The canine
pathophysiology of infraspinatus muscle contracture in the
shoulder: selected disorders and their management with
dog, Vet Surg 7:8-11, 2008.
physical therapy, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 22:171-182,
42. Matava MJ, Whitesides TE, Seiler JG et al: Deterimination
2007.
of the compartment pressure threshold of muscle in a canine
21. Sharma P, Maffulli N: Tendon injury and tendinopathy:
model, J Trauma 37:50-58, 1994.
healing and repait, J Bone Joint Surg Am 87:187-202, 2005.
43. Ricci MA, Corbisiero RM, Mohamed F et al: Replication
 22. Evans HE, editor: Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 3, Phila-
of the compartment syndrome in a canine model: experi-
delphia, 1993, Saunders.
mental evaluation of treatment, J Invest Surg 3:129-140,
 23. Wernham BG, Warman GA, Jarram RM: Bicipital tenosy-
1990.
novitis in dogs, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 30:537-552,
44. Basinger PR, Aron DN, Drowe DT et al: Osteofascial com-
2008.
partment syndrome in the dog, Vet Surg 16:427-434, 1987.
24. Gilley RS, Wallace LJ, Hayden DW: Clinical and patho-
 45. Roe SC: Canine sports medicine and surgery. In Bloomberg 
logic analyses of bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs, Am J Vet
MS, Dee JF, Taylor RA et al, editors: Canine sports medi-
Res 63:402-407, 2002.
cine and surgery, Philadelphia, 1998, Saunders.
25. Cookson JC, Kent BE: Orthopedic manual therapy, an over-
46. Milton JL, Henderson RA: Surgery of muscles and tendons.
view. Part 1. The extremities, Phys Ther 59(2):136-146, 1979.
In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in small animat
26. Brosseau L, Casmiro L, Milne S et al: Deep transverse fric-
surgery, Philadelphia, 1985, Saunders.
tion massage for treating tendonitis, Cochrane Database
47. O'Neill T, Innes JF: Treatment of shoulder instability
System Rev (4):CD003528, 2002.
caused by medial glenohumeral ligament rupture with
Chapter 33
Physical Rehabilitation of the Athletic Patient
607
thermal capsulorrhaphy, J Small Anim Pract 45:521-524,
64. Green DP, McCoy H: Turnbuckle orthotic correction of
2004.
elbow fexion contractures, J Bone Joint Surg (Am)
48. Cook JL, Renfro DC, Tomlinson JL et al: Measurement of 
61(A): 1092, 1979.
angles of abduction for diagnosis of shoulder instability in
65. Nirsch1 RP, Morrey BF: Rehabilitation. In: Morrey BF,
dogs using goniometry and digital image analysis, Vet Surg
editor: The elbow and its disorders, Philadelphia, 1985,
34:463-468, 2005.
Saunders.
49. Devitt CM, Neely MR, Vanvechten BJ: Relationship of
66. Coutts R, Rothe C, Kaita J: The role of continuous passive
physical  examination  test   of  shoulder  instability 
to
motion in the rehabilitation of the total knee patient, Clin.
arthroscopic findings in dogs, Vet Surg 36:661-668, 2007.
Orthop Rel Res 159:126-132, 1981.
50. Cook JL, Tomlinson JL, Fox DB et al: Treatment of dogs 
 67. Dehne E, Tory R: Treatment of joint injuries by immediate 
diagnosed with medial shoulder instability using radiofre-
mobilization based upon the spiral adaptation concept, Clin
quency-induced thermal capsulorrhaphy, Vet Surg 34:469-
Orthop Rel Res 77:218-232, 1971.
475, 2005.
68. Haggmark T, Eriksson E: Cylinder or mobile cast brace
51. Abrams JS, Savoie FH, Tauro JC et al: Recent advances
after knee ligament surgery: a clinical analysis and morpho-
 in the evaluation and treatment of shoulder instability: ante-
logic and enzymatic studies of changes of the quadriceps 
rior, posterior and multidirectional, Arthroscopy 18:1-13,
muscle, Am J Sports Med 7:48-56, 1979.
2002.
69. Noyes FR, Mangine RE, Barber SE: Early knee motion
 52. Miniaci A, Codsi MJ: Thermal capsulorrhaphy for the treat-
after open and arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament
ment of shoulder instability, Am J Sports Med 34(8):1356-
reconstruction, Am J Sports Med 15:149-160, 1987.
1363, 2006.
70. Perkins G: Rest and motion, J Bone Joint Surg (Br)
53. Danielson KC, Fitzpatrick N, Muir P et al: Histomorphom-
35(B):521-539, 1954.
etry of fragmented medial coronoid process in the dog: a
71. Salter RB, Simmonds DF, Malcolm B W et al: The effects
comparison of affected and normal coronoid processes, Vet 
of continuous passive motion on healing of full thickness
Surg 35:501-509, 2006.
defects in articular cartilage, J Bone Joint Surg (Am) 62A:
54. Bottcher P, Werner H, Ludewig E et al: Visual estimation
1232-1251, 1980.
of radioulnar incongruence in dogs using three-dimensional
 72. Salter RB, Hamilton HW, Wedge JH: Clinical application
image rendering: an in vitro study based on computer tomo-
of basic research on continuous passive motion for disor-
 graphic imaging, Vet Surg 38:161-168, 2009.
ders and injuries of synovial joints. A preliminary report of
 55. Punke JP, Hulse DA, Kerwin SC et al: Arthroscopic docu-
a feasibility study, J Orthop Res 1:325-342, 1984.
73. Tipton CM, Mathies RD, Martin RF: Influence of age and
lameness without changes on standard radiographic projec-
sex on strength of bone-ligament junctions in knee joints in 
tions, Vet Surg 38:209-212, 2009.
rats, J Bone Joint Surg (Am) 60(A):230-236, 1978.
56. Cook CR, Cook JL: Diagnostic imaging of canine elbow
74. Wilk KE, Arrigo C, Andrews JR: Rehabilitation of the
dysplasia: a review, Vet Surg 38:144-153, 2009.
elbow in the throwing athlete, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
57. Cook JL, Cook CR: Bilateral shoulder and elbow arthros-
17(6):305-317, 1993a.
copy in dogs with forelimb lameness: diagnostic findings
75. McMaster WC: A literary review on ice therapy in injuries,
and treatment outcomes, Vet Surg 38:224-232, 2009.
Am J Sports Med 5:124-126, 1977.
58. Fitzpatrick N, Smith TJ, Evans RB et al: Subtotal coronoid
76. Lowitzsch K, Hopf HC, Galland J: Changes of sensory
ostectomy for treatment of medial coronoid disease in 263
 conduction velocity and refractory periods with decreasing
dogs, Vet Surg 38:233-245, 2009.
tissue temperatures in man, J Neurot 216:181-188, 1977.
59. Fujiki M, Shineha J, Yamanokuchi K et al: Effects of treat-
77. Akgun K, Korpinar MA, Kalkan MT et al: Temperature
 ment with polysulfated glycosaminoglycan on serum carti-
 changes in superficial and deep tissue layers with respect to
lage oligomeric matrix protein and C-reactive protein
time of cold gel pack application in dogs, Yonsei Med J
concentrations, serum matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9
45:711-718, 2004.
activities, and lameness in dogs with osteoarthritis, Am J
78. Maitland GD: Peripheral maniputation, Butterworth, 1977,
Vet Res 68:827-833, 2007.
Boston.
60. McCarthy G, O'Donovan J, Jones B et al: Randomised
79. Wyke BD: The neurology of joints, Ann Roy Coll Surg
 double-blind, positive-controlled trial to assess the efficacy
(London) 41:25-29, 1966.
of glucos amine/chondroitin sulfate for the treatment of dogs
80. Kottke FJ, Pauley DL, Ptak RA: The rationale for prolonged
with osteoarthritis, Vet J 174:54-61, 2007.
stetching for connective tissue, Arch Phys Med Rehabil
61. Altinel L, Saritas ZK, Kose KC et al: Treatment with unsa-
47:345-352, 1966.
 poni fable extracts of avocado and soybean increases TGF-
81. Sapega AA, Quedenfeld TC, Moyer RA et al: Biophysical
betal and TGF-beta2 levels in canine joint fuid, Tohoku J
factors in range of motion exercise, Arch Phys Med Rehabil
Exp Med 211:181-186, 2007.
57:122-126, 1976.
62. Canapp SO, Acciani D, Hulse D et al: Rehabilitation
82. Warren CG, Lehmann JF, Koblanski JN: Elongation of rat
therapy for elbow disorders in dogs, Vet Surg 38:300-306,
tail tendon: effect of load and temperature, Arch Phys Med
2009.
Rehabil 52:465-474, 1971.
63. Akeson WH, Amiel D, Woo SLY: Immobilization effects 
83. Watten CG, Lehmann JF, Koblanski JN: Heat and stretch
on synovial joints. The pathomechanics of joint contracture,
procedures: an evaluation using rat tail tendon, Arch Phys
Biorheology 17:95-107, 1980.
Med Rehabil 57:122-126, 1976.
608
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
84. Reddy GK, Stehno-Bittel L, Enwemka CS: Laser photo-
97. Akermark C, Johansson C: Tenotomy of the adductor
stimulation of collagen production in healing rabbit Achil-
longus tendon in the treatment of chronic groin pain in
les tendons, Lasers Surg Med 22:281-287, 1998.
athletes, Am J Sports Med 20:640-643, 1992.
85. Mester E, Mester AF, Mester A: The biomedical effects of
98. Blood DC, Studdert VP: Saunders comprehensive veteri-
laser application, Lasers Surg Med 5:31-39, 1985.
nary dictionary, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, Saunders.
86. Speed CA: Review therapeutic ultrasound in soft tissue
 99. Montgomery R, Fitch R: Muscle and Tendon Disorders . In
lesions, Rheumatology 40:1331-1336, 2001.
Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 3,
87. Denegar CR, Saliba E, Saliba S: Electrical stimulation. In
Philadelphia, 2003, Saunders.
Fiscus KA, Kaminski TW, Powers ME, editors: Therapeutic
100. Steiss JE: Muscle disorders and rehabilitation in canine
modalities for musculoskeletat injuries, ed 2, Champaign,
athletes, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 267-285,
 IL, 2005, Human Kinetics.
2002.
88. Levine D, Johnston K, Price N et al: The effect of transcu-
101. Mitchell RN, Cotran RS, Burns DK et al: Repair: Cell
taneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) on dogs with
regeneration, fbrosis, and wound healing. In Kuman V,
osteoarthritis of the stife. Proc of the 32nd Veterinary
Cotran RS, Robbins SL, editors: Basic pathotogy, ed 6,
Orthopedic Society, Snowmass, CO, March 2005.
Philadelphia, 1997, Saunders.
89. Shumway-Cook A, Horak RB: Assessing the infuence of
102. Blebea J, Kerr JC, Shumko JZ et al: Quantitative histo-
sensory interaction on balance, Phys Ther 11:1548-1550,
 chemical evaluation of skeletal muscle ischemia and reper-
1986.
fusion injury, J Surg Res 43:311-321, 1987.
90. Hanson C: Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation. In
103. Nikolaou PK, Macdonald BL，(
Glisson RR et al:
Hall C, Thein Brody L, editors: Therapeutic exercise:
Biomechanical  and  histological  evaluation  of  muscle
moving toward function, ed 2, Baltimore, 2005, Lippincott
after controlled strain injury, Am J Sports Med 15:9-14,
Williams & Wilkins.
1987.
91. Maki BE, Mcllroy WE: Postural control in the older adult,
104. Morelli v, Smith v: Groin injuries in athletes, Am Fam Phys
Clin Geriatr Med 12:635-658, 1996.
64:1405-1414, 2001.
92. Wilk KE, Andrews JR, Amigo CA et al: Preventive and
 105. Vaughan LC: Muscle and tendon injuries in dogs, J Small
rehabilitative exercises for the shoulder and etbow, ed 6,
Anim Pract 20:711-736, 1979.
Birmingham, AL, 200la, American Sports Medicine
106. Piras A: Muscle and tendon injuries and diagnosis, treat-
Institute.
ment and prognosis. In Proceedings of the 13th European
93. Saunders DG: Get on the ball, Chicopee, MA, 2007, Clean
Society of Veterinary Orthopedics and Traumatology Con-
Run Productions.
vention, Munich, 2006.
 94. Kirkendall DT, Garrett WE: Clinical perspectives regarding
107. Johnson JA, Austin C, Breuer GJ: Incidence of canine
eccentric muscle injury, Clin Orthop S81-S89, 2002.
appendicular musculoskeletal disorders in 16 veterinary
 95. Nielsen C, Pluhar E: Diagnosis and treatment of hind limb
teaching hospitals from 1980 through 1989, Vet Comp
muscle strain injuries in 22 dogs, Vet Comp 18:247-253,
Orthop Traumatol 7:56-69, 1994
2005.
108. Lewis DD, Shelton GD, Piras A et al: Gracilis or semiten-
 96. Breur GJ, Blevins WE: Traumatic injury of the iliopsoas 
dinosus myopathy in 18 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp 33:177-188,
muscle in three dogs, JAVMA 210:1631-1634, 1997.
1997.
34
Neurologic Conditions and
Physical Rehabilitation of
the Neurologic Patient
William B. Thomas, Natasha Olby, and Lisi Sharon
General Considerations
      (  )
relaxation.
Typical objectives in rehabilitating the patient with neuro-
Restoring normal function entails a number of exer-
logic disease are to minimize pain, reestablish normal
 cises, including assisted standing, walking, and swimming.
neural pathways, prevent secondary complications, and
 The therapist supports the patient as necessary to give the
ultimately returm the animal to independent function. It is
animal confidence and security when standing and walking.
also essential not to worsen neurologic function or pain in
The center of gravity is just behind the scapula, meaning
patients with spinal instability.
more weight is borme by the thoracic limbs than the pelvic
Neurologic conditions are often very painful. Adequate
limbs in normal animals. The best way of supporting the
analgesia is important to achieve a successful outcome.
animal is to relieve weight from the affected limb(s) and
Pain-free animals are relaxed and cooperative, recover
maintain the center of gravity in the correct place by sup-
faster and more completely, and owners are much happier
porting the patient under the stermum and under the pelvis.
and more compliant with recommendations when their
This minimizes stress on the lumbar vertebrae and allows
pet is comfortable. Pain originates from multiple sources.
the cervical vertebrae to move freely. Patients are not sup-
Nociceptors respond to a variety of stimuli, including
ported under the abdomen because this places pressure on
mechanical (e.g., pinching a toe), thermal (heat, cold), and
abdominal organs and stresses the lumbar vertebrae. Simi-
chemical. Activation of superficial mechanical or thermal
larly a neck collar is not used to support the patient because
nociceptors initiates sharp, pricking pain that is precisely
this puts pressure on the trachea and cervical vertebrae. A
localized and ceases when the stimulus is no longer
harmess that supports the thorax and another to support the
 present. Increased intensity of stimulus activates slower
pelvis are helpful in larger patients.
conducting pain felt as buming or throbbing that is poorly
When the patient is standing, the therapist helps place
localized. With tissue injury and infammation, this type
the limbs in a normal position. The normal stance is a
of pain persists even after the initial injury. Patients with
rectangular configuration in which the feet are at each
neurologic disease can develop neuropathic pain, includ-
comer of the rectangle, with each thoracic limb directly
ing spontaneous pain, paresthesia (tingling, prickling), and
under the shoulders and each pelvic limb under the pelvis.
dysesthesia (paroxysmal shooting, shocklike pain or con-
The spine should be in a straight line from the head to the
tinuous burming pain). One of the most common causes of
tail. With thoracic limb pain, the patient redistributes the
neuropathic pain is intervertebral disk hermiation that com-
weight to the other three limbs, shifting weight and center
 presses or stretches a nerve root.
 Of gravity caudally, resulting in a stance in the configura-
Analgesic and antinflammatory drugs are important
tion of a triangle. The affected limb is placed laterally,
in managing pain in neurologic patients. Rehabilitation
cranially, or caudally and the spine curves toward the unaf-
 modalities are used to supplement medications and reduce
fected side to maintain equilibrium. This posture overloads
drug requirement. Cryotherapy (see Chapter 18) reduces
the hips and knees. When a thoracic limb is paretic and not
pain through the gate control theory described by Melzack
painful (e.g., brachial plexus avulsion), the affected limb
and Wall that is governed by balance between excitation
may be placed caudally and the neck and head may drop
and inhibition in the dorsal hom, slowed nerve conduction
ventrally, shifting the center of gravity cranially.
velocity and increased threshold to nerve stimulation.
If one pelvic limb is affected, the other pelvic limb is
Duration of analgesia lasts at least 30 minutes posttreat-
placed medially, the thoracolumbar spine curves to the
unaffected side, and the head and neck drop ventrally.
lation. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (see
shifting the center of gravity cranially. This increases stress
Chapter 20) also works under the same gate control theory
on the biceps tendons, elbows, and carpi. When both pelvic
(Figure 34-1). Laser therapy (see Chapter 21), and massage
limbs are paretic they tend to be placed medially and the
thoracic limbs are placed laterally and caudally, with the
 paws pointing laterally. The head and neck drop ventrally
From Olby N, Halling KB, and Glick TR: Rehabilitation for the Neurologic Patient, Vet Clin
North Am 5mall Anim Pract 35(6):1389-1409, 2005.
head to shift the center of gravity cranially. This overloads
609
610
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 34-1  Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation applied to
 a patient for pain control.
Figure 34-3  Dry, well-padded bedding and frequent repositioning
 of recumbent patients help prevent pressure sores.
司
Figure 34-2 while the patient is eating. the stance may be cor-
Figure 34-4  Patients with loss of sensation or abnormal sensation
rected and gentle weight shifting exercises may be performed.
are at risk of damaging their limbs from dragging or self-mutilation.
The affected limb(s) should always be protected to prevent trauma.
the shoulders, biceps tendons, elbows, and carpi. The tho-
a normal, upright posture as much as practical minimizes
racolumbar spine is curved dorsally (kyphosis).
many of the adverse effects of recumbency. Patients with
A good time to correct the stance is meal times. Although
loss of sensation or abnormal sensation are at risk of dam-
the patient is occupied with eating. gently correct the
aging their limbs from dragging or self-mutilation (Figure
stance to a normal position (Figure 34-2). Repeat this as
34-4). In these patients, the affected limb(s) should always
needed to maintain a proper stance.
be protected to prevent trauma.
Neurologic patients are at risk of several complications
Specific neurologic diseases and their management are
including shortening of ligaments and tendons, muscle
 discussed in the following sections.
atrophy and contracture, pressure sores, urinary tract infec-
tions, and respiratory tract infections that can develop
Intervertebral Disk Disease
secondary to immobility, recumbency, and altered biome-
chanical stresses. Modalities such as passive range of
Intervertebral disk (IVD) disease is a syndrome of pain or
motion (PROM) and stretching exercises decrease the risk
neurologic deficits, resulting from displacement of part of
of contractures. Dry, well-padded bedding and frequently
the disk. Disks are interposed between each vertebral body
repositioning recumbent patients help prevent pressure
except the first and second cervical vertebrae and each of
sores (Figure 34-3). Bony prominences such as the ischi-
the fused sacral vertebrae. The IVD is situated between
atic tuberosity, greater troc hanter, and xiphoid are inspected
adjacent vertebral end plates and is composed of an outer
frequently to detect early skin lesions. Urine retention is
fibrous ring, the annulus fibrosus, which surrounds an
prevented by urethral catheterization or manual bladder
eccentric amorphous gelatinous center, the nucleus
expression (see Chapter 16). Helping the patient maintain
pulposus.
Chapter 34
Physical Rehabilitation of the Neurologic Patient
611
Intervertebral disk hemiation is a general tenm that
with cervical spondylomyelopathy and is discussed sepa-
refers to displacement of a portion of the disc. Although a
rately. Neck pain is the most common and often the only
 normal disk can hermiate as a consequence of major trauma,
sign of cervical disk disease and is present in approxi-
most hermiations are secondary to preexisting degeneration
mately 90% of affected dogs. This is manifested as low
of the disk. Disk degeneration is associated with decreased
head carriage, stiffness or decreased motion of the neck,
water and proteoglycan concentration. This reduces the
vocalizing, and spasms of the neck muscles. Some dogs
ability of the disk to function as a hydraulic cushion and
exhibit lameness of one or both thoracic limbs, owing to
predisposes to displacement of a portion of the disk. There
nerve root or spinal nerve attenuation (root signature). In
are two types of disk degenerations, chondroid and fibrous 
severe cases, there is ataxia, conscious proprioceptive def-
metaplasia. Chondroid metaplasia is most common in
cits, weakness, or paralysis of all limbs. Spinal refexes are
 chondrodystrophic breeds and causes a progressive trans-
usually normal to exaggerated, although refexes may be
formation of the gelatinous nucleus pulposus to hyaline
weak or absent in the thoracic limbs with caudal cervical
cartilage. This type of degeneration predisposes to disk
disk extrusions and occasionally with more cranial lesions. 
extrusion where disk material is displaced beyond the outer
Other causes of cervical lesions include trauma, neoplasia,
edge of the annulus (also called Hansen Type I).
meningitis, discospondylitis, cervical spondylomyelopa-
 Fibrous metaplasia is an age-related degenerative
thy, and atlantoax ial instability.
 process that occurs in any breed but is more common in
 Treatment options include surgery and nonsurgical
nonchondrodystrophic dogs 7 years of age and older. It is
therapy, with the decision based on the duration and sever-
characterized by a fibrous collagenization of the nucleus
ity of clinical signs. Nonsurgical therapy is indicated as the
 pulposus and degeneration of the annulus fibrosus. Fibrous 
initial treatment in patients with no or mild neurologic
metaplasia predisposes to disk protrusion, in which disk
deficits. The most important aspect of treatment is strict
material is displaced from the disk space but is contained
cage confinement to minimize stress on the damaged
within an intact annulus (also called Hansen Type II).
disk to allow the disk time to heal. A hamess is used
Nonchondrodystrophic breed dogs can also suffer extru-
instead of a neck collar and leash. A short course of anti-
sions and less commonly chondrodystrophic breeds suffer
inflammatory doses of corticosteroids or nonsteroidal anti-
protrusions.2.3
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is administered if necessary
The lifetime prevalence for intervertebral disk disease
for pain control. Muscle relaxants may be beneficial in
is approximately 3.5% and overall mortality rate attributed
some patients with spasm of the cervical muscles. Analge-
to disk disease is about 1%. Miniature dachshunds have
sic drugs without cage confinement are contraindicated
the highest risk, with a lifetime prevalence of 20% and
because they may lead to increased patient activity and risk
 Other chondrodystrophic breeds are also at increased risk.4
further disk extrusion. If the patient does well, cage con-
Diagnosis is based on clinical features and imaging
finement is continued for at least 2 to 3 weeks. About 50%
studies, including radiography, myelography, computed
 of dogs with neck pain caused by disk disease recover with
tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
nonsurgical therapy. Recurrence of signs occurs in about
Survey radiographs are useful at ruling out other diagnostic
one third of patients.
possibilities, such as fractures/luxations, vertebral tumors
Surgery is indicated for patients with substantial neuro-
 and diskospondylitis, but are usually not accurate enough
logic deficits, neck pain unresponsive to appropriate non-
for surgical plamning for intervertebral disk disease.
surgical therapy, or recurrent bouts of neck pain. Removal
Myelography is more accurate than survey radiographs but
 of extruded disk material by a ventral slot to decompress
carries a risk of complications such as seizures and worsen-
the spinal cord and nerve roots is the procedure of choice
ing of neurologic signs. Computed tomography is accurate
in most patients. Dorsal hemilaminectomy may be neces-
for acute extrusions in chondrodystrophic breeds and is
sary for lateral or far-lateral extrusions. In chondrodystro-
noninvasive and usually faster than myelography. However,
phic dogs, prophylactic fenestration of the other disk
CT is not as sensitive for noncalcified hermiations. Mag-
spaces at the time of ventral slot is indicated to decrease
netic resonance imaging is generally considered the best
the risk of extrusion of another disk. Fenestration alone of
diagnostic modality and is accurate and noninvasive, but is
the affected disk is not indicated because it does not allow
also expensive.
removal of extruded disk material.? In dogs with neck pain
 and mild neurologic deficits, the success rate with surgery
Cervical Disk Disease
is about 95%. Nonambulatory dogs have a good outcome
 Cervical disk disease commonly affects small, middle-age 
 in 62% to 100% cases, with small dogs (≤15 kg) having
to older chondrodystrophic breeds, with beagles and
a better prognosis than larger dogs.&.9 Preoperative, intra-
dachshunds having the highest risk.44 The C2-C3 disk
operative, and postoperative management included drugs
space is most commonly affected, with the frequency
 described for medical management. Postoperative physical
 decreasing at progressively more caudal disk spaces. Cer-
rehabilitation is an integral part of the overall care of the
vical disk disease in large-breed dogs is usually associated
patient.
612
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 34-6  Life preserver used for flotation.
Figure 34-5  whirlpool with hydraulic hoist and sling.
limb extension and force on the foot, move the limb slightly
Physical Rehabilitation for Cervical
in all directions. As the refex causes the limb to retract,
Disk Disease
 active, resistance can be achieved by the therapist holding
The most severe cervical injuries cause tetraplegia with a
the foot, creating a gentle "tug-of-war" in which the patient
compromise of respiratory function. It is imperative that
is pulling more forcefully to withdraw the limb from the
respiratory function is evaluated in any tetraplegic animal
therapist's grip. This exercise should be performed for
and that respiratory complications (such as pneumonia or
three to five repetitions per limb, three to four times
hypoventilation) are identified and understood before any
per day.
exercises that may exacerbate the problem.
Assistance should be provided to patients that are able
 Physical rehabilitation as part of medical management
includes massage, heat therapy, electrical stimulation (ES),
ment. Careful use of a sling and hoist may be useful in
therapeutic ultrasound (US), therapeutic laser for muscle
larger nonambulatory patients. Necessary support through
spasms and pain relief. Whirlpool therapy may also be
the chest is provided as needed to invoke as much inde-
cautiously used in patients carefully supported in a sling
 pendent weight bearing as possible. Patients are assisted in
as long as there is no struggling (Figure 34-5).
slow ambulation by placing and moving any limbs with
Postoperative therapy is staged and begins immediately
motor deficits. Assisted walking (tail, sling), propriocep-
 Or within 48 hours of surgery to relieve pain and muscle
tion stimulation, and limb placement exercises facilitate
spasms. Modalities such as cryotherapy, ES, carefully
neuromuscular re-education and proprioceptive function-
administered US, laser and massage may be used based on
ing, as well as muscle strengthening.
the clinical needs of the patient. In ambulatory patients,
Spinal walking is a phenomenon that occurs in cats fol-
neck leashes should not be used, and leashes should be
lowing surgical transection of the spinal cord and occurs
attached to a harmess or across the chest and under one
 ds aas ss  n u re so aos 
thoracic limb.
injury or transection. While these dogs do not regain
Methods of actively eliciting cervical motion begin in
normal motor function, spinal walking may be a functional
the first few days after comfort is achieved and there is no
mode of ambulation for short distances.
pain on movement of the neck. Active range of motion can
 For strengthening, underwater treadmill walking or
be achieved using toys or treats to motivate the patient to
swimming may be initiated after the incision site is healed.
turm the head and neck in all directions. Begin with smaller
The time of suture removal is generally a safe time to start
movements and progress to the point that the patient is able
hydrotherapy. Some therapists start some form of aquatic
to take a toy or treat from near the rear limbs for lateral
therapy earlier, with caution to avoid submersion of the
excursion, between the forelimbs for cervical fexion, and
incision, especially an incision in the ventral cervical
high above the head for extension. Pain-free PROM,
region. In any case, the incision should be sealed, with
 n d n as a ass  a
apposed edges, no discharge or drainage, and no separation
spasms.
of the incision with gentle manipulation of the edges. In
Resistive exercises are used in tetraparetic, paraparetic,
small dogs, a whirlpool may be used for aquatic therapy.
and hemiparetic patients. Pushing on the bottom of the foot
The duration of aquatic therapy depends on the fitness,
of an extended extremity elicits a fexor withdrawal refex
endurance, and ability of the patient. Assistance or life
causing fexion of the limb that stimulates muscles, tendons,
preservers are provided as required (Figure 34-6). If the
ligaments, joints, and bones of the limb. While maintaining
patient does not actively move its limbs through an
Chapter 34
Physical Rehabilitation of the Neurologic Patient
613
adequate range of motion, assistance is given either by
barrowing (Figure 34-11), and increased weight bearing
passively moving the limb(s) or by providing resistance to
with an exercise roll beneath the pelvic limbs (Figure
motion to stimulate the patient to engage the limb against 
34-12). Analogous exercises may be used to strengthen the
the applied resistance.
rear limb muscles, such as walking up inclines, dancing,
Patients can be placed on exercise rolls to strengthen
and weight bearing with the forelimbs on an exercise roll.
 proprioception and joint stability. They may be further
Therapeutic modalities are provided for a minimum of
challenged with mild bouncing and slight movements
 3 weeks. Owners are instructed further in performing
of the ball to create an unstable surface (Figure 34-7).
strengthening exercises after discharge. Continued reha-
Requiring patients to walk on foam, bubble wrap, or an
 bilitation modalities are often prescribed after discharge on
infatable object or challenging them with a rocker board
a recommended weekly schedule.
(Figure 34-8) will also help them to develop stability and
 proprioception. To assist in regaining kinesthetic aware-
Thoracolumbar Disk Disease
 ness, patients can be challenged to step over objects of
Thoracolumbar hermiations are most common from T12-
varying shapes and sizes (Figure 34-9). Small objects
T13 to L1-L2, although other areas may also be affected.
are initially used; the height and width are increased as
dachshunds, cocker spaniels, and beagles and other chon-
the patient progresses. Strengthening the thoracic limbs
drodystrophic breeds are at increased risk.4 Type I extru-
can be achieved by ambulating on land, a dry treadmill
sions are most common in these breeds. Type II protrusions
(Figure 34-10), and deep water and underwater treadmill
are more common in large, nonchondrodystrophic dogs,
hydrotherapy. Additional strengthening exercises include
but large dogs can also suffer acute, Type I extrusions. 10
walking down inclines with variable pitch, wheel
 Onset of signs can be sudden or gradual and depend on
the force, quantity, and location of the disk material and
the duration of disk hermiation. About 10% of affected dogs
have back pain with no neurologic deficits. They are often
reluctant to run, jump, or climb stairs and may have kypho-
sis. Neurologic deficits range from mild ataxia of the pelvic
limbs to complete paraplegia with urinary and fecal incon-
tinence and absent deep-pain perception. The neurologic
deficits may be symmetric or worse on one side. Spinal
reflexes are usually nonmal to exaggerated, but are weak to
absent if the extrusion occurs caudal to L2-L3. In the most
 severe cases, progressive ascending-descending myeloma-
lacia may result. In this syndrome, the spinal cord is
damaged progressively cranial and caudal from the initial
site. This is recognized in patients with an initial thoraco-
lumbar lesion as a loss of pelvic limb refexes, loss of
abdominal muscle tone, cranial migration of the level of
anesthesia and the cutaneous tunic refex, thoracic limb
paresis, and ultimately respiratory arrest. This is a grave
Figure 34-7 Therapy roll used for improving conscious
condition that the therapist should be aware of if the neu-
proprioception.
rologic status deteriorates.
B
Figure 34-8 Rocker boards for rehabilitation. A, Side-to-side motion. B, Forward and backward motion
614
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 34-9 Various-sized rails used as obstacles.
Figure 34-12  Facilitating patient standing using a therapy roll
About 85% of dogs with back pain and no neurologic
 deficits will improve with nonsurgical therapy, as described
for cervical disk disease. Surgery is indicated in patients
with substantial neurologic deficits, or back pain refractory
 s ns e m se  su 
 severe neurologic deficits need urgent surgery. Removal
of extruded disk material via hemilaminectomy is the
procedure of choice in most cases. Fenestration of the
 affected intervertebral disk space is routinely performed.
Prophylactic  fenestration  of other thoracolumbar disk
 spaces reduces recurrence in chondrodystrophic breeds.11
Figure 34-10  Land treadmill.
The prognosis depends in large part on the severity and
duration of the neurologic deficits. The recovery rate for
 nonambulatory dogs with acute extrusions and intact deep
pain perception is 85% to 95%, with most patients regain-
ing ambulation in 1 to 4 weeks. For dogs with loss of
 deep pain perception, the recovery rate is about 50% if
surgery is performed within 24 hours of the loss of deep
pain. This decreases further if surgery is delayed for longer
than 24 hours. The recovery rate for large breed dogs
with chronic protrusions is much lower, ranging from 22%
to 52%.4
Physical Rehabilitation for Thoracolumbar
Disk Disease
Although physical rehabilitation has been used with phar-
macologic intervention in the conservative management
of acute and recurrent thoracolumbar disk disease with
some success, it is important to perform minimal interven-
Figure 34-11  Wheelbarrow exercises.
tion and avoid motions that might risk further hermiation
of disk material for one month; the major application of
 therapeutic modalities is in the postoperative period. The
Other diagnostic considerations  for thoracolumbar
initiation of therapy and protocols used are similar to those
spinal lesions include trauma, fibrocartilaginous embolism,
used for cervical disk patients, but the focus is on the
degenerative myelopathy, discospondylitis, degenerative
pelvic limbs. Patients with thoracolumbar disk disease are
lumbosacral stenosis, neoplasia, meningitis, and orthope-
more likely to have proprioceptive and motor deficits,
dic conditions such as severe hip dysplasia or bilateral
 requiring greater attention to balancing and strengthening
cranial cruciate ligament insufficiency.
activities. Additional nursing care is required such as
Chapter 34
Physical Rehabilitation of the Neurologic Patient
615
bladder management, extending the skills of the veterinary
 assisted by moving the pelvic limbs in a reciprocal walking
therapist and dictating close interaction between the thera-
patterm.
pist and veterinarian.
Ambulation is allowed at controlled paces in patients
Therapeutic modalities and exercises prescribed depend
with motor control. Assisted tail or sling walking and
on the stage of the postoperative period and the neurologic
underwater treadmill hydrotherapy may be used to unload
status of the patient. Control of pain and swelling and the
weight before attaining complete ambulatory indepen-
beginning of exercise are the focus of the initial postopera-
dence. Strengthening exercises are initiated as independent
tive period. Swelling of the surgical site is addressed with
ambulation improves (Figures 34-13 through 34-17). Activ-
 ities include ascending and descending inclines, walking in
using interferential or premodulated interferential wave-
circles or figure eights, walking on terrain with varying tex-
forms. Therapeutic ultrasound must be used with care over
tures (carpet, grass, sand), stepping over objects of varying
the thoracic and lumbar epaxial musculature to avoid gen-
size to regain proprioceptive awareness, and practicing sit-
erating excess heat over the laminectomy site and possibly
to-stand activities for coordination. Nonslip fooring is
damaging nerves and the spinal cord.
ideal to encourage proprioception and appropriate limb
Depending on the neurologic deficits, the patient may
placement. Commercially available booties may provide
be unable to sit, stand, ambulate, or urinate independently.
 protection for dogs that tend to knuckle over on the dorsum
Appropriate supportive care, including bladder manage-
of the paw or drag the paws while ambulating.
ment, must be carefully performed, and there must be close
After the incision has healed, deep water hydrotherapy
communication between the therapist and veterinarian.
may be initiated. Before active movement of the pelvic
Occasionally patients have significant hyperesthesia along
the thoracolumbar areas. In these cases, light massage and
desensitization procedures may be useful. Patients with
significant paraparesis or paraplegia may benefit from
therapeutic exercises designed to help gain trunk control.
One exercise is to assist patients to a sitting position with
decreasing amounts of support until they are able to sit
independently. After this is achieved balance can be chal-
lenged using gentle perturbation exercises on firm surfaces
initially, and then progressing to unstable surfaces such as
 an exercise roll, foam mats, bubble wrap, or pillows. It may
be helpful for the therapist to be positioned caudal to the
patient and place the hands on the cranial stifle to help keep
them extended to maintain a weight bearing position.
Russian or biphasic ES to the muscles of the pelvic limbs
may be used to induce stife and hock extension and
fexion, as tolerated by the patient.
Figure 34-13  Facilitation of weight bearing on rear limbs using a
Standing exercises may begin as soon as treatment is
therapy roll.
 initiated. Appropriate support is provided while placing the
patient in a standing posture to ensure some loading of the
pelvic limbs and correct positioning of the feet. To promote
correct stance, support the patient under the chest and
 pelvis and place the limbs in the correct stance twice daily
while the patient is eating. This fosters continued extension
of the limbs by proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation
and allows the patient to remain in the standing position
for a longer period of time. This can be performed on a
firm surface or with the patient supported by an exercise
roll. Gently allow the dog to intermittently bear weight. If
the patient tends to sink down, tickle the perineal region to
stimulate extension of pelvic limbs. After the patient is able
to maintain a standing position, pressure is applied to the
pelvic limbs by pressing on the dorsal aspect of the pelvis.
Gentle perturbations are applied from all angles while the
patient is standing so that it is challenged to maintain sta-
bility and a standing position. Early ambulation may be
Figure 34-14   Platform used to facilitate limb placement.
616
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 34-17   Dancing exercise.
Figure 34-15
 Platform used to facilitate weight bearing and limb
strengthening.
 can urinate voluntarily. Taking several dogs together will
sometimes induce urination as the patient sees and smells
other dogs urinate. If the patient does not urinate com-
pletely after an adequate amount of time, palpate to check
bladder size. If full the bladder is manually expressed.
Urine samples are periodically obtained to identify and
 treat any infection.
A minimum of 3 weeks of physical rehabilitation is
recommended. Frequently this is extended to continue
facilitating recovery. The degree of success in rehabilita-
 tion of thoracolumbar disk disease varies greatly and may
take several months of dedicated treatment by the therapist
and owner.
 Degenerative Lumbosacral Stenosis
Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis is a degenerative disor-
der resulting in stenosis of the vertebral canal causing
compression of the lumbosacral nerve roots or cauda
equina. In most adult dogs the caudal end of the spinal cord
Figure 34-16  An individual limb exercise.
is located at the level of the L6-7 disk. The nerve roots
originating in the L6, L7, sacral, and caudal spinal cord
 segments course from the distal end of the spinal cord to
limbs, swimming benefts the trunk muscles, aiding the
exit their respective foramina. This collection of nerve
patient's overall stability. Active movement of the pelvic
roots is called the cauda equina.
limbs may be elicited by applying resistance to the paw,
Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis occurs when soft
stimulating the medial aspect of the stife, or fexing
tissue and bony changes, possibly in conjunction with
the hock.
abnormal motion of the lumbosacral joint, impinge on the
In patients that are unable to urinate voluntarily, pre-
nerve roots of the cauda equina. The most common change
venting urine retention is essential. Initially, this may
is protrusion of the L7-S1 disk, but osteophytes of the
require intenmittent or continuous urethral catheterization
 articular facets and hypertrophy of the interarcuate liga-
or bladder expression. After the catheter is removed the
ment and articular facet joint capsule may also cause nerve
dog is taken outside three times daily to see if the patient
root compression.
Chapter 34
Physical Rehabilitation of the Neurologic Patient
617
Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis is most common in
Nonsurgical treatment is  appropriate initially  for
middle-aged, large-breed dogs. Genman shepherd dogs are
patients with mild pain and entails strict rest, antinfam-
the most commonly affected breed. Working dogs and
 matory or analgesic medications, and weight loss if neces-
other large-breed dogs, including boxers, rottweilers, and
sary. Epidural injections of glucocorticoids improve signs
 Doberman Pinschers, are also at increased risk. 12
in many patients and avoid the complications associated
 Pain and lameness are usually more prominent than
with long-tenm administration of oral steroids.14 Physical
frank neurologic deficits because stenosis affects the cauda
rehabilitation also may be useful in the medical manage-
equina, which is more resistant to damage from compres-
ment of lumbosacral disease.
sive forces compared with the spinal cord. The most
Surgery is indicated when there is persistent pain or
common sign is lumbosacral pain, characterized by reluc-
neurologic deficits. The most common procedure is dorsal
tance to work or participate in normal activity, run, jump,
laminectomy of L7-S1 with excision of the protruded
or climb stairs. Affected dogs often maintain a character-
disk and foraminotomy if necessary. Some surgeons also
istic posture, keeping their lumbosacral joint fexed, which
include fusion of the L7-S1, but it is unclear in which
 decreases nerve root compression. Tail weakness, urinary
 patients this is necessary. Resolution of pain is good, with
or fecal incontinence, and pelvic limb lameness or weak-
ness can also occur. On examination, palpation or exten-
working dogs, 67% to 80% of patients are able to retum
sion of the lumbosacral joint and elevation of the tail
to work.19.20 Only about 25% of patients with incontinence
usually induces pain. Other findings may include a weak
have a retum of continence, and more than a 2-week dura-
perineal reflex, proprioceptive positioning deficits in one
tion of incontinence carries a poor prognosis. 6 Recurrence
or both pelvic limbs, and decreased hock fexion when
of clinical signs occurs in about 18% of patients.15
eliciting a fexor withdrawal reflex. The differential diag-
nosis includes other lesions of the lumbosacral region
Physical Rehabilitation for Degenerative
Lumbosacral Stenosis
(discospondylitis, neoplasia), degenerative myelopathy,
fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy, orthopedic dis-
Physical rehabilitation is beneficial as part of the medical
eases (hip arthritis, cruciate rupture), trauma, and urogeni-
and postoperative management of lumbosacral disease.
tal diseases, such as prostatic disease.
In combination with medication, therapeutic modalities
Diagnosis is based on clinical features and imaging.
focusing on pain management, such as ES protocols and
 Survey radiographs may be normal or reveal chronic non-
 therapeutic US, massage therapy, and aquatic therapy are
specific changes to the lumbosacral region, including
prescribed. Surgical patients are provided routine care of
sclerosis of the vertebral end plates, ventral spondylosis
the incision site with icing and limited ES for pain manage-
 deformans, and arthritis of the articular facets. Myelogra-
ment while hospitalized. Therapists should be informed
phy is useful in assessing the caudal region of the lumbar
of the type and location of any implants. Continued care
spine, but will not identify lumbosacral stenosis when the
 consists of cage or crate confinement with assisted walking
dural sac ends cranial to the lumbosacral junction, which
for 3 weeks after discharge. Physical rehabilitation then
happens in about 25% of large-breed dogs. Although con-
resumes following reassessment of the patient and radio-
trast radiography may provide evidence of static and
graphs if fusion was performed. Standard protocols are
dynamic compression, definitive diagnosis and localization
prescribed for strengthening and muscle re-education,
are best made on CT and MRI' (Figure 34-18).
including ES, passive range of motion, standing exercises,
leash walking, proprioceptive and gait training, core muscle
strengthening, and aquatic therapy (Figure 34-19). As with
most protocols, therapy continues for a 3- to 6-week period
 and is lengthened if necessary.
Cervical Spondylomyelopathy
Cervical spondylomyelopathy, also called caudal cervical
stenotic myelopathy or wobbler syndrome, is a disorder
caused by abnormal development of the cervical vertebrae
resulting in compression of the spinal cord. Middle-aged
(7-9 years) Doberman pinschers and young (1-4 years)
giant-breed dogs (Great Danes, mastiffs, rottweilers,
Figure 34-18  Sagittal plane MRl showing protrusion of the L7-S1
Bermese, and Swiss mountain dogs) are most commonly
disk (arrow) with compression of the cauda equine. L7, The L7 verte-
affected.? The specific pathologic changes vary, but may
bral body.
include stenosis of the vertebral canal, bony enlargement
618
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 34-20  Myelography of cervical spondylomyelopathy. There
is compression of the spinal segments dorsal to the C5-C6 disk space
(white arrow). There is a second, less severe lesion dorsal to the
C6-C7 disk space (black arrow), which is narrowed.
leash, and unsupervised activity is avoided. A body harmess
is worm instead of a neck collar. Antinflammatory doses
Figure 34-19  Deep water hydrotherapy.
of corticosteroids such as prednisone are often helpful. In
one study, 54% of patients treated medically improved and
 27% remained unchanged over the long term.22
Surgery is indicated in patients with substantial neuro-
of the articular facets, disk protrusion, capsular and liga-
logic deficits and those that do not adequately respond to
ment proliferation, synovial cysts, and vertebral instability.
nonsurgical treatment. The goals of surgery are to relieve
The C5-C6 and C6-C7 vertebrae and disk spaces are most
any spinal cord compression and stabilize vertebral insta-
commonly affected.
bility. The particular technique chosen is based on the
Clinical signs may be acute or slowly progressive. Mild
specific changes evident on imaging and surgeon prefer-
cases are characterized by subtle ataxia of all limbs, often
ence, and may include ventral slot decompression, dorsal
evident as swaying and increased stride length in the pelvic
laminectomy, or distraction and fusion of affected verte-
limbs, with a short-strided gait in the thoracic limbs.
brae. Overall 70% to 80% of patients improve after surgery,
Because of the anatomic arrangement of the long spinal
with a mean time to reach maximum improvement of 2.6
tracts to the pelvic limbs, the clinical signs are usually
months. About 20% suffer recurrence. There is no clear
more pronounced in the pelvic limbs. Gait deficits are typi-
difference among different surgical techniques.22.23 After-
cally most evident at a slow walk and are less obvious at
care is a major part of the treatment, requiring significant
a fast walk or trot. Additional signs vary and may include
 intervention and effort of the caregiver.
low head carriage and neck stiffness. In severe cases there
is paresis or paralysis of all limbs. Neck pain is variable,
Physical Rehabilitation for Cervical
but is more likely in acute cases. The differential diagnosis
Spondylomyelopathy
includes congenital anomalies, trauma, meningomyelitis,
discospondylitis, neoplasia, and degenerative, ischemic,
Physical rehabilitation plays a significant role in patient
and embolic conditions.
 care. Modalities directed toward decreasing muscle spasms,
Definitive diagnosis is based on spinal imaging. Survey
such as US and ES, passive range of motion of limbs, and
radiographs may be normal or show abnormally shaped
 support with a soft sling to provide assisted standing and
vertebra, narrowed disk space(s), and osteoarthritis of the 
weight bearing, may be used in nonambulatory patients.
articular facets. Myelography, CT-myelography, or MRI is
Assisted sling walking and assisted aquatic therapy are
necessary to fully characterize the specific changes and is
useful to help patients regain unassisted ambulation. Neu-
essential if surgery is considered (Figure 34-20). Hypothy-
romuscular ES for muscle building and re-education is
roidism, von Willebrand disease, and cardiomyopathy are
performed in selected cases. As ambulation improves and
relatively common in middle-age Dobermans, so thyroid
strength is gained, unassisted deep-water and underwater
testing, buccal mucosal bleeding time, and chest radio-
treadmill therapy may be started. Gait training and strength-
 graphs are indicated in affected Dobermans.
ening exercises are incrementally implemented. Modalities
Treatment is based on the severity of the neurologic
used must be compatible with the patient's neurologic
signs, the results of diagnostic imaging, quality-of-life
status and the stage of wound healing in the postoperative
issues, and the wishes of the owner. Nonsurgical treatment
period. Extended time in rehabilitation is often necessary
consists primarily of exercise restriction to minimize vig-
for proper management of these cases because of the dif-
orous activity that would exacerbate the dynamic compo-
ficulties in managing large and giant breeds in a home
nent of spinal cord compression. Dogs are walked on a
environment.
Chapter 34
Physical Rehabilitation of the Neurologic Patient
619
 There is no specific treatment for this condition. Corti-
costeroids are sometimes used although there is little evi-
 dence that any drug is beneficial. Nursing care and physical
rehabilitation play an essential role in promoting recovery
and preventing complications. About 85% of patients
recover, depending on the severity of the deficits and
Owner's commitment.26
Physical Rehabilitation for Fibrocartilaginous
Embolic Myelopathy
Modalities and techniques used are similar to those used
for patients with intervertebral disk disease. Rehabilitation
techniques vary depending on the location of the lesion and
the degree of damage to the spinal cord. Depending on the
Figure   34-21  Photomicrograph  of  fibrocartilaginous  embolic
severity of the condition, the patient may have increased
myelopathy. There is a piece of fibrocartilage (arrow) occluding one
muscle tone and spasticity, or decreased muscle tone and
of the vessels in the spinal cord. There is necrosis of the adjacent
faccidity. In general, ES, passive range of motion of 
 portion of the spinal cord (hematoxylin eosin with PAS stain).
affected joints, aquatic therapy, and assisted ambulation are
early modalities that may be used. Continued ES, assisted
sling walking, deep water aquatic therapy, and gait and
Fibrocartilaginous Embolic Myelopathy
strength training are performed as the patient improves.
 Nonambulatory patients require increased nursing care,
Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy (FCEM) is an
including appropriate bladder care, assistance with ade-
acute infarction of the spinal cord caused by a vascular
quate nutrition and fuid intake, and appropriate monitor-
embolus of fibrocartilage, probably originating from the
ing to ensure cleanliness and comfort. Patients should be
intervertebral disk (Figure 34-21). Adult large- Or giant-
repositioned every 4 to 6 hours to prevent decubital sores.
breed dogs and miniature schnauzers are most commonly
A positioning protocol should be initiated immediately. If
affected. This disease is less common in small dogs, chon-
increased tone to the limb(s) is present, at-risk muscles are
drodystrophic dogs, and cats.
The onset is sudden and often associated with activity
joints and muscles at risk of developing contracture and
such as running or playing. Neurologic deficits rarely pro-
adaptive shortening is performed regularly, typically three
gress beyond the first few hours. Although patients some-
to six times daily. Passive range of motion or active assisted
times yelp as if in pain at the onset of signs, spinal pain is
range of motion and stretching using the body weight and
rarely evident by the time of examination. This lack of
movement of the body in closed-chain activities can be
focal spinal pain is helpful in ruling out other causes of
effective. Slow rhythmic bouncing on a therapy ball assists 
acute spinal diseases, such as fracture/luxation and disk
in decreasing hypertonia and allows for more effective
extrusion. Any region of the spinal cord may be affected,
muscle stretch and more normal movement patterms.
and the spinal cord segments involved dictate the specific
If the patient is unable to sit or stand independently.
neurologic defcits. Ataxia, paresis, or paralysis may affect
assistance to these positions, with proper joint alignment,
the pelvic limbs or all limbs. Asymmetric or unilateral
should be promptly initiated. Placing the patient over a
 deficits are common. Lower or upper motor neuron deficits
small therapy ball with the feet still in contact with the
may result. In severe cases there is loss of deep pain per-
foor assists in maintaining a standing position (see Figure
ception caudal to the lesion.24.25
34-12). It is important to provide weight bearing on the
Diagnosis is based on the clinical features and exclusion
affected limbs while maintaining a standing position.
of other causes. Essential features of FCEM are the signal-
Weight shifting in functional planes of movement also
ment, sudden onset, nonprogressive course, lack of focal
may be initiated in this position. If working only with the
spinal pain, and often the asymmetry of deficits. The dif-
pelvic limbs, the torso and front limbs may be placed on
ferential diagnosis includes intervertebral disk disease,
the ball while the pelvic limbs are worked in a weight-
trauma, neoplasia, and inflammatory disease. Radiographs
bearing position.
and myelography are typically normal, although myelog-
 Finm, deep pressure through manual contacts activates
raphy occasionally shows focal spinal cord swelling.
the tactile receptors, neuromuscular proprioceptive path-
Cerebrospinal fuid analysis is nonspecific. Magnetic reso-
ways, and sensory awareness. Proper hand placement pro-
nance imaging is the best imaging modality and usually
vides security and support to unstable body segments and
shows signal changes suggestive of focal spinal cord
may stimulate contraction of the muscles under the hands
infarction.26
 of the therapist (Figure 34-22). Applying approximation
620
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Figure 34-23  Myelography showing a spinal tumor (meningioma)
at the level of L1. There is a well-defined filling defect (arrows) outlin-
ing the mass.
osteosarcoma, multiple myeloma, fibrosarcoma, chondro-
sarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, and lymphosarcoma. Extra-
dural lymphosarcoma is the most common spinal tumor in
cats and may be secondary to infection with the feline
Figure 34-22  Assisted standing exercise.
leukemia virus. Subarachnoid tumors include nerve sheath
tumors, meningioma, lymphosarcoma, and neuroepitheli-
oma. Intramedullary tumors include glioma, lymphosar-
and compression joint mobilization techniques facilitate
coma, and hemangiosarcoma. Metastatic tumors, including
 postural extensor and stabilizers and enhances body aware-
metastatic carcinomas and sarcomas, may occur in any
ness. Approximation of the affected joints can be achieved
location. Spinal neoplasia is more common in middle-aged
by bouncing the patient while it is sitting on a therapy ball
or older animals. However, neuroepithelioma affects
 Or weight bearing over a ball, and through manual com-
 young, large breed dogs, and lymphoma may affect a cat
pression of the joints. Providing intermittent pressure
at any age.
 Clinical signs are typically insidious and progressive
mation of affected joints in patients with pelvic limb dys-
but can be acute. Focal spinal pain is the most common
function that are able to assume a standing position.
initial sign. Later ataxia and paresis may develop as the
Deep water hydrotherapy is also used to stimulate
spinal cord becomes progressively affected. Systemic
muscle activity and motor learming (see Figure 34-19).
signs, such as weight loss, may occur with metastatic
 Depending on the functional level of the patient, life pre-
cancer. Nerve sheath tumors often present as chronic
servers or manual assistance in the pool may be necessary
lameness of one limb that can be difficult to differentiate
to ensure safety (see Figure 34-6). This assistance also
from orthopedic disease. Eventually, muscle atrophy and
allows the therapist to more easily provide reciprocal
neurologic deficits develop. Intramedullary tumors may
movements to the affected limbs. Assisting the patient to
 present with progressive neurologic signs without evidence
stand in shallow water or weight bearing on the pelvic
of pain.
limbs with the forelimbs elevated are also useful treatments
 Diagnosis is based on clinical features, and diagnostic
in the pool.
imaging. If neoplasia is suspected, chest radiographs are
Assisted ambulation with manual reciprocal placement
 indicated to screen for metastasis. Spinal radiographs may
of the patient's feet may stimulate motor memories and
show abnormalities in cases of vertebral tumors, although
initiate motor leaming. Sling or tail walking aids ambula-
initial changes may be subtle. Myelography is helpful in
tion. As the patient improves, the use of an underwater
identifying spinal cord compression (Figure 34-23). Com-
treadmill or land treadmill further benefits strengthening
puted tomography, CT-myelography, and MRI are more
and gait training. Standard 3-week rehabilitation protocols
sensitive. Definitive diagnosis often requires surgical
 may be lengthened in those patients experiencing a slower
exploration and biopsy.
recovery.
 Medical management may provide temporary relief of
 pain and weakness to maintain a reasonable quality of life
Neoplasia
for a short period of time. Generally this consists of judi-
cious activity, analgesics, and corticosteroids. Chemother-
Spinal tumors are classified by their location as extradural,
apy may be appropriate for specific tumor types. Definitive
subarac hnoid (intradural-extramedullary), and intramedul-
treatment usually consists of surgery. The goal is to obtain
lary. Extradural neoplasia is most common and includes
tissue for histopathologic diagnosis, relieve compression
Chapter 34 
Physical Rehabilitation of the Neurologic Patient
621
on the spinal cord, decrease the tumor volume before radia-
is to confinm the localization, classify any fracture/luxation
tion therapy, or completely remove the tumor, depending
as stable or unstable, and try to determine if there is any
 On the location, size, and type of tumor. Radiation therapy
persistent spinal cord compression that may require
may be used as a primary treatment or as an adjunct to
surgery. The two components of the spine that maintain
surgery, depending on tumor type. The prognosis depends
stability are (l) the dorsal compartment, consisting of the
On the tumor type.
articular facets and lamina, and (2) the ventral compart-
ment, consisting of the vertebral bodies and intervertebral
Physical Rehabilitation for Neoplasia of the
disk. Damage to one of these components usually does not
Spinal Column
result in severe instability, whereas damage to both the
Postoperative physical rehabilitation protocols are gener-
 dorsal and ventral components usually requires fixation to
ally similar to those used in the rehabilitation of patients
prevent further displacement. Myelography or CT is indi-
after intervertebral disk decompression. One essential
cated if survey radiographs are normal or inconclusive.
difference, however, is that protocols must generally be 
Routine chest and abdominal films also may be indicated
stepped down rather than stepped up as the disease
to determine other body systems affected by the trauma.
progresses and the condition and ability of the patient
The decision to treat the patient is based on the severity
diminish.
of the neurologic deficits, the type of vertebral injury,
the severity of any concurrent injuries, and the owner's
Trauma
understanding of the risk, prognosis, and expense of the
 injury and treatment. Animals with mild neurologic deficits
 Major trauma can result in various head and spinal lesions,
caused by cervical injuries or stable thoracolumbar injuries
depending on the anatomic location. A thorough history
often recover with nonsurgical therapy. This consists of 4
usually documents the presence and mechanism of trauma,
to 6 weeks of complete cage rest, with very cautious move-
although the cause is sometimes unknown or surmised by
ment of the animal to assist it with posturing to urinate and
concurrent findings if the accident is not witnessed. Auto-
defecate. Weight bearing is generally not encouraged,
mobile accidents, gunshot wounds, falls, and dog fight
unless the vertebral column is stable. Sometimes an exter-
injuries are common. Spinal injuries may consist of verte-
 nal splint is used in conjunction with cage rest.?8
bral luxation, vertebral fracture, vertebral fracture/luxation,
 Indications for surgery include (1) unstable fracture/
or traumatic IVD hermiation.
luxation, usually evident on imaging by disruption of
In any trauma patient, full assessment of all body
the dorsal and ventral components of the vertebrae; (2)
systems is essential to diagnose and treat shock and any
persistent compression of the vertebral canal, evident as
other injuries. A neurologic examination is performed to
a substantially displaced fracture/luxation or extradural
localize the injury and determine the severity of the defi-
compression of the spinal cord on myelography, CT, or
cits. It is vital that the examination be carefully performed,
 MRI; and (3) progressive deterioration in neurologic status
minimizing movement of the patient to avoid further
despite conservative treatment, usually owing to an unsta-
damage to the spinal cord as a result of instability of the
ble fracture/luxation or progressive spinal cord compres-
spinal column. Assessment of mentation, cranial nerves,
sion from hemorrhage or disk extrusion.28
voluntary movement, and spinal refexes, as well as head
Surgery usually involves decompression of the spinal
and spine palpation, is performed, but moving the patient
cord and fixation of unstable vertebrae. The choice of fixa-
to test gait and postural reactions is avoided until unstable
tion technique depends on the size of the animal, the type
spinal injuries are ruled out with radiographs. The presence
and location of the injury, and the surgeon's preference and
Or absence of deep pain caudal to the injury is the most
experience. In general, dorsal techniques (spinal staples,
important prognostic sign; lack of deep pain sensation after
dorsal spinal plates, and modified spinal instrumentation)
are indicated if the ventral components of the vertebrae are
recovery.
intact. Ventral techniques (vertebral body plates, pins/
 Following initial assessment and stabilization, appro-
screws, and bone cement) are stronger and can be used
priate analgesics are administered. Methylprednisolone
with dorsal and ventral component injuries (Figure 34-24).
(30 mg/kg IV, then 1 hour later 5.4 mg/kg per hour IV
A laminectomy to decompress the spinal cord from inter-
infusion for 24 to 48 hours) may improve the chance of
vertebral disk material, ligament, or bone may be neces-
recovery from severe spinal cord injury if started within 8
sary before fixation. Extermal splints of light casting
hours of injury. However, conclusions from human clinical
material  or  moldable  thenmoplastic  materials  provide
trials are controversial and there are no published con-
some stability and are most applicable to thoracic, cranial
lumbar, and cervical regions. Splints may create sores and
graph of the affected region of the spine is obtained when
have the potential for creating complicated wounds that
the patient is stable. If dorsoventral views are necessary, a
require additional care. Splints may also be used as an
horizontal beam view is safest. The purpose of radiography
adjumct to intermal fixation.?
622
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Nerves must be in a Schwann cell environment for this
regeneration to occur. Peripheral nerve injuries have three
levels of severity. In neurapraxia, axonal conduction is lost
without disruption of the axon. This injury usually results
from compression, transient ischemia, or blunt trauma.
Loss of conduction may be a result of myelin damage or
insufficient energy to maintain ax onal resting potential. In
axonotmesis the axon integrity is lost, but the endoneurium
and Schwann cell sheath it lies within are still intact, pro-
viding the opportunity for regeneration back to the correct
C1
target. Successful regeneration may occur, particularly if 
the axon is damaged close to its target. In neurotmesis the
entire structure of the nerve is disrupted. The axon has the
ability to regenerate but needs to find a Schwann cell
sheath to do so, making it much more difficult.
Peripheral nerve lesions can cause unpleasant abnormal
sensations (paresthesia) and hyperesthesia, both of which
can result in self-mutilation. Another sequel to denervation
of a muscle is severe muscle atrophy, which over time may
lead to muscle contracture and, in growing animals, to
skeletal deformities.
Localization of the lesion is based on the neurologic
examination, which indicates the patterm of muscle dener-
vation and sensory loss. It is useful to refer to references
depicting the cutaneous sensory zones of peripheral
nerves.29.30 Severity of the lesion is determined by assess-
ing the level of motor function and assessing for deep
pain sensation. Electrophysiologic evaluation of the
B
muscles and nerves using electromyography and nerve
Figure 34-24 Surgery for a spinal fracture/luxation. A, There is
conduction velocity studies allows a more detailed
a fracture of C2 with dorsal displacement of C2 relative to C1.
 description of the severity and course of the injury.
B, Postoperative view. The injury has been repaired with a plate and
Muscles that are completely denervated develop spontane-
screws affixed to the ventral aspect of C1, C2, and C3.
 Ous electrical activity when at rest, although such changes 
do not appear for at least a week after denervation of a
muscle. Nerve conduction studies should be interpreted
Physical Rehabilitation for Traumatic Injuries
with care. Immediately after an injury, conduction may
Physical rehabilitation protocols and modalities are similar
be lost across the site of injury, whereas the distal portion
to those used for rehabilitation of lumbosacral decom-
of the disrupted nerve can continue conducting for a
 pression/stabilization and cervical spondylomyelopathy
period of hours to days. As nerves regenerate and sprout
patients. Wound care is discussed in detail in chapter 36
to innervate denervated muscles, the size of motor units
for those patients that develop cast wounds. Extended care
increases; therefore the size of motor unit potentials on
and therapy beyond the standard 3-week rehabilitation pro-
the EMG increases.31.32
tocol may be required in some cases.
As a rule neurotmesis carries a poor prognosis unless
immediate surgical intervention to reconnect the severed
Peripheral Nerve Injury
nerve occurs. Animals with axonotmesis or neurapraxia
carry a better prognosis. Neurapraxia usually reverses
Common causes of peripheral nerve injury include frac-
within 2 weeks of injury, although damage to myelin slows
tures (e.g., femoral fracture that damages the sciatic nerve),
recovery to 4 to 6 weeks.
intramuscular injection (usually affecting the sciatic nerve),
The recovery from axonotmesis is govemed by the
traumatic brachial plexus nerve root avulsion, and poor
proximity of the injury from the target muscle, the severity
surgical technique. Vascular injuries can also occur, the
of muscle atrophy, and the development of contractures. If
 most common of which is iliac thrombosis in cats causing
the damage has occurred far from the target muscle (e.g..
a distal sciatic neuropathy, but thrombosis of the brachial
at the brachial plexus), by the time the axon has regrown,
artery can also cause thoracic limb monoparesis. Axons in
severe muscle atrophy and contractures could limit
recovery.
Chapter 34 
Physical Rehabilitation of the Neurologic Patient
623
Brachial plexus injuries tend to involve the caudal two
is required to support its body weight as the hind limbs
thirds of the plexus (radial, median, ulnar, and lateral tho-
are lowered to the ground.
racic nerves and the sympathetic innervation of the head)
Patients with mild radial nerve deficits beneft from
or the complete plexus, although cranial plexus injuries
being challenged to bear weight on their forelimbs. Patients
have been reported.31 It is easy to be misled when evaluat-
who lack elbow or carpal extension (e.g., brachial plexus
 ing animals with caudal plexus injuries, because there is
 avulsion) have great diffculty or are unable to perform this
 preservation of musculocutaneous function and elbow
activity until some extensor muscle tone is present. The
fexion. This function is not useful for recovery of the
exercise is performed by placing the patient in a standing
ability to bear weight and should not be used to determine
position while supporting the trunk and thoracic limbs.
the prognosis. Instead, it is important to test deep pain
With the animal's front feet placed squarely on the ground,
 perception, particularly in the lateral digit.33 The absence 
the amount of support is gradually reduced. When the
of deep pain in this digit implies severe radial nerve injury.
 patient starts to collapse in the thoracic limbs, support is
 If it does not reappear within 2 weeks of injury, the prog-
provided to the animal and it is retumed to a standing posi-
nosis for recovery of useful motor function in that limb is
tion. A balance ball or custom orthotics may similarly be
guarded.
 used to support the patient. Orthotics are described in more
 In peripheral nerve inures, sensation must be consid-
 detail in Chapter 17. The exercise is repeated 5 times, two
 ered. Dogs experiencing anesthesia, paresthesia and hyper-
to three times per day.
esthesia may injure their limbs by not recognizing when
Active exercises are designed to improve muscle
the limb may be caught on an object, dragging the limb
strength, neuromuscular balance, and coordination in
and causing damage, or by self-mutilation caused by the
Jo uao ren as isea n aa oum su
unpleasant sensations.
their limbs. Patients with peripheral nerve disease affecting
more than one limb may not be able to do some of these
Rehabilitation for Peripheral Nerve Injury
activities. Patients with sciatic nerve deficits can often
The goals of a rehabilitation program for patients with
perform sit-to-stand exercises because these exercises
lower motor neuron injury include restoring and maintain-
require active stife extension but only passive stifle and
ing joint range of motion, improving muscle strength,
tarsal fexion. Balance and coordination exercises benefit
restoring neuromuscular function, and preventing self-
patients with peripheral nerve injuries and are performed
mutilation and trauma to the affected limb. The lack of
as described previously.
spinal refexes and corresponding muscle tone in these
 The application of neuromuscular electrical stimulation
patients poses a challenge to their rehabilitation, and
in patients with peripheral nerve disease may delay the
emphasis is placed on restoration of muscle and joint
onset of neurogenic muscle atrophy and recondition the
function.
 affected muscles.34 When a muscle is completely dener-
Because of the dysfunction of the spinal refex arc,
vated, electrical muscle stimulation is the modality of
 passive exercises are performed until a near-normal gait is
choice. Affected muscle groups should be stimulated once
established. Passive range of motion and stretching are
a day for 15 minutes each.
used in the same manner as in patients with other neuro-
logic problems. Patients with lower motor neuron deficits 
may benefit from stretching of affected and antagonist
Discospondylitis
 muscles. Loss of tone to antagonist muscle groups predis-
 poses patients to joint contractures. Massage of a mildly
Discospondylitis is an infection of the intervertebral disk
contracted muscle group may also be beneficial in restor-
and adjacent vertebral bodies. It is usually caused by hema-
ing its function and should be performed two to three times
togenous spread of organisms from sites elsewhere in the
per day after warming the region.
 body, such as the urinary tract, skin, or mouth. Penetrating
In patients with a sciatic nerve deficit, elicitation of a
wounds, surgery, Or plant material migration can cause
fexor withdrawal refex may not be possible. Neverthe-
direct infection of the disk space or vertebra. In certain
less, progress should be monitored by serial evaluations
geographic regions migrating plant material such as grass
of the spinal refex arcs. In patients with weak or intact
awns is a relatively common cause of vertebral osteomy-
fexor withdrawal refexes, stimulation of the fexor refex
elitis and discospondylitis of the L2-L4 vertebrae. Staphy-
helps to improve muscle tone and neuromuscular coordi-
lococcus intermedius is the most common etiologic agent
nation. Patients with femoral nerve injury require much
identified in dogs with discospondylitis. Other frequently
assistance to maintain normal posture. A balance ball
documented pathogens include Streptococcus spp., Bnu-
(Swiss ball) may be used to support the trunk while
cella canis, and Escherichia coli, but virtually any bacterial
slowly lowering the pelvic limbs to the ground. The
agent can be causative. Some infections are caused by
patient's hind limbs are then gently raised (enough to lift
fungal organisms, including Aspergillus, Paecilomyces,
the toes off the ground) and lowered, such that the animal
and Coccidioides immitis. Vertebral infections caused by
624
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
grass awn migration are often associated with mixed infec-
majority of isolates from affected dogs and are a good
tions, with Actinomyces being a common isolate.35
choice for initial therapy. Clindamycin and amoxicillin
Discospondylitis most commonly affects large, middle-
with clavulanic acid are also usually effective. Patients
aged dogs. Small dogs and chondrodystrophic breeds are
with fever, neurologic deficits, or rapidly progressing signs
umcommonly affected, and the disease is rare in cats. The
are treated with intravenous antibiotics for 3 to 5 days,
most common initial sign is spinal pain, which varies in
followed by a course of oral antibiotics. Initial oral therapy
intensity from mild to extreme. The duration of signs
is appropriate in patients with mild, slowly progressing
noticed by the client usually ranges from several days to
 spinal pain.35
several weeks. Neurologic deficits ranging from ataxia to
 Clinical signs such as spinal pain and fever usually
paralysis are seen in some patients, although usually not
resolve within 5 days of starting effective therapy, although
as the initial abnormality. Signs suggestive of systemic
neurologic deficits usually resolve more slowly. Patients
illness, such as fever, lethargy, depression, anorexia, and
should be treated for at least 8 weeks in an attempt to com-
weight loss occur in about 30% of affected dogs. Concur-
pletely clear the infection and prevent relapse. Patients that
rent urinary tract infection, including prostatitis in male
fail to improve within 5 days of starting treatment are reas-
dogs, is common.35
sessed. Options include treating with a different antibiotic
 Diagnosis is based on clinical features and diagnostic 
or culture of the affected disk space by needle aspiration,
imaging. Radiographs of the involved region are usually
 guided by fuoroscopy or CT.36 Most animals recover with
diagnostic, although they may be normal early in the
 appropriate medical treatment. Surgery is rarely indicated
course of disease. The earliest radiographic sign is subtle
 to obtain biopsy when there is no response to initial therapy.
irregularity of the vertebral end plates. As the infection
or to decompress the spinal cord in patients with substan-
progresses the erosion of the end plate becomes more
tial neurologic deficits, evidence of spinal cord compres-
pronounced, and there are osteolytic and osteoproductive
 sion on imaging, and no response to medical therapy.
changes of the intervertebral disk space, vertebral end
plates, and in severe cases, the entire vertebral body (Figure
Physical Rehabilitation for Discospondylitis
34-25). Computed tomography and MRI are more sensitive
Physical rehabilitation is indicated in more severely
and are helpful when radiographs are normal or inconclu-
affected patients after a positive response to medical man-
sive. Myelography or MRI is indicated only in patients
agement is achieved. Protocols used are similar to those
with substantial neurologic deficits when decompressive
used in dogs with IVD, specifically aquatic therapy, and
surgery is considered. Complete blood count, urine culture
strength and gait training. Particular care should be exer-
and sensitivity, blood cultures, and serology for brucellosis
cised because affected patients generally have significant
are performed in patients with radiographic evidence of
weakness of the affected bones of the vertebral column.
vertebral infection. The differential diagnosis includes
chronic intervertebral disk disease, inflammatory disease,
Atlantoaxial Luxation
and neoplasia.
Initial treatment consists of antibiotics, cage rest, and
The anatomy of the atlas (C1) and the axis (C2) is dis-
analgesics. Selection of antibiotics is based on culture and
tinctly different from the rest of the vertebral column.
sensitivity of blood and urine and serology for B. canis.
There is no intervertebral disk and very little fexion at this
Pending these results or if these tests are negative, treat-
site. The anatomical relationship between Cl and C2 is
ment is started with a bactericidal antibiotic effective
 primarily maintained by ligaments. Atlantoaxial luxation
against beta-lactamase-producing Staphylococcus. First-
occurs when instability of the joint allows C2 to luxate
generation cephalosporins are effective against the
dorsally, relative to Cl, and compress the spinal cord.
Associated lesions can include congenital absence of the
 dens, fracture of the dens, and absence or rupture of atlan-
toaxial ligaments.
Atlantoaxial luxation is most common in toy-breed
dogs with malformation of the dens or ligaments. It can
 Occur in any animal as a consequence of trauma. In dogs
with congenital instability of the atlantoaxial joint, clinical
signs usually occur within the first few years of life
 and are often precipitated by relatively minor trauma.
Yorkshire terriers, Chihuahuas, miniature and toy poodles,
 Pomeranians, and Pekingese dogs are most commonly
affected. Clinical signs include neck pain and gait dysfunc-
Figure 34-25 Discospondylitis. The radiograph shows lysis of the
tion, ranging from ataxia to tetraplegia, with normal or
vertebral end plates (arrow) adjacent to the L2-L3 disk space.
exaggerated refexes. Severe cases may be fatal due to
Chapter 34
Physical Rehabilitation of the Neurologic Patient
625
the axis. The articular cartilage may be removed and bone
grafts placed to encourage fusion. A theoretical advantage
of ventral techniques is bony fusion although incomplete
bony fusion is apparent on follow-up radiographs in many
patients with a good outcome.37 Potential complications
include implant failure, worsening of neurologic deficits,
 and upper respiratory problems associated with the ventral
surgical approach. Successful outcome is reported in 62%
to 91% of patients. Older age (greater than 24 months) at
onset of signs, longer duration of clinical signs (greater
than 10 months), and more severe neurologic deficits
 increase the risk of poor outcome.37
C1
Physical Rehabilitation for
Atlantoaxial Subluxation
Figure 34-26  Atlantoaxial luxation. The radiograph shows dorsal
 Postoperatively, a cervical splint fashioned from light
displacement of C2 relative to C1.
casting material may be applied. Periodic removal allows
assessment of underlying tissues. Extermal coaptation is
respiratory paralysis. It is critical to avoid fexion of the
continued for 4 weeks along with strict confinement. Phys-
neck because this exacerbates spinal cord compression.
ical rehabilitation begins after cast removal. Whirlpool
The differential diagnosis includes vertebral fracture or
aquatic therapy combined with ES and therapeutic US is
luxation, intervertebral disk disease, discospondylitis, neo-
 appropriate in the early phases of rehabilitation. Assisted
 plasia, and meningomyelitis.
aquatic therapy is beneficial until ambulation begins.
The diagnosis is based on history, physical and neuro-
Strengthening and gait training exercises and underwater
logic examination, and radiographs. Typical radiographic
treadmill aquatic therapy may be incrementally added.
findings include dorsal displacement of C2 relative to C1
and an increased space between the arch of Cl and spine
of C2 on the lateral view (Figure 34-26). The size and
Degenerative Myelopathy
shape of the dens are best evaluated on a ventrodorsal view.
The dens may be normal, hypoplastic, aplastic, or dorsally
This is a slowly progressive degenerative disease of the
angulated. If survey radiographs are equivocal, the atlan-
central nervous system that most severely affects the tho-
toaxial joint may be slightly fexed during fuoroscopy to
racic spinal cord segments. It is inherited as an autosomal
assess stability. CT or MRI is also useful if the diagnosis
recessive trait. The cause is a mutation in the superoxide
is uncertain, or to identify coexisting lesions. Cerebrospi-
dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene, similar to the familial form
nal fuid analysis is helpful in identifying or ruling out
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in human patients (Lou
inflammatory disease. Lumbar puncture for fuid collection
Gehrig's disease).38
avoids fexion of the cervical spine that is required for col-
Degenerative myelopathy affects older dogs, usually
lection of fuid from the cerebellomedullary cistem.
more than 8 years of age. German shepherd dogs, Rhode-
Nonsurgical treatment is indicated in patients with mild
sian ridgebacks, Pembroke and Cardigan Welsh corgis,
signs. This consists of cage rest and application of a neck
boxers and Chesapeake Bay retrievers, are most commonly
brace that prevents neck fexion for 6 weeks. Analgesics
affected, although cases have been documented in a number
are administered as needed. Conservative treatment may
 Of other large-breed dogs and cross breeds.39
be successful in patients with traumatic luxations, but dogs
There is an insidious onset of progressive ataxia and
with congenital instability can suffer relapse because of
 paresis in the pelvic limbs. This is manifested as swaying.
the inherent instability. Surgery to reduce and stabilize
staggering, and scuffing of the rear limbs, often worse on
the atlantoaxial joint is the definitive treatment. Doral
one side. Spinal refexes in the pelvic limbs are normal to
techniques achieve fixation by securing the spinous
exaggerated. An essential feature is that this disease does
process of the C2 to the dorsal arch of C1 using the
not cause spinal pain. Most patients become nonambula-
nuchal ligament, orthopedic wire, nonmetallic suture, or an
tory within 6 to 9 months, at which point many clients elect
implantable device (Kishigami atlantoaxial tension band).
euthanasia. Otherwise the signs eventually progress to loss
Cross-pinning of the atlas and axis with polymethylmethac-
of refexes in the pelvic limbs, paresis of the thoracic limbs,
rylate has also been described. Ventral techniques can
urinary and fecal incontinence, and brainstem involvement,
be performed using transarticular screws or pins, with or
such as dysphagia.39
without polymethylmethacrylate, or a plate. Implants may
Diagnosis is based on clinical features, imaging, and
also be placed into the pedicle of the atlas and the body of
spinal fuid analysis to rule out other causes, and DNA
626
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
testing to detect the SOD1 mutation. Affected dogs have
REFERENCES
two copies of the abnormal gene, one inherited from the
1. Mathews KA: Neuropathic pain in dogs and cats: if only they
mother and one inherited from the father. Dogs that test
could tell us if they hurt, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
positive for both copies of the abnormal gene are at risk of
38(6):1365-1414, vii-vii, 2008.
developing the disease and will pass the mutation to off-
2. Brisson BA: Intervertebral disc disease in dogs, Vet Clin
spring. Dogs with one copy of the abnormal gene do not
North Am Small Anim Pract 40(5):829-858, 2010.
develop the disease but can pass the trait on to their off-
3. Bray JP, Burbidge HM: The canine intervertebral disk. Part
spring. Dogs with two copies of the normal gene do not
Two: Degenerative changes—nonchondrody strophoid versus
 develop the disease and cannot pass on the trait.39
chondrody strophoid disks, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34(2): 135-
144, 1998.
Other spinal cord diseases can cause similar or identical
4. Bergknut N, Egenvall A, Hagman R et al: Incidence of inter-
signs, including intervertebral disk protrusion, spinal cord
 yertebral disk degeneration-related diseases and associated
tumor, and infammatory diseases. It is important to exclude
mortality rates in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 240(11):1300-
these diseases on the basis of imaging tests such as MRI
1309, 2012.
and analysis of spinal fuid.
5. Cherrone KL, Dewey CW, Coates JR et al: A retrospective
There is no medication that has been shown to be
comparison of cervical intervertebral disk disease in non-
effective  for degenerative myelopathy in randomized
chondrodystrophic large dogs versus small dogs, J Am Anim
controlled studies. Steroids and other antinflammatory
Hosp Assoc 40(4):316-320, 2004.
drugs have been used but are generally not helpful. A
6. Forterre F, Konar M, Tomek A, Doherr M, Howard J,
study evaluating combination therapy with aminocaproic
Spreng D et al: Accuracy of the withdrawal reflex for
localization of the site of cervical disk hermiation in dogs: 35
acid, N-acetylcysteine with vitamins B, C, and E failed
cases (2004-2007), J Am Vet Med Assoc 232(4):559-563,
2008.
the quality of life of affected dogs and improve survival
7. Levine JM, Levine GJ, Johnson SI et al: Evaluation of the
time. A nonrandomized study found patients with exten-
success of medical management for presumptive cervical
sive physical rehabilitation had significantly longer sur-
intervertebral disk herniation in dogs, Vet Surg 36(5):492-
vival times (mean 255 days) than dogs that received
499, 2007.
moderate (mean 130 days) or no physical rehabilitation
8. Fry TR, Johnson AL, Hungerford L et al: Surgical treatment
 sop on p  si s t (sp s ua)
of cervical disc herniations in ambulatory dogs: ventral
their mobility longer with physical rehabilitation as loss
decompression vs fenestration, 111 cases (1980-1988), Prog
of mobility is a main factor in euthanasia. Common reha-
Vet Neurol 2:165-173, 1991.
bilitation includes range of motion and therapeutic exer-
 9. Hillman RB, Kengeri SS, Waters DJ: Reevaluation of predic-
cise, aquatic therapy, and maintaining function as long as
tive factors for complete recovery in dogs with nonambula-
tory tetraparesis secondary to cervical disk herniation, J Am
possible.
Anim Hosp Assoc 45(4): 155-163, 2009.
10. Cudia SP, Duval JM: Thoracolumbar intervertebral disk
Miscellaneous Conditions
disease in large, nonchondrodystrophic dogs: a retrospective 
study, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33(5):456-460, 1997.
 Miscellaneous diseases creating neurologic dysfunction
11. Brisson BA, Holmberg DL, Parent J et al: Comparison of the
that are treatable and have a reasonable prognosis may
 effect of single-site and multiple-site disk fenestration on the
benefit from physical rehabilitation. These include
rate of recurrence of thoracolumbar intervertebral disk her-
immune-mediated  polyradiculoneuritis  (Coon  Hound
niation in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 238(12):1593-1600,
paralysis), congenital vertebral anomalies and arachnoid
2011.
12. Meij BP, Bergknut N: Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in
cysts. Because of the uncommon clinical presentation of
these conditions and the lack of experience in rehabilitat-
dogs, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 40(5):983-1009,
2010.
ing these conditions, the use and success of specifc proto-
13. Ramirez O 3rd, Thrall DE: A review of imaging techniques
cols are unknown. Adherence to therapeutic principles and
for canine cauda equina syndrome, Vet Radiot Utrasound
selecting protocols used for similar diseases should provide
39(4):283-296, 1998.
 a sound basis for rehabilitation of these patients.
14. Janssens L, Beosier Y, Daems R: Lumbosacral degenerative
stenosis in the dog. The results of epidural infltration with
Summary
 methylpredmisolone acetate: a retrospective study, Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatot 22(6):486-491, 2009.
The rehabilitation of dogs with neurologic disease involves
15. Danielsson F, Sjostrom L: Surgical treatment of degenerative
lumbosacral stenosis in dogs, Vet Surg 28(2):91-98, 1999.
a combination of nursing care, active and passive exercise,
functional activities, and therapeutic modalities. The foun-
16. De Risio L, Sharp NJ, Olby NJ et al: Predictors of outcome
 dation for maximizing the patient's functional recovery is
after dorsal decompressive laminectomy for degenerative
lumbosacral stenosis in dogs: 69 cases (1987-1997), J Am
cooperation and participation of the patient, the owner, and
Vet Med Assoc 219(5):624-628, 2001.
the therapist.
Chapter 34 
Physical Rehabilitation of the Neurologic Patient
627
17. Kinzel S, Koch J, Stopinski T et al: [Cauda equina compres-
 29. Bailey CS, Kitchell RL: Cutaneous sensory testing in the
sion syndrome (CECS): retrospective study of surgical
dog, J Vet Intern Med 1(3):128-135, 1987.
yim saop 9g ul Auonouel pesiop pegied yim juuean
30. Bailey CS: Patterns of cutaneous anesthesia associated with
lumbosacral stenosis], Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr
brachial plexus avulsions in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
117(7-8):334-340, 2004.
185(8):889-899, 1984.
18. Suwankong N, Meij BP, Voorhout G et al: Review and ret-
31. Griffths IR, Duncan ID, Lawson DD: Avulsion of the bra-
rospective analysis of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in
chial plexus. 2. Clinical aspects, J Small Anim Pract 15:177-
156 dogs treated by dorsal laminectomy, Vet Comp Orthop
183, 1974.
Traumatol 21(3):285-293, 2008.
32. Griffiths IR, Duncan ID: The use of electromyography and
19. Jones JC, Banfeld CM, Ward DL: Association between post-
nerve conduction studies in the evaluation of lower motor
operative outcome and results of magnetic resonance imaging
neuron disease or injury, J Small Anim Pract 19:329-340,
and computed tomography in working dogs with degenera-
1978.
tive lumbosacral stenosis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 216( 11):1769-
 33. Faissler D, Cizinauskas S, Jaggy A: Prognostic factors for
1774, 2000
20. Linn LL, Bartels KE, Rochat MC et al: Lumbosacral stenosis
avulsion, J Vet Intern Med 16:370, 2002.
pue ssuuy oonouide shop luom Ae 67 u1
34. Kern H, Salmons S, Mayr W et al: Recovery of long-term
 outcome after surgical intervention (1990-1999), Vet Surg
denervated human muscles induced by electrical stimulation,
32(1):21-29, 2003.
Muscte & Nerve 31(1):98-101, 2005.
21. da Costa RC: Cervical spondylomyelopathy (wobbler
35. Thomas WB: Diskospondylitis and other vertebral infec-
syndrome) in dogs, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
tions, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30(1):169-182,
40(5):881-913, 2010.
vii, 2000.
22. da Costa RC, Parent JM, Holmberg DL et al: Outcome of
 36. Tipold A, Stein VM: Inflammatory diseases of the spine in
 medical and surgical treatment in dogs with cervical spon-
small animals, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 40(5):
dylomyelopathy: 104 cases (1988-2004), J Am Vet Med
871-879, 2010.
Assoc 233(8):1284-1290, 2008.
 37. Beaver DP, Ellison GW, Lewis DD et al: Risk factors affect-
23. Jeffery ND, McKee WM: Surgery for disc-associated
ing the outcome of surgery for atlantoaxial subluxation in
wobbler syndrome in the dog—an examination of the con-
dogs : 46 cases (1978-1998), J Am Vet Med Assoc 216(7):1104-
troversy, J Small Anim Pract 42(12):574-581, 2001.
1109, 2000.
 24. Cauzinille L, Kornegay JN: Fibrocartilaginous embolism of 
 38. Awano T, Johnson GS, Wade CM, Katz ML, Johnson GC,
the spinal cord in dogs: review of 36 histologically confirmed
Taylor JF et al: Genome-wide association analysis reveals a
cases and retrospective study of 26 suspected cases, J Vet
SODl mutation in canine degenerative myelopathy that
Intern Med 10(4):241-245, 1996.
resembles amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Proc Natt Acad Sci
25. Gandini G, Cizinauskas S, Lang J et al: Fibrocartilaginous 
U S A 106(8):2794-2799, 2009.
embolism in 75 dogs: clinical findings and factors infuenc-
39. Coates JR, Wininger FA: Canine degenerative myelopathy,
ing the recovery rate, J Small Anim Pract 44(2):76-80,
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 40(5):929-950,
2003.
2010.
 26. De Risio L, Adams V, Dennis R et al: Magnetic resonance
 40. Polizopoulou ZS, Koutinas AF, Patsikas MN et al: Evaluation
imaging findings and clinical associations in 52 dogs with
of a proposed therapeutic protocol in 12 dogs with tentative
suspected ischemic myelopathy, J Vet Intern Med 21(6): 1290-
degenerative myelopathy, Acta Vet Hung 56(3):293-301,
1298, 2007.
2008.
27. Olby N: The pathogenesis and treatment of acute spinal cord 
41. Kathmann I, Cizinauskas S, Doheir MG et al: Daily
injuries in dogs, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
 controlled physiotherapy increases survival time in dogs
40(5):791-807, 2010.
with suspected degenerative myelopathy, J Vet Interm Med
 28. Jeffery ND: Vertebral fracture and luxation in small animals,
20(4):927-932, 2006.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 40(5):809-828, 2010.
35
Physical Rehabilitation for
Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
Denis J. Marcellin-Little, David Levine, and Darryl L.Millis
 eriatric and arthritic patients have specific medical
require lifelong treatment and sustained owner compli-
and rehabilitation needs linked to the increased
ance. It is important for the therapist to understand the
prevalence of chronic conditions and their pro-
effects these diseases have on function and activities of
gressive loss of mobility. In fact, geriatric patients can be
daily living. For example, hypothyroidism may cause
a significant component of a rehabilitation practice. Aging
lethargy and easily could be mistaken for arthritis and
triggers changes in a wide range of tissues. Also, the inci-
inactivity. It is important for the owner to make regular
dence and severity of chronic diseases increase over time.
 appointments with their veterinarian for patient monitoring
 The life span of canine companions is increasing in part
and modification of the treatment plan, as necessary.4 The
because of medical and surgical advances in veterinary
changes associated with aging are progressive and are has-
medicine. As a consequence geriatric and arthritic patients
tened by stress, the environment, genetic factors, malnutri-
are often candidates for rehabilitation, requiring a thorough
tion, and lack of activity.
assessment and potentially complex treatments. Geriatric
and arthritic patients should also be reassessed on a regular
Medical Considerations
basis to detect changes in their conditions and to design
and deliver the most accurate and beneficial plan of care.
The effects of aging have been documented in human
This chapter discusses the effects of aging, medical con-
beings, and similar effects are seen in dogs. Quite often,
siderations and common neurologic and musculoskeletal
owners of geriatric dogs attribute specific changes in
conditions in the aging dog, quality of life issues, pain
behavior and lifestyle, such as a decreased appetite,
management in geriatric and arthritic patients, nutritional
changes in sleeping patterns, or decreased activity, to their
considerations, and general management of the arthritic
 pet becoming arthritic or being old. Although a component
patient.
of these changes could be the aging process, the presence
of concurrent neurologic, musculoskeletal, or metabolic
Aging in Dogs
diseases should also be considered. In geriatric dogs, the
 diagnosis and treatment of systemic diseases are necessary
The term geriatric relates to elderly people. The World
for the success of a rehabilitation program aimed at manag-
Health Organization defines middle-age as being 45 to 59
ing a disorder such as osteoarthritis (OA). The increased
years, elderly as being 60 to 74 years, and aged as being
likelihood of multiple conditions being present in a geriat-
75 years and older.' No such groupings have been proposed
ric dog warrants a thorough medical evaluation before a
in dogs, although Table 35-1 describes the ages at which
rehabilitation program is designed. A complete medical
dogs are considered “geriatric" and are likely to develop
history, including previous medical diagnoses and treat-
diseases associated with aging.? Aging itself is not a
ments, may help determine the origin of the patient's
disease. Multiple factors, including genetics, environment,
quannsuon io snoaaid fue nuapi pue uaqoud Aeud
and nutrition, play a role in the aging process. For ex ample
diseases that may affect the success of rehabilitation. In
smaller dog breeds live longer than larger breeds, and
conjunction with the history, performing a thorough physi-
mixed-breed dogs have a longer life expectancy than pure-
cal examination and obtaining hematologic information
bred dogs. Obese animals have a shorter life span than
 may confinm the presence of concurrent diseases.
 non-obese animals.? Dogs that are neutered live longer than
Multiple disease processes in older animals, such as
those that are not neutered. Pets that live inside live longer
those listed in Table 35-2, can cause nonspecifc signs
than those that are housed outside.
that mimic or exacerbate the signs of OA or aging. These
There are multiple changes that occur as a result of the
signs include weakness, lethargy, and exercise intolerance.
aging process in dogs, as outlined in Box 35-1.
Treatment of concomitant diseases before the implementa-
Most of these conditions are chronic (endocrinopathies,
tion of a rehabilitation program allows the patient to be in
hepatic disease, renal disease, cardiac insuffciency) and
the best condition to appropriately respond to rehabilitation
628
Chapter 35
Physical Rehabilitation for Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
629
Table 35-1
Typical Ages at Which Various-
Table 35-2
Common Medical Conditions
Sized Dogs May Be Considered
Present in Geriatric Dogs,
Geriatric
 Organized by Organ Systems
Age (Mean ±
Organ System Condition
Weight
Standard Deviation)
Cardiovascular
Cardiomyopathy
Small dogs
0-20 1b
11.48 ± 1.86
Endocardiosis
Medium
21-50 1b
10.19 ± 1.56
Arrhythmias
dogs
 Heartworm disease
Pericardial disease
Large dogs
51-90 1b
8.85 ± 1.38
Systemic hypertension
Giant dogs
>90 1b
7.46 ± 1.27
Endocarditis
Upper
Laryngeal paralysis
respiratory
Brachycephalic respiratory syndrome
tract
Laryngeal and pharyngeal neoplasia
Bronchomalacia
Box 35-1
Effects of Aging in Dogs
Collapsing trachea
Metabolic Effects
Lower
Pneumonia
 Decreased metabolic rate
respiratory
 Neoplasia (primary or metastatic)
 Decreased immune competence
tract
Pleural effusion
 Decreased phagocytosis and chemotaxis (decreased ability to
Pulmonary edema
Bronchitis
ward off infections)
Autoantibodies and autoimmune diseases may develop
Pneumothorax
Gastrointestinal  Malabsorptive disease (infammatory
Physical Effects
bowel disease)
 Percentage of body weight represented by fat increases
Protein-losing enteropathy
 Skin becomes thickened, hyperpigmented, and less elastic
Neoplasia (adenocarcinoma, lymphoma)
Footpads hyperkeratinize and claws become brittle
Hepatobiliary
Hepatic parenchymal disease (chronic
Muscle, bone, and cartilage mass are lost, with possible
hepatitis, cirrhosis, neoplasia, toxic
development of arthritis
hepatitis)
Lungs lose elasticity, fibrosis occurs, and pulmonary secretions
Biliary tract abnormalities (pancreatitis,
become more viscous
 bile duct neoplasia, cholelithiasis,
 Pulmonary vital capacity is diminished
cholecystitis)
Cough reflex and expiratory capacity decrease
Endocrine
Hyperparathyroidism
Urinary incontinence frequently develops
Hypothyroidism
Cardiac output may decrease
Hyperadrenocorticism
Number of cells in the nervous system decreases
Hypoadrenocorticism
Thyroid neoplasia
Insulinoma
Diabetes mellitus
 and allows the clinician to provide the most accurate prog-
Pheochromocytoma
 nosis. If the concurrent disease requires long-term treat-
Hypoparathyroidisrm
ment, frequent adjustments of the medical therapy and
Urinary tract
Renal failure
the rehabilitation program may be required to reach the
Urinary tract infection
 goals of each treatment. For example some of the most
Urinary incontinence
 common systemic diseases in older animals are endocrine
Hematologic
Anemia (regenerative or
disorders and neoplasia.6 Those conditions that have asso-
and
 nonregenerative)
ciated neurologic and musculoskeletal involvement, such
immunologic
 Neoplasia (lymphoma,
 as hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, hyperparathy-
hemangiosarcoma, leukermia)
Hemostatic disorders
roidism, osteosarcoma, and insulinoma interfere with the
 Immune-mediated polyarthritis
implementation of a successful rehabilitation program and
Systemic lupus erythematosus
accurate assessment of the patient's progression during the
Neurologic
Intervertebral disk disease
 program. Understanding the pathophysiologic mechanisms
Cervical spondylomyelopthy
is important not only for the successful treatment of the
Lumbosacral instability
concurrent disease but also for the development of a reha-
Degenerative Myelopathy
bilitation plan tailored to the needs and weaknesses of the
Neoplasia
individual patient. Communication between the veterinar-
Musculoskeletal (
 Osteoarthritis
ian, therapist, and owner is important and facilitates the
Neoplasia
630
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
assessment of the response to the rehabilitation program
Box 35-2
Common Geriatric Conditions
and the management of concurrent diseases.
in Dogs
Common Musculoskeletal and
Obesity
Neurologic Considerations
Cardiovascular disease
 Degenerative joint disease
The list of common geriatric diseases is outlined in
Cataract(s)
Box 35-2. The most important systems related to rehabili-
Cancer
tation care are the musculoskeletal and nervous systems.
 Dental disease
Hypothyroidism
Muscle mass and bone mass decrease with aging. Muscle
Urolithiasis
function is diminished as a result of muscle fiber atrophy,
Hyperadrenocorticism
loss of elasticity, and reduced oxygen transport to muscles.
 Diabetes mellitus 
Cartilage tends to deteriorate as a result of altered biome-
Anemia
chanical integrity and loss of tensile strength. The most
 Urinary incontinence
common problem of the musculoskeletal system in geriat-
Hepatopathies
ric dogs is OA. Obesity compounds the effects of arthritis
Chronic renal disease
(Figure 35-1).4 Decreased intestinal absorption of calcium
and decreased activity level may result in decreased bone
mineral content. Osteoporosis, or reduction in the quantity
 of bone, is rarely clinically significant in aging dogs. The 
primary importance of senile osteoporosis is its influence
on fracture healing. Callus formation is slower in older
animals, and fractures require additional healing time. This
increases the likelihood of delayed or malunion fractures,
muscle atrophy, and disuse osteoporosis. Neoplasia involv-
ing the musculoskeletal system, although less common in
some breeds of dogs, also must be considered. Primary
bone tumors are the most common and include osteosar-
coma, chondrosarcoma, fbrosarcoma, and hemangiosar-
coma (Figure 35-2).4
Several conditions affecting the nervous system also
affect aging dogs. In addition to intervertebral disk disease,
 degenerative conditions such as degenerative myelopathy
and spinal neoplasia may occur in older dogs (Figure
Figure 35-1 The most common problem of the musculoskeletal
35-3). Cognitive dysfunction is a common issue in older
system in aged dogs is osteoarthritis. Dogs may have difficulty
anu o sso se yns sis nxa Ae sop asau 'sop
arising, and obesity compounds the effects of arthritis.
training, disturbances in sleep and wake cycles, inatten-
tion to food or their environment, and inability to recog-
 nize familiar people and places. Short-term memory is
counseling, when indicated. A questionnaire is helpful to
affected by changes in intermeurons that cause a prolonged
provide a baseline for function and may be used to reassess 
effect to a stimulus and increased response time to the
the animal's quality of life over time (Figure 35-4).
extermal environment.4 Cognitive dysfunction also may
 The normal process of aging includes changes in muscle
affect the patient's ability to participate in some activities
physiology, hair coat and skin, cognitive function, hearing.
 of a rehabilitation program.
and vision. These changes should be assessed, recorded,
 and addressed as part of the overall treatment program.
Maintaining Quality of Life
The initial amount of exercise in the aging dog should be
easily tolerated, with increasing amounts added as the
A geriatric screening program should be implemented as
rehabilitation program progresses. Low-impact exercise,
 part of a general wellness program for animals 8 years and
such as frequent short leash walks and swimming should
older. This allows the veterinarian to target geriatric-related
occur regularly, possibly on a daily basis. Owners should
health problems, detect early geriatric disease to imple-
be aware of changes in water or food consumption, rapid
ment effective medical care, and offer preventive health
weight changes, abnormal urination or defecation, changes
 care measures. Client education plays a large role in this
in activity level, vomiting, or diarrhea (Figure 35-5). When
process. Owners should be instructed on the normal process
appropriate, clinicians should advise owners during the
of aging, nutrition, appropriate exercise, and bereavement 
final weeks of the animal's life and after their death.
Chapter 35
Physical Rehabilitation for Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
631
B
() leuenone uo algisia snlawny aul jo uood lewixond aui u ewosnesoaiso ue sey lallaiai alewa pareds pio-ear-g sul Z-ie ana
and mediolateral (B) radiographic projections. Classic clinical signs of osteosarcoma include lameness, lethargy, and decreased appetite.
medications that may be helpful include amantadine, gaba-
pentin, and tramadol. In patients with severe pain, such as
may be present with neoplasia, opioid drugs may be pre-
scribed, or transcutaneous fentanyl patches may be applied
for sustained delivery of medication. Although these
patches may be helpful in the short term, they are rarely
used over extended periods of time because of the cost and
Other factors involved with prolonged treatment.
Nutritional Considerations
The weight management of geriatric patients is particularly
important because obesity is one of the most common
Figure 35-3  Degenerative myelopathy may affect geriatric dogs.
conditions in geriatric patients. Because of decreased
 muscle mass and the possible presence of OA in geriatric
The diagnosis is often confounded by the presence of osteoarthritis
of multiple joints.
dogs, excess weight may predispose aging dogs to critical
and potentially irreversible locomotion difficulties.? In one
lifelong study involving 48 Labrador retrievers, restricted
 Pain Management in the Geriatric Dog
food intake increased median life span and delayed the
onset of signs of chronic disease in dogs. In that study lit-
 Because aging dogs may have a fragile physiologic balance,
termate dogs were paired, with one dog in each pair fed
pain management of geriatric dogs should rely as much as
25% less food than its littenmate, which was fed the same
possible on therapeutic options with minimal physiologic
diet ad libitum, from 8 weeks of age until death. Body
impact. For ex ample, geriatric people are more sensitive to
composition was measured annually until 12 years of age.
the gastrointestinal side effects of antinflammatory medi-
Compared with control dogs, food-restricted dogs weighed
cations than younger people.? The same most likely applies
less and had lower body fat content and lower serum tri-
to dogs.? Nonsteroidal antinfammatory drugs should
glycerides, triiodothyronine, insulin, and glucose concen-
therefore be used with caution in geriatric dogs. The pain
trations. Median life span was 18 months longer for dogs
management  options  with minimal  physiologic risks
 in which food was restricted. The onset of clinical signs of
include but are not limited to low-impact exercises,
chronic disease, including OA, was delayed and generally
massage, and therapeutic heat and cold. Analgesic
less severe for food-restricted dogs.
632
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
FUNCTIONAL QUESTIONNAIRE
progress.
1 = not able to perfom this activity (needs assistance 100% of the time)
2 = moderate assistance to perform activity (needs assistance >50% of the time)
3 = minimal assistance to perform this activity (needs assistance <50% of the time)
 4 = independent with activity (no assistance needed)
5 = N/A
Client:
Patient:
Date:
Medications:
How often is (are) medication(s) given?-
1. Able to position itself to urinate?
2. Able to position itself to defecate?
3
 3. Able to transfer from lying to siting and vice versa?
1
4
5
 4. Able to transfer from sitting to standing and vice versa?
2
3
4
5
5. Able to transfer from lying to standing and vice versa?
3
5
6. Able to roll over?
1
3
7. Able to scratch behind its ears?
1
3
5
8. Able to ascend stairs?
1
3
9. Able to descend stairs?
3
10. Able to walk up an incline/hill?
1
2
3
4
11. Able to get in and out of your car?
1
3
4
12. Able to get on/off a couch or bed?
1
2
3
4
5
13. Able to run?
3
4
5
14. Able to jump?
2
3
Figure 35-4  Functional questionnaire to assess and monitor the progress of a geriatric patient.
Chapter 35
Physical Rehabilitation for Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
633
15. Experienced an increase or decrease in weight?
Increase
Decrease
 Same
 16. Experienced an increase or decrease in endurance?
Increase
Decrease
 Same
 17. Have you noticed a change in your pet's temperament/attitude? Y
N
Increase
Decrease
Same
Please elaborate:
18. What does your pet like to do for fun?
Is he/she able to do that activity?
Please elaborate:
19. Has your pet been able to resume normal activities?
YN
Please elaborate:
20. Able to go on a walk?
YN How long?
minutes
Could your pet walk longer? Y N
Does anything prevent him/her from taking longer walks?
YN
If so, what?
 21. Do you notice any problems (limping, stiffness) or are the problems worse after taking a walk?
If yes, how so?
 22. Does your pet tire quickly, have to make rest stops, or lag behind during walks?
YN
Please elaborate:
Figure 35-4, cont'd
Continued
634
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
 23. Does your pet seem to be in pain?
YN
What makes you think this?
24. Is there anything your pet CAN do now that it was NOT able to do before? Y N
Please explain:
LAMENESS SCALE
0 = Normal stance
0 = No lameness
0 = No lameness
1 = Slightly abnormal stance
1 = Lameness barely perceptible
1 = Lameness barely perceptible
(partiai weight bearing)
2 = Moderately abnormal stance
2 = Lameness obvious, but not
 2 = Lameness obvious, but not
(toe-touch weight bearing)
severe
severe
 3 = Severely abnormal stance
3 = Severe lameness
3= Severe lameness
(holds limb off the floor)
4 = Unable to stand
4 = Partial or complete
4 = Partial or complete 
 non-weight-bearing lameness
 non-weight-bearing lameness
Degree of lameness (standing)
Degree of lameness (walk)
Degree of lameness (trot)
Score:
27. Additional comments:
Figure 35-4, cont'd
Chapter 35
Physical Rehabilitation for Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
635
Figure 35-6 As osteoarthritis progresses, a vicious cycle of pain,
Figure 35-5  Owners should be aware of changes in water or food
reduced activity level, joint stiffness, and loss of strength occurs. The
consumption, rapid weight loss, abnormal urination or defecation,
changes in activity level, and vomiting or diarrhea, especially after a
resulting weakness and pain may mimic a neurologic condition.
major illness or surgery. This dog developed sepsis after an amputa-
tion for osteosarcoma.
included antiinfammatory and analgesic drugs, changes in
lifestyle, and surgical management. More recent advances 
 In addition to restricting calories, adequate protein,
 in the management of OA include weight loss, therapeutic
minerals, and vitamins also must be present in the diet
exercise, and physical modalities to reduce the severity of
of the aging patient. Most high-quality commercial diets
clinical signs and reliance on medications to control pain
have adequate nutritional composition to support most
 and discomfort.2.13 Management of the arthritic patient 
 phases of life, and some concentrate specifically on aging
involves a number of modalities and must be tailored to
dogs. Adequate protein is necessary to help maintain
each patient and owner. Nutritional management (includ-
muscle mass, and it should be of adequate composition and 
ing weight control), physical rehabilitation, and medica-
quality to support muscle maintenance. Concurrent medical
tions are the main components for OA management.
conditions, such as heart disease, renal disease, and liver
Cooperation among the veterinarian, therapist, veterinary
disease, also should receive consideration because dietary
technician, and owner is vital to carry out an appropriate
management of these conditions is vital to successful
management program. Regular monitoring of the progress
man agement.
of therapy is essential to help with decision making for
further treatment and maintaining enthusiasm for the
Management of the Geriatric Patient
program. Some of the benefits of a complete program
with Osteoarthritis
include increasing muscle strength and endurance, increas-
ing joint ROM, decreasing pain, and improving perfor-
Joint disease is a common problem, affecting up to 20%
mance, speed, quality of movement, and function. This is
of adult dogs. Osteoarthritis, often referred to as degenera-
particularly important for patients that have become exer-
tive joint disease (DJD), is a progressive degenerative con-
cise intolerant or have limited mobility.
dition of joints. Many inflammatory mediators are present
Much of the pain associated with OA has been attrib-
in arthritic joints, including interleukins, prostaglandins,
uted to synovitis.14 The goal of treatment is to provide
and metalloproteinases. There is a progressive cascade of
adequate analgesia to reduce the severity of clinical signs,
 mechanical and biochemical events in patients with OA,
which allows the patient to be active and undergo therapeu-
which leads to cartilage destruction, subchondral bone scle-
tic exercise and weight loss. These treatments are impor-
rosis, synovial membrane infammation, and periarticular
tant to accomplish increased muscle strength and joint
osteophytes. Patients with OA have decreased quality of
function, maintain an acceptable quality of life, control
life, limited activity, reduced performance, muscle atrophy,
pain and discomfort, slow the progression of disease, and
pain and discomfort, and joint stiffness with decreased
 promote repair of damaged tissue when possible.
range of motion (ROM).811 A vicious cycle of pain, reduced
The surgical management of OA focuses on correcting
activity level, joint stiffness, and loss of strength occurs as
joint disease to prevent further joint degeneration. Early
OA progresses (Figure 35-6).
intervention to remove an osteochondritis dissecans lesion,
Veterinarians are approached frequently to treat arthritic
perform a juvenile pubic symphysiodesis or triple pelvic
patients. Traditional management of dogs with OA has
osteotomy, stabilize a cranial cruciate ligament rupture,
636
Section Vl
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Antiinflammatory Agents
Osteoarthritis is classified as a noninfammatory joint
disease because of the relatively low number of infam-
matory cells in the synovial fuid. However, many infam-
matory mediators (e.g., prostaglandins and leukotrienes),
degradative enzymes (metalloproteinases) released as a
result of cell membrane injury, and inflammatory cells are
intricately involved in a cascade of events leading to the
 deterioration of articular cartilage. Inflammatory products
are produced through enzymatic action (phospholipase A2)
on cell membrane phospholipids to produce arachidonic
 acid. Cyclooxygenase (COX) and lipoxygenase (LOX) act
 on arachidonic acid to produce prostaglandins, leukotri-
enes, and related products known as eicosanoids. Nonste-
Figure 35-7 Early intervention and surgical stabilization of the 
stifle joint of dogs with a ruptured canial cruciate ligament may
 a  (s s  
reduce the progression of osteoarthritis.
foundation for medical management of OA, particularly
in advanced cases. NSAIDs inhibit the COX enzyme,
thereby decreasing infammatory mediators and reducing
pain associated with OA. Two isoforms of the COX
enzyme have been identifed, COX-1 and COX-2.
Cyclooxygenase-1 is a constitutive enzyme and is nor-
mally produced in physiologic amounts in many tissues.
It has protective functions, such as protection of the gastric
mucosa, maintaining renal perfusion, and maintaining
normal platelet function. The inhibition of the COX-1
enzyme by traditional NSAIDs is believed to be respon-
sible for the adverse side effects of gastric ulceration,
prolonged bleeding time, and decreased renal perfusion.
The COX-2 enzyme is primarily inducible, and its produc-
tion increases in response to infammation. Traditionally
 NSAIDs have inhibited both COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes.
The identification of the two COX isoforms has resulted
 in research to develop products that selectively inhibit the
Figure 35-8  Although total hip replacement is a salvage procedure
inducible COX-2 enzyme, while sparing the constitutive
for end-stage osteoarthritis of the hip joint, dogs can have a high
COX-1 enzyme. Selective inhibition of COX-2 with pres-
quality of life following surgery and rehabilitation.
ervation of COX-1 could potentially reduce the adverse
effects associated with the gastrointestinal tract and
repair an articular fracture, to reduce hip sublux ation asso-
kidneys. NSAIDs that are frequently used in veterinary
ciated with hip dysplasia, and correct angular limb defor-
medicine include carprofen, deracoxib, firocoxib, etodolac,
mities to avoid abnormal stresses on joints are all surgical
and meloxicam. Acetaminophen with or without codeine
procedures that help slow the degenerative process of
is occasionally used in dogs, but should never be used in
affected joints (Figure 35-7). Salvage treatments for severe
cats. COXTB-class drugs are those that are diarylhetero-
OA include total joint replacement and arthrodesis of
cyclic compounds that preferentially and irreversibly bind
 joints, such as the carpus and tarsus (Figure 35-8).
the COX-2 enzyme and are relatively COX-1 sparing.
The medical treatment of OA is multifaceted and
Deracoxib and firocoxib are COXTB-class drugs that are
includes antiinfammatory medications, weight optimiza-
approved for use in veterinary medicine. Carprofen,
tion, controlled exercise, physical modalities, alteration of 
etodolac, and meloxicam also have some preferential
the environment, and disease-modifying OA agents. Vet-
selectivity to inhibit mainly COX-2. No NSAID has been
erinarians must impress on owners that the management
shown conclusively to clearly be more efficacious than
of chronic OA is a lifelong commitment and is hard work.
the others. The effectiveness of various NSAIDs appears
It is critical to evaluate patients on a regular basis and
to vary between patients.'s One NSAID could be more
provide feedback and encouragement to owners. Manage-
effective than another in a patient, and the reverse could
 ment of the arthritic patient should be approached in a
be seen for another patient. This means that, for each
logical, stepwise progression.
patient, the optimal NSAID may be identified after several
Chapter 35
Physical Rehabilitation for Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
637
different NSAIDs are used (successively but not concur-
Chondroitin sulfate also competitively inhibits degradative
rently) for 2-week trial periods. A washout period of a
enzymes found in cartilage and synovium.
few days should be employed, as long as the patient is
 Polysulfated glycosaminoglycans (PSGAGs) is a drug
not in excessive pain during the washout period. It is
and is administered as an intramuscular injection. Polysul-
important to have owners also evaluate the response to
fated glycosaminoglycans reduce the production of metal-
treatment because they evaluate the patient in the home
 loproteinases and increase production of hyaluronic acid
environment in w hich the patient negotiates various obsta-
and cartilage GAGs. In addition they improve stife ROM,
cles and situations that are not present in a veterinary
clinical use of the limb, and the health of the synovium in
clinic. Caution must be used when using any NSAID
dogs recovering from experimental cranial cruciate ligament
because of their potential side effects. Before prescribing
 transection and stife stabilization surgery.2°0 Hyaluronic acid
 any medication, the patient's physiologic state, especially
(HA) is a nonsulfated GAG and a major component of
liver and kidney function, should be assessed. It is impor-
synovial fuid and cartilage. Hyaluronic acid is available
tant to educate the owners regarding potential side effects,
  s  nn   s
including gastrointestinal events (primarily vomiting and
fuid viscosity, reduces infammation and prostaglandin
diarrhea), hepatic disease, and renal disease.
production, and scavenges free radicals. Some patients
 Certain forms of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs),
 could potentially benefit from periodic administration
especially omega-3 fatty acids, may reduce the production
of HA.
of certain eicosanoids, especially the more potent inflam-
Obesity
matory 4-series leukotrienes, and help reduce infamma-
tion. Some humans with rheumatoid arthritis respond to
Obesity is strongly associated with the development of OA
treatment with PUFAs. Polyunsaturated fatty acids, par-
in people and likely contributes to the progression of OA
ticularly eicosapentaenoic acid, appeared beneficial to
aout saun s'e ae aldoad Aanay alcuexa ioH zzt'sop u!
dogs with OA in two studies.16.17
likely to develop OA than light people, and loss of 5 kg
Oral or injectable corticosteroids are also prescribed for
decreases the odds of developing OA by greater than
patients with OA. Steroids are effective antinflammatory
 50% .73 Additionally, weight loss results in less joint pain
drugs and result in clinical improvement in patients.
 and a decreased need for medication to treat OA.24 In one
However, their use as a short-term solution in lieu of
clinical report weight reduction of 11% to 18% of the
other modalities should be avoided because of their prob-
initial body weight of obese dogs resulted in improvement
able long-term adverse effects on cartilage and other body
 Of hindlimb lameness associated with hip OA.?s Another 
systems. For example, glycosaminoglycan (GAG) synthe-
study of obese dogs with hip dysplasia indicated that there
sis by chondrocytes is reduced 30% in patients receiving
 is a significant increase in weight bearing as measured with
prednisone. Although veterinarians may feel pressured to
a force plate following weight loss.?6 In addition the owners
provide quick results, client education is critical to empha-
felt that weight loss resulted in significant improvement in
size that management of OA is a lifetime endeavor.
a number of areas in the home environment.
 In addition to restricting intake of the normal diet and
Slow-Acting Disease-Modifying
eliminating treats, prescription diets are available that can
Osteoarthritic Agents
 help achieve and maintain ideal body weight. In general, a
Agents thought to alter the course of OA are termed slow-
 goal is to reduce body fat composition to 20% to 25% of
acting disease-modifying osteoarthritic agents because it
an animal's total body weight. Clinically the ribs should
is thought that they improve the health of the articular
be easily palpable, and there should be a "waist"’ when the
cartilage or synovial fuid. These agents may be more ben-
 animal is viewed from above and the side.27
eficial in early OA than in end-stage OA. Nutraceuticals
Physical Rehabilitation Modalities
are nutritional supplements believed to have a positive
infuence on cartilage health by providing precursors nec-
Mild to moderate exercise and training in normal humans
essary for repair and maintenance, and they may also alter
and dogs do not cause OA by themselves, but articular
the pathophysiology of OA and its progression. Gluco-
cartilage may undergo biochemical, histologic, and biome-
samine and chondroitin sulfate (CS) are routinely com-
chanical changes.231 Most studies of moderate running
bined as disease-modifying agents. Glucosamine is a
have indicated that there is no injury to articular cartilage
precursor to the disaccharide units of GAGs, which com-
with this form of activity, assuming that there are no abnor-
prise part of the proteoglycan (PG) articular cartilage
mal biomechanical stresses acting on the joints. Heavy
matrix. Studies have shown that glucosamine helps to
training programs, however, result in changes that may
improve cartilage metabolism and upregulates PG synthe-
predispose to the development of OA.32-34 Controlled thera-
sis.18.19 Chondroitin sulfate is the predominant GAG found
peutic exercise is a valuable but underused management
in articular cartilage. Extracellular and intracellular mecha-
option for OA patients. Arthritic humans participating in
nisms are stimulated by CS to produce GAG and PG.
controlled, low-impact exercises have improved function
638
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
and reduced pain and need for medication.3536 The goals
Box 35-3
Guidelines for an Osteoarthritis
of therapeutic exercise should be to reduce body weight,
Home Care Program
increase joint mobility, and reduce joint pain through the
Osteoarthritis tends to follow a course of exacerbation and
porting muscles. Muscle disuse results in atrophy and
remission. During a period of aggravation, do not force
weakness. Because muscles act as shock absorbers for
exercise. Low-impact exercises, such as leash walking and
joints, strengthening periarticular muscles may help protect
swimming, are ideal.
joints. Mild weight-bearing exercise also helps stimulate
One sign of osteoarthritis is stiffness, especially in the
cartilage metabolism and increases nutrient diffusion.
morning. Begin the day by taking time to warm up the joints.
Exercise may also increase endogenous opiate production;
This can be done using warm water bottles, hot packs, heating
wet towels in the microwave (comfortable enough for you to
tolerate on your own skin), or using a bathtub/whirlpool (=85°)
tailored to the condition and personality of each patient and
for 15 to 20 minutes.
to their owners (Box 35-3). An improper program could
 Following warm-up, apply passive range of motion to the
hasten the progression of OA. Overloading joints should
affected joints. Slowly fex and extend the joints—DO NOT
be minimized by performing low-impact activities, such as
force beyond a comfortable range. Fifteen to twenty SLOW
walking and swimming, until weight loss occurs. Unreal-
repetitions are sufficient. This helps to decrease stiffness and
istic demands placed on the owner will likely decrease
increase motion in the joints.
compliance, and the physical condition of the owner must 
Continue throughout the day taking the dog on several short
be considered. Joint instability should be corrected before
walks (at least three) with long rest periods in between. Let the
 initiating an exercise program. Exercise programs must be 
patient set the time and distance. Begin walking 10 to 15
minutes at a time, gradually increasing the time and length.
tailored to account for the typical course of exacerbations
Multiple short walks are more beneficial than one or two long
and remissions of OA. The animal should not be forced to
walks. Note any discomfort, increased fatigue or stiffness, Of
exercise during times of exacerbation of the arthritic condi-
refusal to go any further. Should this occur, cut the previous
 tion because infammation may increase. In preparation for
level of activity in half and continue from there.
exercising, warming and stretching affected muscle groups
 Differentiate between muscle soreness and joint pain:
and joints during a warm-up period are recommended.38.39
 Muscle soreness—painful upon palpation of muscle groups
Tissue warming promotes blood fow to the area, promotes 
·
 Joint pain—painful when fexing or extending a joint
tissue and collagen extensibility, and decreases pain,
As tolerance and endurance improve, activities to further
muscle spasms, and joint stiffness. Heat is contraindicated 
improve mobility, reduce pain, and increase muscle strength
if swelling or edema is present in a limb or joint. Heating
may be added. Some ideas may be to incorporate ramps,
agents such as moist or dry hot packs, circulating wanm
inclines, declines, or stairs into the wal king program in
incremental amounts. Once again, let the patient set the
water blankets, and warm baths typically heat the skin and
boundaries.
subcutaneous tissues to a depth of 1 to 2 cm. Another
 Following exercise, a period of cool-down is necessary.
 physical agent used for heating is therapeutic ultrasound.
Massage and use a bag of frozen vegetables or an ice pack on
Ultrasound frequencies of 1 and 3 MHz in continuous
the joints for 15 to 20 minutes to minimize any postexercise
mode produce thermal and nonthermal effects. The effects
 swelling that may occut.
 are related to the treatment time, intensity, frequency, and
 No antinfammatory medications should be given for the
 area being treated. Tissue heating may penetrate to 5 cm,
first day when beginning a rehabilitation program. The
 much deeper than with superficial heating modalities. Non-
thermal effects include increased cell membrane permea-
 exercise progression. After a day if no joint pain is noticed,
bility, calcium transport across the cell membrane, removal
medications may be given 1 hour before exercise. Withhold
of proteins and blood cells from the interstitial spaces, and
medication again as exercise is increased to be certain that the
nutrient exchange. Any stretching should be done during
medication is not masking excessive pain.
the latter part of warming or immediately after. Massage
Osteoarthritis treatment is a lifelong commitment. If
rehabilitation is discontinued, any benefits gained will likely
also has been used to increase blood fow to muscles to
be lost.
warm up the area before activity, and to decrease stiffness
 after activity. Electrical stimulation of muscle also appears 
to be of benefit when treating dogs with OA. Transcutane-
ous electrical stimulation (TENS) was applied to the stife
length of the exercise should be titrated so there is no
joint of dogs with experimentally induced OA. Peak verti-
increased pain after activity. Also exercise sessions should
cal force was significantly increased after TENS applica-
be short in the early phases of training: three 10-minute
tion in these dogs.40
sessions is preferred to one 30-minute session. Walks
Controlled leash walking, walking on a treadmill,
should be brisk and purposeful, minimizing stopping.
jogging, swimming, and going up and down stairs or ramp
Avoiding sudden bursts of activity will help avoid acute
are excellent low-impact exercises (Figure 35-9). The
inflammation of arthritic joints. Swimming and walking in
Chapter 35
Physical Rehabilitation for Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
639
causes pain. The exercise periods should be evenly spaced
throughout each day and over the entire week. Training and
conditioning help maintain an ideal body weight, improve
ROM, and increase muscle strength and tone, which help
to stabilize joints. Following exercise a 5 to 10-minute
cool-down period is recommended. A slower paced walk
may be initiated for 3 to 5 minutes, followed by ROM and
stretching exercises. A cool-down massage may help
decrease pain, swelling, and muscle spasms. Finally, cryo-
therapy (cold packs or ice wrapped in a towel) may be
applied to painful areas for 15 to 20 minutes to control
postexercise inflammation. Application of cold decreases
 blood fow, infammation, hemorrhage, and metabolic rate.
Environmental Modifications
Altering the environment may be helpful for dogs with
moderate to severe arthritis. The principles of environmen-
tal modifications for dogs are similar to those for arthritic
humans.41 Whenever possible animals should be moved
Figure 35-9(
juallaoxa ue s! dwei paupu! ue umop pue dn buiog
from a cold, damp environment (i.e., outdoor) to a wanm,
low-impact exercise. A handicap access ramp also makes it easier to
dry environment (indoor). A soft, padded bed should be
get into buildings.
provided. A circulating warm-water blanket under the
blankets provides heat that may reduce morming stiffness.
Provide good footing to avoid slipping and falling. Mini-
mize stair climbing through the use of handicapped ramps
and keeping pets on ground foors. Steps are negotiated
more easily if they are wider, have a gradual rise, and are
spaced farther apart. Portable ramps are available to assist
patients getting in and out of vehicles. Avoid overdoing
activities on the weekends, and prevent excessive play with
 Other pets because arthritic animals may attempt to keep
up, and in the process, become more lame and painful. In
some instances, however, play with other animals stimu-
lates activity and provides a welcome break in the exercise
routine.
Rehabilitation for the Patient
with Neoplasia
Figure 35-10 Training on an underwater treadmill may signifi-
cantly increase weight bearing comparable to achievements obtained 
Geriatric patients with neoplasia may benefit from specific
using medication in many patients.
rehabilitation programs. For example fibrosis of the skin
 and subcutaneous tissue may result from radiation therapy.
When such fibrosis involves limb tissues, the ROM of a
water (Figure 35-10) are some of the best activities for
joint may be limited and limb use may be negatively
dogs. The buoyancy of water is significant and limits the
impacted. A gentle massage of the affected region, stretch-
impact on the joints while promoting muscle strength and
ing, and ROM exercises may help limit the impact of
joint motion. If joint pain is perceived to be greater after
fibrosis. It is particularly critical to develop a comprehen-
exercising, the length of the activity can be decreased by
sive pain management program in cancer patients because
half. When stepping up the amount of activity, the increase 
should be approximately 10% to 15%, once a week unless
tively affects the quality of life of patients and may lead to
increased pain or decreased function occurs. Ideally, anti-
anorexia and decreased ambulation. In addition to all the
inflammatory drug use should be minimal and consider-
conventional strategies used for pain management, fen-
ation should be given to avoid administration immediately
tanyl patches may be used to provide pain relief in the short
before stepping up activity because it is important
term. Palliative radiation therapy may also be used to
to determine if the level of exercise is too great and
provide pain relief in a limb with osteosarcoma. Although
640
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
the majority of patients respond positively to three or four
15. Millis DL, Loonam JE, Evans M: Comparison of carprofen
sessions of palliative radiation therapy generally spaced a
and etodolac for the management of stife osteoarthritis: a
week apart, the likelihood of fracture of the affected bone 
pilot study. Proceedings of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society
increases after the therapy. The rehabilitation programs of
Annual Meeting, Steamboat Springs, CO, 2003.
16. Roush JK, Cross AR, Renberg WC et al: Evaluation of the
geriatric cancer patients are designed to be gentle, low-
effects of dietary supplementation with fish oil omega-3 fatty
intensity exercises and manipulation to minimize the stress
acids on weight bearing in dogs with osteoarthritis, J Am Vet
to the patient.
Med Assoc 236:67-73, 2010.
17. Roush JK, Dodd CE, Fritsch DA et al: Multicenter veterinary
Summary
practice assessment of the effects of omega-3 fatty acids on
osteoarthritis in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 236:59-66, 2010.
The optimal rehabilitation of geriatric patients involves a
18. Phitak T, Pothacharoen P, Kongtawelert P: Comparison of
thorough initial patient assessment, focusing on the iden-
glucose derivatives effects on cartilage degradation, BMC
tification of underlying musculoskeletal and metabolic
Musculoskelet Disord 11:162, 2010.
disorders, weight management, OA management (if neces-
19. Derfoul A, Miyoshi AD, Freeman DE et al: Glucosamine
sary), environmental modifications that promote low-stress
promotes chondrogenic phenotype in both chondrocytes and
mesenchymal stem cells and inhibits MMP-13 expression
activities, and patient assessment by the veterinarian at
and matrix degradation, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 15:646-
 regular time intervals to monitor patient progress.
655, 2007.
 20. Millis DL et al: Effect of polysulfated glycosaminoglycan on
REFERENCES
articular cartilage in a Pond-Nuki model of osteoarthritis, Vet 
1. Hoskins JD: Geriatrics, Vet Clin North Am Smafl Anim Pract
Surg 27:293, 1998.
27:1273-1284, 1997.
 21. Felson DT, Zhang Y, Anthony JM: Weight loss reduces the
2. Goldston RT: Geriatrics and gerontology, Vet Clin North Am
risk for symptomatic knee osteoarthritis in women, Ann
Small Anim Pract 19:1-202, 1989.
Intern Med 116:535, 1992.
3. Kealy RD et al: Effects of diet restriction on life span and
22. Marshall WG, Bockstahler BA, Hulse DA et al: A review of
age-related changes in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1315-
osteoarthritis and obesity: cutrent understanding of the rela-
1320, 2002
tionship and benefit of obesity treatment and prevention in
 4. Goldston RT, Hoskins JD: Geriatrics and gerontology of the
the dog, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot 22:339-345, 2009.
dog and cat, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders.
 23. Schrager M: Slimming down reduces arthritis risk, Phys 
 5. Tonner PH, Kampen J, Scholz J: Pathophysiological changes
Sportsmed 23:22, 1995.
in the elderly, Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiot 17:163-177,
 24. McGoey BV, Deitel M, Saplys RJ: Effect of weight loss on
2003
musculoskeletal pain in the morbidly obese, J Bone Joint
6. Fleming JM, Creevy KE, Promislow DEL: Mortality in
Surg 72B:323, 1990.
North American dogs from 1984 to 2004. An investigation
 25. Impellizeri JA, Tetrick MA, Muir P: Effect of weight reduc-
into age-, size-, and breed-related causes of death, J Vet
tion on clinical signs of lameness in dogs with hip osteoar-
Interm Med 25:187-198, 2011.
thritis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1089- 1091, 2000.
7. Laine L, Curtis SP, Cryer B et al: Risk factors for NSAID-
26. Burkholder W, Hulse DA: Signs of osteoarthritis can be
ass ociated upper GI clinical events in a long-term prospective
improved with weight loss and exercise, St. Louis, 2002,
study of 34701 arthritis patients, Aliment Pharmacot Ther
Nestle Purina Pet Care.
32:1240-1248, 2010.
27. LaFlamme DP: Development and validation of a body condi-
8. Joubert KE: The effects of firocoxib (Previcox) in geriatric
tion score system for dogs, Canine Practice 22:10-15, 1997.
-6LI:08 sossy 1aA 4f ynog f sAep 06 Jo poued e 1oA0 s3op
 28. Felson DT: The epidemiology of knee osteoarthritis: results
184, 2009.
from the Framingham osteoarthritis study, Semin Arthritis
9. Bromiley MW, Ulbrich M: Physiotherapy in veterinary med-
Rheum 20:42, 1990.
icine, ed 1, Oxford, UK, 1995, Blackwell Scientific.
 29. Jurvelin J et al: Effect of physical exercise on indentation
 10. Downer AH, Spear VL: Physical therapy in the management
stiffness of articular cartilage in the canine knee, Int J Sports
of long bone fractures in small animals, Vet Clin North Am
Med 7:106-110, 1986.
5:157-164, 1975.
 30. Kiviranta I et al: Moderate running exercise augments gly-
11. Millis DL, Levine D: The role of exercise and physical
cosaminoglycans and thickness of articular cartilage in the
modalities in the treatment of osteoarthritis, Vet Clin North
knee joint of young beagle dogs, J Orthop Res 6:188-195,
Am Small Anim Pract 27:913-930, 1997.
1998.
12. Minor MA, Gewett JE, Webel RR: Exercise and disease
 31. Newton PM et al: The effect of lifelong exercise on canine
related measures in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and
articular cartilage, Am J Sports Med 25:282-287, 1997.
osteoarthritis, Arthritis Rheum 32:1396, 1988.
32. Arokoski J et al: Softening of the lateral condyle articular
13. Nicholas J: Physical modalities in rheumatological rehabili-
cartilage in the canine knee joint after long distance (up to
tation, Arch Phys Med Rehabit 75:994, 1994.
40 km/day) running training lasting one year, Int J Sports
14. Baker K, Grainger A, Niu J et al: Relation of synovitis to
Med 15:254-260, 1994.
knee pain using contrast-enhanced MRIs, Ann Rheum Dis
 33. Hallett MB, Andrish JT: Effects of exercise on articular car-
69:1779-1783, 2010.
tilage, Sports Med Arthrosc Rev 2:29-37, 1994.
Chapter 35
 Physical Rehabilitation for Geriatric and Arthritic Patients
641
34. McKeag DB: The relationship of osteoarthritis and exercise,
 38. Halbertsma JP, van-Bolhuis AI, Goeken LN: Sport stretch-
Clin Sports Med 11:471, 1992.
ing: effect on passive muscle stiffness of short hamstrings,
35. Kovar PA, Allegrante JP, Mackenzie CR: Supervised
Arch Phys Med Rehabil 77:688-692, 1996.
fitness walking in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee:
 39. Magnusson SP: Passive properties of human skeletal muscle
a randomized, controlled trial, Ann Intern Med 116:529,
during stretch maneuvers: a review, Scand J Med Sci Sports 
1992.
8:65-77, 1998.
36. Lewis C: Arthritis and exercise. In Biegel L, ed: Physicat
 40. Johnston KD, Levine D, Price MN et al: The effect of TENS
fitness and the older person: a guide to exercise for heaith
 on osteoarthritic pain in the stifte of dogs. Proceedings of the
care professionals, ed 1, Rockville, MD, 1984, Aspen
2nd International Symposium on Physical Therapy Rehabili-
Sy stems.
tation Veterinary Medicine, Knoxville, TN, 2002.
37. Bender T, Nagy G, Barna I et al: The effect of physical
 41. Baird CL: First-line treatment for osteoarthritis. Part 2: Non-
therapy on beta-endorphin levels, Eur J Appt Physiol
pharmacologic interventions and evaluation, Orthop Nurs 
100:371-382, 2007.
20:13-18, 2001.
Physical Rehabilitation for
36
Wound Care
June Hanks and Sallye Gregg
atients undergoing rehabilitation frequently have
localized edema that serves to increase pressure in the
wounds, including surgical wounds and wounds
interstitial space and decrease pressure in the blood vessels.
resulting from nonsurgical trauma. Therefore, an
As the wound area accumulates more proteins, white blood
understanding of wound healing and the care of wounds is
cells, and cell fragments, the fuid in the interstitial space
necessary to speed the rehabilitation process and identify
becomes more viscous and changes from a transudate to
abnormal wound healing. Normal restoration of injured
 an exudate. Mast cells in the area release inflammatory
tissue follows a series of predictable overlapping events
mediators and secrete enzymes. Vasodilation is induced by
often grouped as the infammatory, proliferation, and
histamine released by mast cells and prostaglandins
maturation/remodeling phases of wound healing (Figure
released by injured cells.3 Swelling and chemical release
36-1). Biochemical substances modulate cellular activities
in the area continue to increase, causing pain. The entire
occurring during the phases of tissue repair. Acute wounds
series of events leads to the hallmark signs of inflamma-
tend to follow a predictable progression through the wound
tion: edema, heat, redness, pain, and decreased function.
healing phases, whereas chronic wounds may have a pro-
Cellular events that accompany the vascular events
longed period of inflammation, proliferation, or excessive
include margination of neutrophils to the sides of the blood
wound contraction.
vessel wall and eventual migration through the wall. Guid-
This chapter reviews the wound healing phases and
ance to the injured area occurs as neutrophils follow the
discusses factors that may delay the tissue restoration
 chemical gradient formed by bacteria and dead or dying
 process. Modalities, dressings, and altermative treatments 
cells through a process called chemotaxis. Circulating
sss a ssad su a ds cs
monocytes migrate into the tissue spaces and are then
called macrophages. Neutrophils and macrophages release
Wound Healing Physiology
enzymes, engulf bacteria, produce tissue proteases that
further degrade debris, and release chemotactic agents and
chemical mediators that attract more infammatory cells to
Inflammatory Phase
the area. Although less effective than neutrophils in the
The first response to injury is inflammation, a process that
phagocytic process, macrophages produce numerous
includes vascular and cellular events to control blood loss,
growth factors and are critical in directing the tissue repair
combat bacterial invasion, and set the stage for further
process.4.5
healing by signaling the cells necessary for repair and
regeneration to come to the site of injury. For a few seconds
Proliferative Phase
to several minutes following injury, blood vessels in the
As the cells necessary for tissue repair respond to signals
area refexively constrict to reduce blood loss. Platelets
to enter the injured area, the proliferative phase of wound
aggregate at the injury site and are activated by contact
repair begins. Endothelial cells adjacent to the site of injury
between damaged endothelial cells lining the blood vessel
respond to ischemia, growth factors, and chemical media-
walls and exposed collagen. The activated platelets adhere
tors and begin to bud into the injured area through the
to one another and the injured endothelium and interact
process of angiogenesis. As buds connect through capillary
with fibrin to help form a plug to wall off the injured area.
loops, nutrients are carried to the area and waste products
The activated platelets also release chemical mediators
are removed. The blood vessel buds appear as tiny red dots
such as cytokines (signaling proteins), growth factors
in the tissue space. Previously damaged lymphatic vessels
(hormone-like substances that control cell metabolism),
begin to function again and work with the blood vessels to
 and chemotactic agents (substances that attract cells impor-
reduce local tissue edema. Proteases produced by various
tant for repair to come to the site of injury).'l2
cells work alongside phagocytic cells to degrade wound
Following vasoconstriction blood vessels dilate, allow-
debris.
ing more fuid, inflammatory cells, and growth factors into
Fibroblasts from the local tissue and general circulation
the interstitial space. The walls of injured blood vessels
begin to fill the spaces between the capillary loops. As
allow fuid to leak into the interstitial space, causing
the fibroblasts proliferate among the capillary loops, an
642
Chapter 36
Physical Rehabilitation for Wound Care
643
phases, the wound is not yet completely healed. The newly
formed tissue must be strengthened and reorganized
 Maturation &
Inflammation
Proliferation
through collagen synthesis and lysis in the newly formed
Remodeling
scar tissue. Through chemical events, intermal stress, and
extermal tension, the collagen fibers transform from
immature type MI collagen to mature type I collagen?
Figure 36-1  Overlapping phases of wound healing.
Interventions of range of motion exercise and scar tissue
mobilization aid the process of scar tissue remodeling
eventually achieving a balance between collagen formation
and degradation to produce a strong healthy scar. Most of
the remodeling of the scar occurs in the first 6 to 12 months
after wound closure, but can continue for up to 2 years.
Even when fully remodeled, the scar tissue attains only
75% to 80% of the strength and elasticity of the original
tissue.
Types of Wound Closures
Wounds that heal following approximation of the wound
edges with little or no granulation tissue formation (as in
Figure 36-2  Granulation tissue covering a large wound.
a surgical wound) are said to heal by primary closure or
primary intention. An uncontaminated, clean wound bed
extracellular matrix composed of water, proteoglycans,
with wound margins that can be brought together with little
and other cells is formed. The matrix fills the space between
tension on the surrounding tissues is required for healing
collagen and elastin fibers in the wounded area, allowing
by primary closure. Healing by secondary closure, or sec-
more fibroblasts to migrate across the wound bed. The
ondary intention, occurs when the wound edges cannot be
newly formed vascularized connective tissue is called
brought together. The process of granulation tissue forma-
 granulation tissue (Figure 36-2). Chemotactic agents and
tion, wound contraction, and epithelialization is required
 Oxygen levels guide fbroblasts to migrate and proliferate,
to fill the wound defect. Healing by secondary closure is
thus filling in the wound bed. Integrins, surface cell recep-
more complicated, results in more scar tissue formation,
tors, serve as chemotactic agents and adhesion molecules
 and requires more time and energy to achieve closure than
to assist the migration of fibroblasts within the extracel-
 does healing by primary intention. In some cases, a trau-
lular matrix.' As oxygen levels increase in the wounded
matic or surgical wound cannot be immediately closed
 area, less proliferative activity is stimulated. Some of the
because of contamination or risk of infection. The wound
fibroblasts transform into myofibroblasts which have con-
may be cleaned over a period of a few days. When the
tractile properties and begin to pull the wound edges
wound is free of debris, it may be cleaned, surgically
inward. The wound contraction decreases the size of the
debrided and closed. Such a wound is said to heal through
defect. In larger and deeper defects, more granulation
delayed primary closure.
tissue is needed to fill the void calling for a greater degree
Abnormal Wound Healing
of wound contraction. The shape of the wound affects the
speed of contraction. Linear wounds contract faster than
A variety of factors may result in failure of an acute wound
rectangular wounds. The slowest to contract are circular
to move through the inflammatory, proliferative, and matu-
wounds.
 ration phases of healing in a predictable fashion. Wounds
Epithelial cells (primarily keratinocytes) migrate across
may become chronic because of a larger number of prote-
the granulation tissue bed from the wound margins and
ases and lack of protease inhibitors, leading to a degrada-
epidermal appendages to cover the wound defect. Growth
tion of the extracellular matrix and a larger wound bed.
factors stimulate epithelial cell proliferation while oxygen
Chronic wounds have higher amounts of infammatory
levels and chemotaxis guide migration across the wound
immunomodulating agents and are less responsive to
bed. Ease of migration is facilitated in a moist wound
growth factors. Patients who are immunocompromised or
environment.6 After the wound has been completely resur-
who have arterial insufficiency may be unable to mount the
faced with epithelial cells, the proliferative phase is con-
infammatory response necessary to clean the wound of
sidered complete.
debris and produce chemotactic cells that signal other cells
necessary for the production of granulation tissue in the
Maturation/Remodeling Phase
wounded area. Such wounds may be void of the classic
Although the wound bed is resurfaced through the cellular
signs of infammation. In contrast, some wounds may
and vascular events in the infammatory and proliferative
 persist in the infammatory phase, exhibiting debris, rolled.
644
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Table 36-1
Factors Affecting Wound Healing
Wound Characteristics
Local Factors
Systemic Factors
 Improper Management
Time since onset
Circulation
Age
Allow wound to become too wet or too dry
Location
Sensation
 Inadequate nutrition
Failure to fill wound cavity with dressing
Dimensions
Mechanical stress
Co-morbidities
Failure to thoroughly cleanse wound
Temperature
Medication
Overuse of cytotoxic agents
Hydration
Necrotic tissue
Infection
Myers BA: Wound managerment: principles and practice, ed 2. Englewood Cliffs, N, 2008, Pearson Prentice Hall.
thickened wound edges, and a lack of adherence of the
superficial wounds. The close proximity of wound edges
wound edge to the wound bed. Common causes of chronic
results in shorter healing times for linear wounds than
infammation include the presence of a foreign body in the
for rectangular or circularly shaped wounds. Maintenance
wound bed, repetitive trauma (e.g., excessive licking of the
of appropriate wound moisture within the wound bed
wound bed), and the overuse of agents that are cytotoxic
encourages granulation tissue formation and epithelializa-
to the cells involved in the healing process. Currently there 
tion. Thus, wound beds and periwound areas that are too
are insufficient data to assess safety, efficacy, and recom-
dry (desiccated) or too wet (macerated) have prolonged
 mendations for use of some topical agents because of
healing times. Devitalized tissue within the wound bed
inconsistency or lack of verification of equivalent compari-
and dry exudate or scabs can slow the migration of epi-
sons between in vitro and in vivo studies.? Agents in ques-
thelial cells across the wound bed, prolong the infam-
tion include povidone-iodine, hydrogen peroxide, sodium
matory response, and create an environment conducive
hypochlorite bleach, and chlorhexidine.10-12
to infection.13.14
Some wounds may granulate too little (hypogranulate)
Important to consider is the fact that all wounds are
.aouod, v 'xeut ne[nuea e iog yuoddns iood jo asnenag
contaminated. All body surfaces, including skin, and the
wound is formed as epithelial cells pile up at the wound
digestive tract have a normal microfora of bacteria and
edge and fail to migrate across the wound bed. The wound
fungi that include Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, Peptococ-
edges of such pothole wounds should be gently wiped with
cus, Streptococcus, Acinetobacter, and yeast. The resident
gauze and the wound cavity should be lightly filled with a
microflora and pH of the skin create a slightly acidic envi-
dressing to promote the formation of a granular matrix and
prevent premature migration of epithelial cells. In contrast,
causing microorganisms.' In an open wound the microflora
hypergranulation tissue may be formed when a wound
adhere to the surface and replicate, resulting in colonies
defect has been flled, yet the granulation process contin-
that do not necessarily adversely affect the host as the
ues, resulting in granulation tissue that extends well above
normal immune response is activated. However, if the bac.
the wound surface. Hypergranulation tissue, or proud fesh,
teria or fungi continue to replicate, a point of critical colo-
can be resolved by the application of pressure to the tissue
nization is reached in which the microorganisms become a
through certain dressing types, such as hydrocolloid dress-
bioburden, adversely affecting the host. When microorgan-
ing, the use of silver nitrate to cauterize the tissue and level
isms multiply to the point of invading viable body tissues,
the wound bed, hypertonic saline dressings, or surgical
the wound is considered infected. Because of the presence
excision of excess tissue.
of individual factors in each host, there is no specific
threshold for infection, although in general, wounds with a
Factors Affecting Wound Healing
Deterrents to expedient wound healing include wound
tissue are considered infected.!6 However, the type of
characteristics, local factors, and systemic factors (Table
microorganism must also be considered because some are
36-1). Acute wounds and surgically induced wounds tend
more virulent and produce exotoxins that may inactivate or
to heal more quickly than severe traumatic wounds or
 modify host responses, leading to host cell dysfunction or
wounds of insidious onset. Wounds located over bony
death. Bacterial endotoxins, molecules within the walls of
prominences, in areas with few epidermal appendages,
gram-negative bacteria, may induce a strong inflammatory
across joints, and in areas of thick skin have slower
response leading to fever, bleeding, and clotting. In addi-
healing times. Because more cellular activity and rebuild-
tion interactions among bacteria can lead to a microorgan-
ing of tissue are required, larger and full-thickness
ism community called a biofilm that attaches to the wound
wounds require more healing time than smaller or more
surface and is encased in a self-developed glycocalyx
Chapter 36
Physical Rehabilitation for Wound Care
645
(which protects the bacteria). The microorganisms encased
heart rate will still be elevated in response to hypovolemia,
in the biofilm exhibit increased virulence and resistance,
hypoxia, hypotension, or hypercarbia, even when high
making them less responsive to biological and pharmaceu-
doses of opioid medications have been delivered to the
tical intervention.17 Immunocompromise, malnutrition,
patient. In the emergency patient opioids are unlikely
and impaired local circulation of the host can also affect
to cause respiratory depression or the deterioration of
resistance to invading organisms.
hemodynamic parameters.?0 The use of nonsteroidal
In general, infection should be suspected when the signs
antiinfammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and corticosteroids are
of inflammation are disproportionate to the size and extent
contraindicated for use in a patient in shock until
of the wound (e.g., drainage is copious, has uncharacteris-
renal perfusion, blood pressure, and dehydration issues
tic color, wound is very painful, periwound area is
 have been addressed. In addition, endogenous endorphins
extremely red or hot, etc.). Wound cultures such as tissue
released in a stressful situation, such as an emergency
biopsies, swab cultures, or fuid aspirations may be used
room, can mask the seriousness of the patient's condition;
to identify an offending microorganism. Although tissue
therefore chemical sedation for fear and aggression is a
biopsy is the gold standard for culturing, properly per-
humane way to examine the emergency patient. An oxygen
formed swab cultures are a reliable method to identify and
mask or oxygen induction chamber allows the patient to
qems e uuouad Aqadod ol st punom e ui euanoeq Anuenb
 relax while medications are administered. 21
culture, the clinician must frst debride and thoroughly
 Severity of the injury determines the proper medications
rinse the wound bed. The swab should then be moved
 for pain control. Severe to excruciating pain present after
slowly over viable tissue in the wound bed in a crisscross
trauma with fractures and muscle damage require high-
patterm back and forth, moving from top to bottom while
 dose opioids and additional pain medications for adequate
rolling the swab and applying enough pressure to express 
relief. Fractures should be immobilized as soon as possible
some of the wound bed fuid. Wounds with a small surface
to reduce pain. Muscle hemorrhage, hematomas, or bruis-
area of little granulation tissue should be cultured by swab-
ing may cause significant discomfort. These injuries may
bing only the small area for 5 seconds while rotating the
benefit from local application of ice during the first 72
applicator.'9 Tissue biopsies are preferred for evaluating
hours or until the acute inflammatory phase has ended, and
pressure/decubital ulcers, burms, or wounds with a sus-
heat application thereafter. For injuries to the perineum,
pected neoplastic process.
pelvis, and rear limbs, epidural anesthesia may be neces-
Because endogenous or exogenous microbes can lead
sary if opioids are inadequate to control pain. After the
to infection, meticulous adherence to infection control pro-
patient has been stabilized, adjunctive medications such as
cedures must be exhibited. Procedures include hand
 NSAIDs, medications for nerve pain, and low-dose seda-
washing before and after glove use, the use of gloves,
tives may be administered.
which should be changed between procedures on the same
Nursing care is extremely important in controlling pain
patient and promptly after touching contaminated materi-
and anxiety. The patient should be kept clean, warm, and
als, and isolation of patients with antibiotic-resistant
dry on thick padded bedding. The extra attention and care
infections.
shown to the patient may decrease the anxiety level and
lessen the length of time the patient must be hospitalized.
Emergency Care
Initial Assessment
 In caring for a patient with a wound, the safety of the
patient and staff is of upmost concerm. When in pain, pets
 Although extermal bleeding wounds often capture the
can become suddenly aggressive. Staff should have muzzles
attention of the owners, the health care worker must be
and blankets readily available for use as necessary. A
aware that more life-threatening injuries may be present.
muzzle can be used during the administration of parenteral
The initial stabilization includes an examination of the
 pain medications and placement of an intravenous (IV) line 
airway with administration of oxygen, as appropriate. In
if patient respirations are normal. For patients having prob-
the case of severe head wounds, facial trauma or tracheal
lems breathing, a thick blanket can be placed over the
 damage, rapid induction may be necessary to accomplish
animal to control the head during the evaluation and
intubation and obtain an open airway (Figures 36-3 and
administration of pain medications. It is necessary to exer-
36-4). Puncture wounds or trauma to the chest wall should
cise universal precautions including the use of gloves to
increase suspicion of a pneumothorax, for which a thora-
protect the provider from human blood that may be present
cocentesis or chest tube may be necessary. All vital signs
on the coat of the patient and to protect the wounded area
should be obtained to evaluate the need for IV fuids and/
of the patient from bacteria that may be spread by health
 or blood products to treat hypovolemic shock.
care workers.
Bleeding from a wound may be controlled following
Medications to relieve pain should not be withheld
 Or simultaneously with establishing an adequate airway
from a patient, because analgesic agents do not prevent a
and stabilizing hemodynamic parameters. Capillary bleed-
full patient evaluation from being completed. Pain medica.
ing and venous hemorrhage normally can be controlled
tions do not mask the physiologic indicators, because the
with gauze sponges, direct pressure, and a bandage. With
646
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
conducted. Traumatic wounds are classified according to
type and contamination. Wound types include lacerations.
avulsions, shearing injuries, punctures or bites, penetrating
wounds, and pressure necrosis (Table 36-2). Wounds
also may be classified based on degree of contamination
(Table 36-3).
The initial lavage, debridement, and aftercare are to
 encourage healthy tissue that is free of infection and necro-
sis, and has a good blood supply. The golden period of
Figure 36-3  Puncture wounds over the neck of a dog that sus-
wound care refers to the first 6 hours after the traumatic
tained bite wo unds.
event occurred. It is during this time that the wound may
be cleaned and closed without the development of infec-
tion. While stabilization is occurring, the wound should be
kept as moist as possible by placing sterile water-soluble
gel into the wound and covering with a saline-soaked
sponge. Wounds that are kept moist heal up to 50% faster
than wounds that are allowed to dry out. Wide clipping of
the wound enables the clinician to examine the injury and
often exposes wounds that were not apparent upon initial
inspection. In the case of a bite wound, the opposite side
of the affected limb or body part should be carefully exam-
ined for a potential matching injury from the rest of the
teeth involved in the bite.
The wounded area must be cleansed of all debris and
 blood. In a grossly contaminated wound, tap water is prac-
tical to use for the first cleaning. Obvious debris can be
washed away with warm water using a gentle spray attach-
ment. A surgical scrub solution should then be applied to
Figure 36-4  Exploration of the wound in Figure 36-3 resulted in
the intact skin and the area around the wound. Detergent-
finding a laceration of the trachea.
containing scrubs are cytotoxic and may delay healing.
especially if used for extended periods of time. An
a gloved hand, a sterile gel should be placed in the wound
exception is the topical microbicide chloroxylenol (brand
and the wound should be covered with a layer of gauze
name Techni-Care@), which, in a retrospective clinical
sponges. Compression over the gauze sponges may be
trial, appeared to decrease infection rates and allow the
maintained with a layer of elastic bandage or tape until the
wound to progress toward healing?? (Table 36-4).
wound can be definitively addressed. More aggressive
Following the removal of gross contamination and
therapy is needed for arterial bleeding. For appendicular
cleansing of the surrounding skin, the wound must be
wounds, a 5- to 10-cm wide blood pressure cuff can be
lavaged with large amounts of fuid (at least 500 mL). The
applied proximal to the wound. The cuff is infated to 20
statement, "The secret to treating pollution is dilution'truly
to 30 mm Hg higher than the systemic arterial pressure to
applies to initial wound management. Fluid can be sprayed
control the bleeding while sedation is given. The infated
on the wound using an 18-gauge catheter attached to a
cuff can serve as a temporary tourmiquet for 30 to 45
 35-mL syringe via a three-way stopcock. A wamm l-L bag
minutes while the patient is sedated and prepared for surgi-
of fuid is also attached, enabling the operator to rapidly fill
cal exposure to the artery. A sterile hemostat is applied to
the syringe and fush the wound. This mechanism provides
the bleeding vessel and ligation with a small diameter
a pressure of 7 to 9 pounds per square inch (PSI), which is
antimicrobial suture is performed. Even though the blood
sufficient for decreasing the bacterial population, but not so
 pressure cuff can be left in place for an extended period
high as to drive the bacteria deeper into the tissues. Room
without permanent damage to the limb, the pressure should
temperature or cold lavage solutions are uncomfortable and
be released every 5 to 10 minutes to allow blood fow to
possibly painful to the patient. The least toxic, most inert
and from the region. Commercial toumiquets made from
lavage solution is ideal. The topical application of a mixture
narrow bands of elastic material or Penrose drains should
of sugar or honey, sugar and povidone-iodine (PI), or honey
not be used because they can place excessive pressure on
and PI may be used to promote granulation tissue formation
neurovascular structures and cause penmanent damage.
and reduce bacteria in the wound. Used alone or in combi-
After life-threatening injuries have been addressed, a
nation with PI, sugar acts to inhibit bacterial growth and
thorough examination of the wounded area should be
 modulates keratinocytes and fibroblasts ?3.24
Chapter 36
Physical Rehabilitation for Wound Care
647
Table 36-2
Types of Traumatic Wounds
Laceration
The wound exhibits minimal necrosis or compression and has sharp, linear, or jagged edges.
 Normally this is a relatively clean injury that requires minimal debridement, but inspection of
the deeper tissues is important.
Avulsion
 The injury results from tensile forces pulling the tissue free of its natural attachments. Deep
exploration with delayed closure is beneficial for this type of wound.
Shearing or
The high friction of the pavement on the skin during a motor vehicle accident will often result
degloving
in tearing of the skin and its attachments as well as damage to the deep vascular, nerve, and
bony structures. These wounds have minimal to moderate contamination and benefit from 
delayed closure. Skin grafts and orthopedic repairs are common with this injury.
Punctures
The small skin wound is only the tip of the iceberg in this injury. The compressive forces and
trauma to the underlying tissues from a bite injury involves significant disruption of the deep
tissue planes as well as deep seeding of bacteria into the wound. Foreign bodies that range
from hair to pieces of sticks and gravel are often found in these wounds. The wound should
 be opened and explored to clean, debride, and alleviate dead space. Delayed closure and
antibiotics are beneficial in these patients.
Penetrating
These wounds are considered to be contaminated and require surgical exploration if the wound
 injuries from
is over the abdominal cavity or the bullet is located within a joint.
projectiles
 Pressure necrosis
Devitalized necrotic tissue occurring from sustained pressure causing ischemia such as from a
tightly wrapped bandage, lying for extended time periods on a bony prominence, or from 
crushing and vascular injury during a trauma.
Halling K:uds adp frauMathwA dit earymgenyan criticaarmal d wYrk 00iea;wamHnde:
Small aimal wound management Philadelphia, 1990, Lea & Febiger.
Table 36-3
Wound Classification/
Box 36-1
Wound Management Techniques to
Contamination
Create and Maintain a Moist,
Clean Wound Environment
Clean
 Injury created by a grossly clean
object and is less than 6 hours
Dirty wound?
→ Clean it
P[O
Cavity/hole?
→
Fill it
Contaminated
Created by an object with bacterial
Wet wound?
→
Use more absorptive dressing/change
contamination and/or is greater
more frequently
than 6 hours old
Dry wound?
Use less absorptive dressing
Dirty/infected
Old traumatic wound with purulent
Infected wound?
→
Address underlying cause, clean
wound, use antimicrobial dressing
material or necrotic tissue present
Dernell ws: Initial wound management. Vet Clir North Am Small Anim Pract
36(4):714-773, 2006; Garzotto CK: Wound management. In Silverstein DC,
 of application, and frequency of dressing changes to main-
Hopper K, editors: Small animal critical care medicine. St. Louis, 2008.
Saunders.
tain a moist wound bed facilitates granulation tissue for-
mation and migration of epithelial cells across the wound
bed (Box 36-1).
Principles of Wound Management
Wound Dressings
 Basic principles of wound management include cleaning
The ideal wound dressing provides an optimal moist
the wound, preventing infection, providing a moist wound
wound healing environment, thermal insulation, gaseous
environment, and attending to systemic needs. Provision
exchange, pain relief, edema control, dead space elimina-
of a moist, but not wet, wound environment leads to
tion, protection from contaminants, and assistance with
increased angiogenesis, decreased dehydration and cell
removal of dead tissue without disruption of the wound
death, enhanced autolytic debridement, increased epitheli-
 bed. The primary dressing or contact layer may be adher-
alization, and the provision of a bacterial barrier to
ent or nonadherent, although in general nonadherent
 decrease infection rates. The appropriate choice, technique
contact layers are recommended to prevent disruption of
648
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Table 36-4
Properties of Surgical Scrubs
Chlorhexidine
Povidone-Iodine
Alcohol
Techni-Care@
Length of cidal
>6 hr
3 hr
None
>6 hr
Capacity
Ocular irritation
Yes
Yes
Yes
Minimal
Scrub time
8 min
3.5 min
11 min
0.5 min
Amount needed
10 mL
10 mL
N/A
2.6 mL
Tissue contraindication
Yes
Yes
Yes
None
Toxicity
 Skin, eyes, ears, genitals 
Skin
Skin, eyes
Nontoxic
 Denatured by organic material
Minimal
Yes; inactivated by blood
No data
Minimal
 Transdermal penetration
No
Yes
No
Yes
pH
5.84
4.0
6.8
7.2
GrubbsCtatCL tal: aae therayf open infeted surgical wouds: arerpective reviw uing Tehni-ar. Sug t (2:109,2000;StatCL: Fghing
wound infections. Plastic Surg Prod 11:34-40, 2005.
Figure 36-6   Small animal hyperbaric oxygen chamber
Figure 36-5  Various dressings used over multiple wounds.
 granulating tissue when dressings are removed. Permeabil.
plasma oxygen levels occur with oxygen delivery by mask
ity and occlusive properties vary among dressings. Semi-
or other indirect routes, whereas large increases of dis-
occlusive dressings are most commonly used to create a
solved oxygen in the plasma occur with oxygen delivery
moist wound environment, allowing air to pass through
under increased atmospheric pressure. Compared with nor-
the dressing and exudate to be absorbed into the dressing
mobaric conditions, the increase in partial pressure of dis-
from the wound bed. The secondary dressing is placed
solved oxygen in plasma and the increase in delivery of
over the primary dressing to increase protection, cushion-
oxygen to the tissues provides an environment conducive
ing, absorption, or occlusion and may be used to hold the
for healing of ischemic or otherwise hypoxic tissues.
 primary dressing in place?s (Figure 36-5). Major dressing
Angiogenesis is stimulated, immune system function is
types include gauze, alginate, films, foam, hydrogels, and
 improved, and proliferation is enhanced.26
hydrocolloids (Table 36-5).
 Hyperbaric oxygen therapy chambers come in various
sizes and can accommodate more than one small animal
Other Wound Healing Therapies
per treatment session (Figure 36-6). Each HBOT session
Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy
is managed by trained personnel. Contraindications include
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT), traditionally used to
deep vein thrombosis and congestive heart failure. Relative
treat decompression illness (the bends), has been used for
contraindications include severe arterial deficiency, chronic
some time in wound care. Only minimal increases in
 obstructive pulmonary disease, and pregnancy.
Chapter 36
Physical Rehabilitation for Wound Care
649
 frequent dressing changes
Soften eschar and provide
 moisture for dry wounds
 Heavily exudating wounds
 Infected wounds; wound
Minor burms;, skin grafts;
To reduce bioburden in
wound, reduce risk of
requiring packing;
Pressure ulcers; bums
woundsrequiring
 pressure ulcers 
 s
infection
 Distribution of silver within dressing
 Cannot be used on highly exudative
wounds unless changed frequently;
 May adhere to wound bed; require
 more frequent dressing changes
 Should not be used on infected 
may roll in areas of friction
not be used on dry wounds 
used on infected wounds 
 secondary dressing
on removal; may
Limitations
Moisture retentive; may be left in
 place for several days; provides
Moisture retentive; encourage
 Broad spectrum antimicrobial
 cushioning and insulation
bacteria; provides thermal
Can be used on infected or
autolytic debridement
 uninfected wounds; are
nonadherent and are
biocompatible
Inexpensive
insulation
properties
Benefits
 Absorption Capacity
multiple layers are
Varies, dependent on
 base dressing (e.g..
Low (moderate if
Low to moderate
hydrocolloid,
Wound Dressings
gel, etc.)
used)
Moderate
Moderate
H
Iype of Dressing
 Silver-impregnated
 Semipenmeable
Table 36-5
Hydrocolloid
Hydrogels
dressing
 Alginate
Gauze
foam
650
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
include use on dry wounds, necrotic wounds, in body cavi-
Electrical Stimulation
ties, over malignancies, or in the presence of exposed
The effectiveness of electrical stimulation as an adjunctive
blood vessels. Use is indicated for acute, chronic, and
therapy to wound healing is supported in the literature.27-31
 traumatic wounds; partial thickness burms; pressure ulcers;
Electrical stimulation is thought to facilitate wound
 and neuropathic wounds.36
healing by providing electrical current to the injury,
causing galvanotaxis, stimulating cells, enhancing blood
Holistic Treatment
fow, combating infection, reducing edema, and enhanc-
Throughout this chapter, the primary emphasis has been on
 ing autolysis. Indications include chronic or recalcitrant
Jocal wound care. However, the clinician must recognize
wounds. Contraindications include untreated osteomyeli-
 and attend to global factors that may affect wound healing,
tis and concurrent use with dressings containing heavy
such as nutrition of the patient, adherence of all staff to
metal ions. Common methods of treatment include high
exercising excellent wound management procedures at all
volt direct current with direct or periwound application at a
times, and the capabilities of the at-home caregivers. It is
frequency of 80 to 125 Hz, submotor (no contraction seen)
critical that the patient receive sufficient amounts of water,
intensity of 75 to 200 volts, with 45 to 60 minutes of treat-
protein, fats, and carbohydrates to support wound healing.
ment 3 to 7 days a week, or 30 minutes twice a day. With
Maintenance of an appropriate fuid balance is essential for
the direct treatment method of placing an electrode directly
 all cellular and systemic functions. Protein deficiency pre-
in the wound bed and the ground electrode placed in a loca-
disposes the patient to altered osmotic pressures, resulting
tion to maximize current fow through the wound. Polarity
in interstitial edema and restriction of blood fow, which
recommendations vary but most recommend placement of
may decrease the body's oxygen diffusion into the affected
the cathode in the wound bed for an infected wound, and
area. In the presence of inadequate protein and caloric
placement of the anode in the wound bed when promotion
intake, the nitrogen balance of the body is disturbed, result-
of granulation tissue and epithelialization are desired. The
ing in the use of stored proteins for energy, leaving little
polarity should be changed when a plateau of healing is
for wound repair processes. Carbohydrates, particularly
observed.32
glucose, have a protein-sparing effect, allowing the body
to use fats and carbohydrates for energy. Fats carry fat-
Negative Pressure Wound Therapy
soluble vitamins, help with thermoregulation, and, in the
Use of negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT), also
form of free fatty acids, compose important components of
kmown as vacuum-assisted closure, may enhance wound
cell membranes vital to the synthesis of new cells.
 Provision of a proper wound healing environment at the
the wound bed. An open-cell foam cut precisely to the size
local and systemic level leads to effective and faster wound
of the wound is placed within the wound bed and an evacu-
healing. Through proper wound cleansing, debridement,
ation tube with side ports is embedded within the foam with
dressing management, and nutritional support, the body
the free end of the tubing exiting at one end. The foam
should have the elements necessary to provoke an appropri-
contact layer may be lightly moistened with saline to
 ate inflammatory, proliferative, and maturation response that
improve comfort. A skin sealant may be applied to the peri-
 results in healed wounds within the typical time frames.
wound area and a hydrocolloid or sheet hydrogel dressing
may be placed where the evacuation tube exits the foam to
Conclusion
protect the underlying tissue. The flm drape is then applied
Over the foam and wound with enough overlap in the peri-
Rehabilitation patients frequently have wounds, including
wound area to ensure an airtight seal.33 The evacuation tube
surgical wounds and wounds resulting from nonsurgical
with a clamp is attached to an adjustable negative pressure
trauma. A good understanding of wound healing and the
pump and canister. The amount of negative pressure typi-
care of wounds is necessary to speed the rehabilitation
 nas aq A u  u 51 o os uo sa A
process and identify abnormal wound healing. This chapter
 continuous or intermittent vacuum.34 Although various pres-
summarizes the wound healing phases and discusses
sures are recommended based on wound etiology, the most
factors that may delay the tissue restoration process.
common pressure is approximately 125 mm Hg because
Modalities, dressings, and altermative treatments to speed
this pressure has been associated with maximum increase in
the healing process are discussed. Further reading in this
blood fow. Lower pressures may be used for chronic wounds 
 specialty can be found in these resources.3741
Or Over skin grafts and higher pressures may be used for
acute wounds or wounds with large cavities.33
REFERENCES
The beneficial effects of NPWT appear to result from
 1. Sepahl GC, Woodward SC: Repait, regeneration, and fbro-
increased blood and lymphatic fow; enhanced tissue per-
sis. In Rubin E, editor: Rubin's pathology: clinicopathologic
fusion, exudate management, release of growth factors,
foundations in medicine, ed 4. Philadelphia, 2005, Lippincott
cell proliferation; and reduced edema. Contraindications
Williams & Wilkins.
Chapter 36
Physical Rehabilitation for Wound Care
651
 2. Doherty D, Haslett C, Tonnesen M et al: Human monocyte
 22. Grubbs BC, Statz CL, Johnson EM et al: Salvage therapy of
adherence: a primary effect of chemotactic factors on the
open, infected surgical wounds: a retrospective review using
monocyte to stimulate adherence to human endothelium.
Techni-Care@. Surg Infect 1(2):109-114, 2000.
J Immunof 138(6):1762-1771, 1987.
23. Nakao H, Yamazaki M, Tsuboi R et al: Mixture of sugar and 
3. Sussman C, Bates-Jensen BM: Wound healing physiology:
povidone-iodine stimulates wound healing by activating
acute and chronic. In Bates-Jensen B, Seaman S, editors:
keratinocytes and fbroblast functions. Arch Dermatol Res
Wound care: a collaborative practice manuat for health pro-
298(4):175-182, 2006.
fessionais, ed 3. Philadelphia, 2007, Lippincott Williams &
 24. Mphande A, Killowe C, Phalira S et al: Effects of honey and
Wilkins.
sugar dressings on wound healing. J Wound Care 16(7):317-
4. Myers BA: Wound healing. In Myers BA, editor: Wound
319, 2007.
management: principles and practice, ed 2. Englewood
 25. Hedlund CS: Surgery of the integumentary system. In
Cliffs, NJ, 2008, Pearson Prentice Hall.
Fossum TW, editor: Small animat surgery, ed 3. St. Louis,
5. Murphy HS, Ward A: Infammation. In Rubin E, editor:
2007, Elsevier.
Rubin's pathology: clinicopathotogic foundations in medi-
 26. Kmieriem M: Hyperbaric oxygen use in emergency and criti-
cine, ed4. Philadelphia, 2005, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
cal care. International Veterinary Emergency and Critical
6.S
 Seiler WD, Stahelin HB: Implications for research. Wounds
Care Symposium, San Antonio, TX, 2007.
6:101-106, 1994
 27. Huttenlocher A, Horwitz AR: Wound healing with electric
7. Kerstein MD: Moist wound healing: the clinical perspective.
potentia1. NEJM 356(3):303-304, 2007.
Ostomy/Wound Manage 41(7A):37S-43S, 1995.
 28. Bayat M, Asgari-Moghadam Z, Marouf M et al: Experi-
8. Sephal GC, Woodward SC: Repair, regeneration, and fibro-
mental  wound healing using microamperage electrical
sis. In Rubin E, editor: Rubin's pathotogy: clinicopathoiogic
stimulation in rabbits. J Rehabil Res Dev 43(2):219-226,
foundations in medicine, ed 4. Philadelphia, 2005, Lippincott 
2006.
Williams & Wilkins.
 29. Bai H, McCaig CD, Forrester JV et al: DC electric fields
9. Payne DN, Babb JR, Bradley CR: An evaluation of the suit-
induce distinct preangiogenic responses in microvascular
ability of the European suspension test to reflect in vitro
and macrovascular cells. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biot
 -eio jueogais reouo isuieae sondesnue jo Anoe
24(7):1234-1239, 2004.
isms. Lett Appl Micro 28:7-12, 1999.
 30. Houghton PE, Kincaid CB, Lovell M et al.: Effect of electri-
10. Drosou A, Falabella A, Kirsner RS: Antiseptics on wounds:
 cal stimulation on chronic leg ulcer size and appearance.
an area of controversy. Wounds 15(5):149-166, 2003.
Phys Ther 83(1):17-28, 2003.
 11. Gilchrist B: Should iodine be reconsidered in wound man-
 31. Gardner S, Frantz RA, Schmidt F: Effect of electrical stimu-
agement? Eur Tiss Repair Soc J Wound Care 6(3):148-150,
lation on chronic wound healing: A meta-analysis. Wound
1997.
Repair Reg 7:495-503, 1999.
12. Burks Rl: Povidone-iodine solution in wound treatment.
32. Myers B: Wound management: principtes and practice, ed 2.
Phys Ther 78(2):212-218, 1998.
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2008, Prentice Hall.
13.8
 Sibbald R, Orsted H, Schultz G et al: Preparing the wound
33. Gupta S, Cho: A literature review of negative pressure wound
bed: focus on infection and infammation. Ostomy/Wound
therapy. Ostomy Wound Manage 50:(11A Suppl):2S-4S,
Manage 49(11):92-99, 2003.
2004.
14. Schultz GS, Barillo DJ, Mozingo DW et al: Wound bed
 34. Kloth LC: Five questionsand answers—about negative
preparation and brief history of TIME. Int Wound J 1(1):19-
pressure wound therapy. Adv Skin Wound Care 15(5):226-
32, 2004.
229, 2002.
15. Porth CM: Pathophysiology: concepts of altered heaith
35. Lanz Ol: Vacuum assisted closure: current veterinary appli-
 states, ed 7. Philadelphia, 2005, Lippincott-Raven.
cations. In NAVC Conference Veterinary Proceedings: Small
16. Hedlund CS: Surgery of theintegumentary system. In Fossum
Animal and Exotics, Book 2. Orlando, FL, 2007.
TW, editor: Small animal surgery, ed 3. St. Louis, 2007,
 36. Armstrong DG, Lavery LA, Diabetic Foot Study C: Negative
Elseviet.
pressure wound therapy after partial diabetic foot amputa-
17. Stewart PS, Costerton JW: Antibiotic resistance of bacteria
tion: a multicentre, fandomized controlled trial. Lancet
in bioflms. Lancet 358(9276):135-138, 2001.
366(9498):1704-1710, 2005.
18. Bill TJ, Ratliff CR, Donovan AM et al: Quantitative swab
 37. Myers BA: Factors affecting wound healing. In Myers BA,
 culture versus tissue biopsy : a comparison in chronic wounds.
editor: Wound management: principles and practice, ed 2.
Ostomy Wound Manage 47(1):34-37, 2001.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2008, Pearson Prentice Hall.
19. Levine NS, Lindberg RB, Mason AD et al: The quantitative
 38. Halling K: Wounds and open fractures. In Mathews KA,
swab culture and smear: a quick, simple method for deter-
editor: Veterinary emergency and criticat care manual, ed 2.
mining the number of viable bacteria in open wounds.
 New York, 2007, Lifelearn.
J Trauma 16(20):89-94, 1976.
39. Swaim SF, Henderson RA: Small animal wound manage-
 20. Dyson D: Analgesia and chemical restraint for the emergent
ment, Philadelphia, 1990, Lea & Febiger.
patient. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 38(6):1329-
 40. Dernell WS: Initial wound management. Vet Clin North Am
1352, 2008
Small Anim Pract 36(4):714-773, 2006.
21. Mathews KA: Nonsteroidal antinfammatory analgesics: a
41. Garzotto CK: Wound management. In Silverstein DC,
review of cuftent practices. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 12(2):89-
Hopper K, editors: Small animal critical care medicine.
99, 2002.
St. Louis, 2008, Saunders.
37
Physical Rehabilitation for
the Critically Injured
Veterinary Patient
Anne Marie Manning and Zoran Vrbanac
he critically injured veterinary patient can present 
Muscle contracture is shortening of the muscle owing
a daunting challenge to the clinician trying to
 to either intrinsic or extrinsic causes. Intrinsic changes are
 provide physical rehabilitation. Types of injuries
structural and can result from infammatory or traumatic
sustained may range from single or multiple orthopedic
processes. Trauma, infammation, ischemia, and hemor
injuries; soft tissue trauma to the chest, abdomen, or head;
rhage in injured patients can restructure muscle tissue com-
or a combination of these injuries. Burm injury or smoke
ponents and result in fibrosis and the development of
inhalation can cause severe metabolic and cardiorespira-
adhesions. Following hemorrhage into a muscle, fibrin
tory dysfunction. The common thread in all of these
deposition occurs. Within 2 to 3 days fibrin is replaced with
patients is a debilitating injury that renders them partially
reticular fibers that form a loose connective tissue network.
or completely immobile for prolonged periods. Although
 If the affected muscle is kept immobile, the network
bedrest is important to the recovery from critical injuries,
becomes more dense and resistant to stretch.'
prolonged inactivity can have deleterious effects on both
Extrinsic muscle contracture is secondary to neurologic
injured and healthy body systems. The goals of providing
abnormalities or mechanical factors and is commonly asso
physical rehabilitation to critically injured patients are to
ciated with prolonged immobilization. Causes of extrinsic
prevent complications stemming from injuries, prevent
muscle contracture include paralytic or spastic muscle con-
complications secondary to prolonged inactivity, maintain
ditions. Paralyzed muscles cannot provide adequate resis-
 body condition, improve patient comfort, and hasten recov-
tance to opposing muscles across a joint. Eventually the
ery. The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the effects of
antagonistic muscle will shorten. Carpal contracture in bra-
prolonged inactivity on traumatized and healthy body
chial plexus injuries illustrates this type of extrinsic con-
systems and to describe the application of basic physical
tracture. To prevent contracture of the carpus in this
rehabilitation techniques for specific critical injuries.
situation, stretch must be applied to the normal muscle.
Spastic muscle, which may exist in the pelvic limb mus-
The Musculoskeletal System
culature following trauma to the spinal cord between
T3-L3, results from imbalance of muscle control. Increased
 Rarely do traumatized animals escape injury to the mus-
muscle tone reduces the resting length of the spastic muscle
culoskeletal system. Injuries can include single or multiple
and results in abnormal joint positioning. Treatment is
fractures of the appendicular or axial skeleton, hemorrhage
aimed at stretching the abnormal muscle. Joint contracture
-dns saarau o Aanfu no 'saoeds yuio! pue 'aosnu 'uys ou
is defined as an inability to move a joint through its full
plying these structures. Patients with head, chest, or
range of motion (ROM). Conditions that contribute to joint
abdominal trauma may be unable to move because of
contracture include absence of mobility at the joint, immo-
decreased consciousness or pain. Disuse or injury to the
 bilization of a joint in an inappropriate position, joint pain,
musculoskeletal system may result in muscle weakness
 paralysis, and muscle damage.
and muscle atrophy; skin, muscle, and joint contractures;
The position in which limbs are immobilized also con-
and eventually may limit an animal's ability to move,
tributes to the development of contractures. Muscle fibers
 groom, eat, and ambulate. With these global implications
lose up to 40% of the length of sarcomeres when immobi-
maintenance of this body system is paramount.
lized in a shortened position. Therefore whenever possible
The balance between collagen synthesis and degrada-
tion is abnormal in immobile patients. Trauma with bleed-
fibers at equal length and tension to minimize contracture.?
ing into soft tissue and muscle and subsequent inflammation 
Additional factors that affect the rate of contracture devel-
and degeneration can trigger increased collagen synthesis.
opment include the precipitating cause, duration and degree
Increased collagen synthesis in an inactive patient leads to
 of immobilization, and preexisting joint restrictions.
tighter packing of collagen fibers and contributes to the
Edema, ischemia, and bleeding accelerate the development
development of contractures.
of muscle and joint contracture. Immobile, injured patients
652
Chapter 37
Rehabilitation for the Injured Veterinary Patient
653
Table 37-1
 Treatment of Musculoskeletal Injuries
Technique
Benefits
Frequency
Cryotherapy
 Reduces inflammation, swelling, and pain
Every 4-6 hr (after
initial 24-72 hr)
Superficial or
Improves circulation, reduces muscle spasm, provides pain relief
Every 4-6 hr (after
deep heating
acute inflam.
has subsided)
Massage
Increases circulation to paralyzed musculature, reduces/breaks down
4-6 times/day
 adhesions, provides pain relief, reduces edema
Range-of-Motion (ROM) Exercises
Passive
Maintains existing mobility of joints and soft tissue, minimizes contracture
4-6 times/day
formation, prevents loss of ROM, maintains muscle elasticity, improves
circulation, reduces edema
Active
Same as passive ROM exercise plus maintains physiologic muscle
4-6 times/day
elasticity, maintains bone integrity, and may increase muscle strength
Splinting and
Corrects severe muscle and joint contracture by providing prolonged stretch
casting
to muscle and joint structures
therefore require efforts directed at prevention and treat-
Table 37-2
Goals of Chest Physical
ment of contracture development following soft tissue
Rehabilitation
musculoskeletal injuries (Table 37-1).
Technique
Goals
Respiratory System
Positioning
Reduce risk of atelectasis, improve
The respiratory complications of prolonged immobility
ventilation/perfusion, improve gas
and those resulting from primary injuries are numerous and
exchange, reduce risk of pressure
potentially catastrophic in critically injured patients. Inju-
sores, minimize muscle and joint
ries to the head, chest, and abdomen often result in reduced
stiffness
Cough
 Remove secretions from trachea to
respiratory function because of pain, inability to move,
altered consciousness, or damage to thoracic structures.
fourth-generation bronchi
Postural
 Increase mobilization and elimination
altered breathing patterms, diminished ability to cough, and
drainage
 of secretions from upper airways
Percussion
Dislodge bronchial secretions 
Vibration
 Move secretions into larger airways
thorax, pulmonary contusions, and painful soft tissue inju-
ries to the chest and abdomen may result in a restrictive
breathing patterm characterized by shallow, rapid ventila-
tidal volume, functional residual capacity, and lung com-
pliance. Altered respiratory patterms in conjunction with
(Table 37-2). These goals can be achieved through tech-
immobility may lead to atelectasis, accumulation of respi-
niques such as stimulating the animal to cough, frequent
ratory secretions, and pneumonia. It is important for the
repositioning, postural drainage, percussion, vibration, and
clinician to note any injuries that may compromise respira-
exercise. Each of these techniques is reviewed in detail.
tory function and devise a physical rehabilitation plan to
address those concerms. Chest physical rehabilitation is a
Cough
term that describes the use of techniques aimed at improv-
Coughing is the most important defense mechanism to
ing lung volumes or facilitating the removal of airway
eliminate retained secretions. A cough can eliminate secre-
secretions.? The goals of chest physical rehabilitation are
 tions from the trachea to the level of the fourth-generation
to maintain bronchial hygiene, eliminate secretions from
segmental bronchi. An effective cough is initiated by a
the airways, re-expand atelectatic lung segments, improve
deep inspiration, followed by closure of the glottis and
 oxygenation, and reduce the incidence of pneumonia
contraction of the chest wall and abdominal musculature
654
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
to generate high intrathoracic pressure. After high intratho-
seven postural drainage positions that can be used to drain
racic pressure is attained, the glottis opens and is followed
by rapid expulsion of air during exhalation. Critically
tion of postural drainage therapy depends on the number
injured patients may not be able to initiate a cough bec ause
of lung segments requiring drainage, the amount of secre-
of impaired consciousness, pain, weakness, or injuries to
tions produced, and the patient's tolerance for the proce.
the chest or abdominal wall. These animals can be assisted
dure. In general 5 to 10 minutes per position is necessary
to cough by applying gentle pressure to the trachea at the
for this therapy to be effective. Because exercise is superior
level of the third tracheal ring. Placing an animal in stermal
to postural drainage for mobilization of respiratory secre-
recumbency may also improve an animal's ability to cough.
tions, ambulatory patients should be encouraged to walk
Animals should be assisted to cough after postural drain-
for 5 to 10 minutes, three to four times a day.7 Postural
age, percussion, and vibration and before changes are
drainage is indicated in injured patients with pulmonary
made in the patient's position.
contusions, atelectasis, or altered consciousness, and those 
patients that are immobile secondary to injuries.
Positioning
Percussion
Injured animals are often unable to move or change posi-
tion within their cage. Altermating right, stermal, and left
  pd si () uissnrad sa
lateral recumbency every 4 hours is recommended for
 striking the patient's chest wall with cupped hands over
immobile patients. Frequent repositioning helps prevent
the affected lung segments (Figure 37-2). With this tech-
 atelectasis and pooling of secretions in dependent lung
nique a mechanical shockwave is applied to the chest wall
segments. Because position infuences the distribution of
and transmitted to the lungs to dislodge secretions from
blood fow to the lungs, changing body positions alters
bronchial walls. The goal of percussion in combination
ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) relationships within the lungs.
with vibration is to move secretions from small to larger
When a patient is positioned with the compromised lung
airways where they can be cleared by a cough or postural
segment in a dependent position, that lung receives
 drainage techniques. Percussion is performed throughout
increased blood fow, resulting in increased V/Q mismatch
both inspiration and expiration. The amount of force used
and impaired gas exchange. Therefore if pulmonary con-
is determined by patient tolerance to the procedure and
 tusions or pneumonia are present, positioning the patient
the patient's medical problem. Correct hand form and
 positioning over the affected lung segment are more impor-
V/Q mismatch and improving gas exchange. Improved
tant than the amount of force used. Only affected lung
 Oxygenation and a reduction in the number of patients with
segments should be percussed because normal lung does
postoperative fever have been documented in humans
not benefit from percussion. The rate of percussion should
when side-to-side turming is used.6
be steady and the therapist should proceed in a circular
 Frequent position changes in conjunction with comfort-
motion over the affected area.'° Erratic percussion, that is,
able bedding also help reduce the risk of pressure sores,
frequent stops and starts, should be avoided. Generally
edematous limbs, and muscle and joint stiffness. Reposi-
percussion should be sustained for 3 to 4 minutes followed
tioning is a simple physical rehabilitation technique that
by vibration. Three to four periods of percussion are gen-
should be employed in all immobile patients.
erally adequate for each postural drainage position. Percus-
sion is not recommended for those patients that produce
Postural Drainage
little or no sputum with a cough' as well as patients with
Postural drainage is the use of changes in body position
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
to allow gravity to aid in the removal of tracheobronchial
(COPD).2
secretions from different lung segments. This method of
 thoracic physical rehabilitation prevents pooling of respira-
Vibration
tory secretions in the lungs, enhances drainage of the
After each period of percussion, vibration (shaking of the
periphery of the lung, accelerates clearance of mucus, and
chest wall) is performed to move the dislodged secretions
increases the functional residual capacity of the lungs.′ The
toward larger airways (Figure 37-3). Unlike percussion,
 patient must be positioned so that segmental bronchi are
which is performed during both inspiration and ex halation,
vertical to the affected lung to allow movement of secre-
vibration is performed only during exhalation. The tech-
tions into the larger airways. After secretions reach the
nique is performed with both hands placed on the same
mainstem bronchi and trachea, a cough will aid in their
side of the chest over the affected lung segment. With arms
removal. Postural drainage is most effective when used in
straight and locked the therapist simultaneously contracts
conjunction with percussion and vibration to loosen thick
all of his or her muscles from the hands to the shoulder
airway secretions.
and vigorously shakes the chest wall. A mechanical vibra-
In human patients 1l postural drainage positions are
tor also may be used. Vibration is performed on four to six
used to drain 14 lung segments. Figure 37-1 illustrates
consecutive breaths following each episode of percussion.
Chapter 37
Rehabilitation for the Injured Veterinary Patient
655
G
Figure 37-1 Positions for draining various portions of the lungs. A, Lateral segment of the left caudal lung lobe. The patient is in left lateral
recumbency with the hind end elevated 40 degrees. B, Left and right caudal dorsal lung fields. The patient is in sternal recumbency with hind
end elevated 40 degrees. C, Left and right caudal ventral lung fields. The patient is a dorsal recumbency with the hind end elevated 40 degrees.
D, Left and right cranial ventral lung fields. The patient is in dorsal recumbency with the front end elevated 40 degrees. E, Left and right cranial
dorsal lung fields. The patient is in sternal recumbency with the front end elevated 40 degrees. F, Right middle lung lobe. The patient is in dorsal
recumbency. A pillow has been placed under the left side of the thorax so that the right side is higher than the left side. The hind end is elevated
40 degrees, and the front end is rotated one-quarter turn to the right. G, Lateral segment of the right caudal lung lobe. The patient is in left
lateral recumbency with the hind end elevated 40 degrees. (Modified from Manning A, Ellis D, Rush J: Physical therapy for criticallyill veterinary
patients. I. Chest physical therapy. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 19:680, 1997.)
Any indication for postural drainage is an indication for
arrhythmias.1113 Animals with pulmonary contusions often
percussion and vibration.
have some degree of hypoxia and should be supplemented
with oxygen before and during these techniques. If oxygen
desaturation occurs Saoz values generally returm to pre-
Contraindications for Postural Drainage,
treatment values within minutes of position changes and
Percussion, and Vibration
the conclusion of percussion. Animals with chest trauma
Although most patients tolerate chest physical rehabilita-
are at risk for cardiac arrhythmias secondary to traumatic
tion, critically injured patients may be at risk for compli-
 myocarditis. Chest percussion in these animals may pre-
cations. In human patients postural drainage has been
cipitate an arrhythmia or cause an existing arrhythmia to
 associated with transient decreases in oxygen saturation of 
worsen. Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring is rec-
arterial blood (Saoz), and percussion can potentiate cardiac
ommended before and during chest physical rehabilitation.
656
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
Box 37-1
Contraindications for Chest
Physical Rehabilitation in
Critically Injured Patients
 Flail chest or rib fractures
Pneumothorax
Platelet count <30,000 platelets/μL
 Areas with open wounds
·
 Subcutaneous emphysema of the neck or thorax
Pain
Unstable cardiovascular condition. Use caution with postural
drainage techniques in patients with cranial trauma.
Figure 37-2  Chest percussion is performed by striking the chest
wall with cupped hands over the affected lung segments. The goal is
to help break up secretions to larger airways so that they may be
expelled by coughing or other means.
 Ambulatory patients should be encouraged to stand and
walk for short periods of time (5-10 minutes) every 4 to 6
hours. Weak but ambulatory animals can be supported with
slings or hamesses. Nonambulatory patients should be assisted
to stand for a few minutes every 4 to 6 hours in conjunction
with changes in body position. Refer to chapter 29 for exam-
ples of exercises that may be used early postoperatively or for
patients with extreme weakness and injuries.
Clinical Applications of Physical
Rehabilitation for the Critically
Injured Patient
Figure 37-3  After percussion, vibration (shaking of the chest wall)
Soft Tissue Trauma and Orthopedic Injuries
 is performed to move the dislodged secretions toward larger airways.
Trauma to soft tissue structures such as skin and muscle
Vibration is performed only during exhalation. Both hands are placed 
may be confined to a limited area or may be extensive.
on the same side of the chest over the affected lung segment. with
Extensive bruising. swelling, and pain may result from
arms straight and locked, the therapist vigorously shakes the chest
injury. Initial treatment should consist of immobilization,
wall. vibration is performed on four to six consecutive breaths fol-
lowing each episode of percussion.
pue 'sinou g m t Aaaa snuu oz o o1 roy Aderayo1
comfortable bedding. If open wounds are evident, protec-
tive bandaging should be applied. Animals should be repo-
Other injuries in which chest physical rehabilitation is con-
 sitioned at least every 4 to 6 hours to prevent dependent
traindicated are listed in Box 37-1.
edema from forming in the limbs and to prevent lung
atelectasis. If the extremities are injured the involved
Exercise
limbs should be elevated above the level of the heart to
Exercise is superior to chest physical rehabilitation in
promote drainage and reduce edema. Bandaging the limb
reducing atelectasis, mobilizing secretions from the lung
can prevent or reduce edema by compressing lymphatics
periphery, and preventing pooling of secretions in the
and blood vessels to limit fuid accumulation in the inter-
lungs. A systematic review on human patients suffering
stitium. Bandages of cast padding and reusable elastic
from COPD revealed moderate evidence of positive infu-
bandage material should be applied beginning with the
ences of a walking program and chest therapies (except 
distalmost aspect of the extremity.? Bandages may need to
percussion) on patients with COPD exacerbation.4 Exer-
be changed several times daily to allow inspection of the
cise enables deep breathing, which improves ventilation
 area and for physical rehabilitation.
and expiratory fow. Exercise has also been shown to
After acute infammation has resolved, warm com-
improve sympathetic activity, which increases ciliary beat
presses or warm water baths may be used. If the animal is
frequency and decreases mucus viscosity.1s.16 In addition
capable, restricted exercise is encouraged beginning 48
to the respiratory benefits, early mobilization reduces
hours after the initial insult. If spinal cord or orthopedic
many of the musculoskeletal complications associated with
 injuries prevent the patient from ambulation but permit
 prolonged immobility.
movement of the limb, gentle passive ROM exercises
Chapter 37
Rehabilitation for the Injured Veterinary Patient
657
should be initiated. The limb and all joints should be cycled
in some articles as controversial, because although hyper-
through their full ROM 10 times, four to six times daily.
baric oxygen reduces the half-life of carboxyhemoglobin
 Range of motion exercises may be performed in conjunc-
 in humans, there are conflicting reports of its efficiency of
tion with massage therapy. If fractures are present, ROM
preventing late sequelae .23
exercises should be withheld until appropriate fixation of
the fracture. After surgical stabilization of fractures, cryo-
Heat Stroke
therapy should be applied to reduce infammation, pain,
Heat exhaustion and heat stroke are the most common
and muscle spasms. Following resolution of the acute
heat-related diseases involving dysfunction or failure of
inflammatory period, application of warm compresses may
temperature control in the body. They usually occur when
be beneficial to help relieve pain and muscle spasms.
the body is subjected to elevated ambient temperature
Passive range of motion of the joints above and below the
and during strenuous exercise. When body hyperthermia
fracture site and massage therapy of the soft tissues are
lasts for a prolonged period of time, neurologic abnormali-
usually initiated 1 to 4 days after surgery if the patient
ties such as hallucinations, seizures, and coma can occur,
permits.17 Physical rehabilitation techniques to prevent
with the further effects of organ failure, disseminated intra-
contracture formation include encouraging ambulation,
vascular coagulation, permanent brain damage, and death.24
active and passive range of motion exercises, and stretch-
 The extent of damage to the body depends on the dura-
ing affected joints and muscles. Massage may be used to
tion and level of hyperthermia. The primary treatment of 
break down adhesions, reduce muscle spasm, and limit
an animal suffering from heat stroke is to reduce the body
edema. If severe contractures have already formed, ROM
temperature immediately. Cooling methods include exter-
exercises can be combined with serial casting or splinting.
 nal and intermal approaches. Extermal methods use the con-
The use of casts or splints allows joints and muscles to be
vection and conduction abilities of cold, whereas intemal
stretched for prolonged periods of time. Moderate contrac-
 methods are more invasive, including irrigation lavage or
tures may be treated by splinting the area for 20 to 30
intravascular catheters with cool intravenous fuid admin-
minutes, four times daily, in conjunction with ROM exer-
istration. Some of the described extermal methods can be
cises and massage. Severe contractures may require place-
practical, such as immersion in a cold water bath or surface
ment of a cast or splint for 2 to 3 days. At the end of this
application of ice packs. White et al.? describe the use
period, the area is re-examined, and another cast or splint
of evaporative cooling by spraying the dogs with tap
is placed as necessary to achieve further gains in motion.
water (15°C) (59*F) and compared the results with a peri-
Splinting and bracing are described in detail in chapter 17.
toneal lavage group. The evaporative technique was as
rapid as the lavage group.
Burn and Smoke Inhalation Injuries
Head Trauma
nno Aeu Ainfun uoge euui aous pue Ainfun unq aaaas
as a result of thermal, radiation, chemical, or electrical
 Patients that have sustained head trauma may have impaired
injury. Bum injury in animals can lead to severe metabolic,
consciousness and usually benefit from both chest and mus-
cardiovascular, and pulmonary disorders. The burm classi-
culoskeletal physical rehabilitation. Depressed conscious-
fication system classifes burms by the amount of total body
ness may cause abnormal breathing patterms such as
surface area (TBSA) involved and by increasing depth:
hyperventilation, hypoventilation, irregular respiration, or a
superficial, superficial partial-thickness, deep partial-thick-
Cheyne-Stokes breathing patterm (apnea altermating with
ness, and full-thickness18.19 Although burm injuries have
hyperpnea). Abnormal breathing patterms may lead to
not been well described in the veterinary literature, rapid
reduced tidal volume, functional residual capacity, and lung
cooling of bums within 30 minutes of thermal injury
compliance, allowing respiratory secretions to accumulate.
seems to be beneficial in preventing tissue damage,
Comatose or stuporous animals are unable to mobilize
reducing edema formation, and increasing the speed of
secretions because of depressed cough and uncoordinated
re-epithelialization.2?0 Current  recommended  treatment
swallowing mechanisms. Atelectasis caused by immobility
includes cooling the wounds with cold tap water (15°C
contributes to respiratory complications. Respiratory physi
[59° F]) for 20 minutes.?l Ice-cold water must be avoided
cal rehabilitation should be initiated in these patients as soon
because of the risk of hypothermia.
as they are stable. The therapist should assist the patient to
Smoke inhalation injuries are not common in veterinary
cough and use postural drainage, percussion, and vibration
practice, but can occur. Smoke contains toxic substances
techniques within 48 hours of presentation or as the animal's
that can cause, apart from respiratory disorders, neurologic
condition permits. Care should be taken when placing
signs in animals after inhalation. One of the most important
these patients in a head-down postural drainage position. If
considerations is carbon monoxide (CO), a product of
 increased intracranial pressure or ongoing hemorrhage is
combustion. The ability to bind to hemoglobin multiple
 suspected, head-down positions should be avoided.
times greater than oxygen, results in cellular hypoxia.22
Comatose or stuporous patients often exhibit abnormal
The use of hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been reported
trunk and limb posture. The limbs may be held in rigid
658
Section VI
Physical Therapy for Specific Diagnoses
extension or fexion or may be limp. As soon as the patient's
9. Manning AM, Elis DR, Rush JE: Physical therapy for criti-
condition allows, musculoskeletal physical rehabilitation
cally ill veterinary patients. I. Chest physical therapy, Comp 
should be initiated to prevent muscle and joint contracture.
Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:675-689, 1997.
A combination of frequent position changes, massage, and
10. Percussion and vibration. In Frownfelter D, editor: Chest
 passive ROM exercises should be employed.
physicat therapy and putmonary rehabilitation, St. Louis,
1987, Mosby.
Pulmonary Contusions
11. Connors AF et al: Chest physical therapy: the immediate
effect on oxygenation in acutely ill patients, Chest 78:559-
Chest physical rehabilitation is frequently used in human
564, 1980.
patients with pulmonary contusions. In patients with trau-
12. Snow V, Lascher S, Mottur-Pilson C et al: The evidence base
 matic chest injuries, chest physical rehabilitation is believed
for management of acute exacerbations of COPD: clinical
to exert its greatest effect on the smaller airways rather than
practice guideline Part 1, Chest 119(4):1185-1189, 2001.
the larger airways.2627 Before initiating chest physical
13. Hammon WE, Connors AF, McCaffree DR: Cardiac althyth-
rehabilitation, chest radiographs should be taken and eval-
mias during postural drainage and chest percussion of criti-
uated for the presence of pneumothorax, fail chest, or rib
cally ill patients, Chest 102:1836-1841, 1992.
fractures that would preclude percussion and vibration.
14. Tang CY, Taylor NF, Blackstock FC: Chest physiotherapy for
 patients admitted to hospital with an acute exacerbation of
Chest radiographs should also be used to identify contused
 lung segments so that the therapist may choose the proper
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): a systemic
review, Physiotherapy 96:1-13, 2010.
postural drainage positions and apply percussion and
15. Baldwin DR et al: Effect of addition of exercise to chest
vibration over the appropriate area.
physiotherapy on sputum expectoration and lung function in
adults with cystic fbrosis, Respir Med 88:49-53, 1994.
Conclusion
16. Oldenburg FA et al: Effects of postural drainage, exercise,
and cough on mucous clearance in chronic bronchitis, Am
Rehabilitation should begin as soon as the critically ill
Rev Respir Dis 120:739-745, 1979.
patient is stable, and before the onset of complications
17. Hodges CC, Palmer RH: Postoperative physical therapy.
associated with prolonged hospitalization and immobiliza-
In Harari J, editor: Surgical complications and wound
tion. A proactive approach to rehabilitation requires less
healing in the small animal patient, Philadelphia, 1993,
Saunders.
time and effort and reaps greater rewards than one that is
18. Saxon WD, Kirby R: Treatment of acute burn injury and
in response to developing problems. Most patients experi-
 smoke inhalation. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors: Kirk's 
ence benefits from even simple rehabilitation therapies
veterinary therapy Xl. Philadelphia, 1992, Saunders.
such as massage, thenmotherapy, PROM, and controlled
19. Bishop JF: Burn wound assessment and surgical manage-
exercise regimens that involve a minimum amount of time
ment, Crit Care Nurs Clin North Am 16(1):145-177, 2004.
 On the owner's or therapist's part.
 20. Vaughn L et al: Severe burn injury, burn shock, and smoke
inhalation injury in small animals. Part 2: Diagnosis, therapy,
REFERENCES
complications, and prognosis, J Vet Emerg Crit Care 22(2):
1. Halar EM, Bell KR: Contractures and other deleterious
187-200, 2012. doi: 10.1111/j. 1476-4431.2012.00728.x
effects of immobility. In Delisa JA, Gans BM, Bockenek WL,
 21. Cuttle L, Kempf M, Kravchuk O et al: The optimal tempera-
editors: Rehabilitation medicine: principles and practice,
ture of frst aid treatment for partial thickness burn injuries,
Philadelphia, 1988, Lippincott.
Wound Repair Regen 16(5):626-634, 2008.
 2. Spector SA et al: Architectural alterations of rat hind limb
22. Beasley VR: Smoke inhalation, Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim
skeletal muscle immobilized at different lengths, Exp Neurol
Pract 20(2):545-556, 1990.
76:94-110, 1982.
23. Mariani CL: Full recovery following delayed neurologic
 3. Anderson DM, Keith J, Novak Pet al: Mosby's medicat, nursing
signs after smoke inhalation in a dog, J Vet Emerg Crit Care
&alfied heatth, dictionary, ed 6, St. Louis, 2002, Mosby.
13(4):235-239, 2003.
4. Smaldone GC, Messina MS: Flow limitation, cough, and 
24. Diller KR, Zhu L: Hypothermia therapy for brain injury,
patterns of aerosol deposition in humans, J Appt Physiot
Annu Rev Biomed Eng 11:135-162, 2009.
59:515-520, 1989.
25. White JD, Kamath R, Nucci R, Johnson C, Shepherd S:
 5. Wheeler SL: Care of respiratory patients. In Slatter D, editor:
Textbook of small animat surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993,
stroke: comparative effcacy in a canine model. Am J Emerg
Saunders.
Med 11(1):1-3, 1993.
6. Gibb KA, Carden DL: Atelectasis, Emerg Med Clin North
 26. MacKenzie CF, Shin B, Hadi F, Imle PC: Changes in total
Am 2:371-378, 1983
lung/thorax compliance following chest physical therapy.
 7. Ciesla ND: Chest physical therapy for patients in the inten-
Anesth Anaig 59:207-210, 1980.
sive care unit, Phys Ther 76:609-625, 1996.
 27. Ciesla ND, Klemic N, Imle PC: Chest physical therapy for
8. Frownfelter D: Postural drainage. In Frownfelter D, editor:
the patient with multiple trauma, Phys Ther 61:202-205,
Chest physical therapy and putmonary rehabilitation,
1981.
St. Louis, 1987, Mosby.
SECTION VII
Business Considerations in Veterinary
Rehabilitation
Development of a Rehabilitation
Facility for Small Animals and
Business Considerations
Jim Minick and Debbie Gross Saunders
Why Consider a Rehabilitation
 of expensive diagnostic equipment such as radiographic,
Enterprise?
ultrasound, and other imaging equipment. The ability to
take a radiograph at a rehabilitation facility can be more
The success of any business lies in its ability to take advan-
efficient for the client if additional information is required
tage of current trends and technologies to support its growth.
for the therapist. In a stand-alone rehabilitation facility all
Veterinarians today are looking for new ways to expand their
pertinent information must be forwarded to the practitioner
 practices, specialties, and income. Historically this has been
before the initial evaluation. Of course professionalism and
accomplished through expansion of specialty areas (e.g.,
sensitivity to professional relationships must be considered
oncology, dentistry, ophthalmology). Most of these disci-
in a rehabilitation facility housed in a veterinary clinic.
plines require specialized training and, in some cases, very
Competence in the area of rehabilitation medicine is a
expensive equipment. Rehabilitation for animals is similar
prerequisite to provide legitimate service. Training is imper-
to that currently being performed on humans. A person
ative for a successful rehabilitation practice. For individuals
undergoing knee surgery would expect a regimented reha-
who do not choose to pursue training or when trained staff-
bilitation program for increased mobility and pain manage-
ing is an issue, partnerships with other medical practices and
ment. Of the more than 60,000 veterinarians currently
staff may be used for the rehabilitation component.
practicing in the United States, only a small, but growing.
Patient evaluation is the most critical component of 
 percentage offer any fonm of rehabilitation for small animals.
the process because therapeutic protocols are established
Rehabilitation can be prescribed for:
based on problems identified during the evaluation. As
· Presurgical and postsurgical procedures
with humans, rehabilitation of animals involves numerous
· Recumbent patients, such as trauma or neurologic cases
types and degrees of care. When the evaluation process is
· Increased mobility and strength in geriatric animals
thorough, logical, and based on sound clinical fundamen-
· Pain management of injured and geriatric animals
tals, positive results can be expected. By following a struc-
Conditioning canine athletes
tured program the results may be further improved. The
· Improving quality of life
evaluation will determine the primary, secondary, and pos-
Sports specific injuries
sibly tertiary problems with which the dog presents. After
Wound care and management
the problems are identified, the goals are established and
·Arthritis
the respective treatments are outlined. Specific consider-
· Weight management and control
ations for each animal should be considered as well. For
Two scenarios exist for establishing a rehabilitation prac-
example aquatic therapy (Figures 38-1 and 38-2) may not
tice; a stand-alone facility or a facility associated with a
 be applicable to every dog for a variety of reasons.
veterinary practice. Both have advantages and disadvan-
tages. A stand-alone rehabilitation facility offers the advan-
Creating a Sound Business Strategy
tage of focusing on only rehabilitation with a team of
veterinarians, physical therapists, technicians, and other
When starting a business there are basic strategies that
support staff. A rehabilitation facility within a veterinary
must be considered. No single individual can possess all
practice may be able to optimize benefits to patients by
the answers; therefore a well-planned business strategy
providing total patient care. Integration with a regular vet-
must be developed with a common sense approach to
erinary practice allows one to take advantage of economies
success. Common sense is the knack of seeing things as
of scale, especially when considering the purchase and use
they are, and doing things as they ought to be done.
659
660
Section VlI
Business Considerations in Veterinary Rehabilitation
will undoubtedly be from outside sources. Existing canine
rehabilitation clinics within a 50-mile radius is not a nega-
tive, but it is advantageous to determine what services they
offer and determine how you may compete.
Business Plan
After determining that a rehabilitation practice is some-
thing that can enhance a new or existing practice, a written
plan must be drafted. Anyone who has considered a new
business is always encouraged to have a well-defined
written business plan. Until the plan is in writing you are
Figure 38-1  Underwater treadmill
not fully committed to the business entity.
 If you already have your own practice you should be
familiar with the need for and structure of a good business
plan. If not there are many resources that may be consulted
to help in this endeavor. Organizations such as the SBA
 can help to create the plan or, if preferred, numerous books
and computer software are available to guide the process.
 Many existing canine rehabilitation centers have business
plans and they may be able to offer advice and guidance.
Legal Entity
A logical plan should start with the choice of a legal entity
such as a Corporation, Subchapter S Corporation, or
Limited Liability Company (LLC). These entities can
provide protection for you and your assets. The state in
which you do business, the size of your company, and
Figure 38-2  Rehabilitation pool.
the potential tax benefits/burdens all infuence the entity
chosen. Discussions with a lawyer and accountant will help
The road map to a successful rehabilitation practice
to determine the best entity for each situation. Doing Busi-
will result from sound business principles discussed
ness As (DBA) may be set up initially under an LLC for a
throughout this chapter.
rehabilitation clinic in an existing facility. Advice from
The basic rules for a successful practice may be sum-
 legal counsel should be pursued regarding this matter.
marized as follows:
·Know what you want.
Accounting and Legal Support
·Find out what it takes to get it.
Two of the most important people to have on any team
Act on it and persevere.
are a competent business attormey and an accountant with
As the process progresses, it cannot be stressed enough that
tax experience that specializes in small to medium-sized
the key to success in any worthwhile endeavor is to align
service businesses. Accounting and legal expertise can
yourself with the correct team. It is not difficult to pick the
save the average business owner thousands of dollars over
best and brightest individuals who can help you succeed.
a 5- to 10-year period. An accountant makes sure bills are
Canine rehabilitation is a relatively new feld and it is
 paid in a timely fashion, supplies banks with information
important to examine clinics established in different areas
that is required, such as profits and losses, accounts receiv-
of the country. In addition most cities have Small Business
able, and cash fows, and makes sure that a sound account-
Administration (SBA) offices that can be wonderful
ing system minimizes tax liability. A good attormey can
resources for each of the points discussed in this chapter.
reduce or minimize legal issues related to employees,
One of the initial steps in establishing a practice is
employment agreements, partnerships, contracts and, to
determining whether a physical rehabilitation practice is
some extent, construction and equipment contracts. If there
viable in your community and your location. Some ques-
 is an ongoing working relationship with specific individu-
tions to consider include: (1) What is your referral source?
als, these business associates will help you and your busi-
(2) Is the location convenient for clients? (3) Are there
ness. These services will be invaluable in making sound
other canine rehabilitation clinics within a 50-mile radius,
business recommendations. The most successful small
and what services do they offer? (4) What are the economic
businesses incorporate tax and legal advice from their
demographics for your location? Even if a rehabilitation
inception, making them members of the team and keys to
clinic is within an existing clinic, some portion of referrals
success.
Chapter 38
Development of a Rehabilitation Facility
661
Financing
Attributes of each of the elements should include:
Financing the venture may be accomplished in a variety of
 Brochures should be colorful, informative, and uncom-
ways. Bank loans are the most obvious avenue to raise funds.
plicated.
Community banks are becoming more creative in their loan
Web sites should be innovative, easy to navigate, informa-
 practices and may be fexible if there is a good credit history.
tive, customer friendly, and dynamic. A static (not often
Altermative sources of funding such as investment partmers
changed) Web page can be more harmful than helpful.
who provide equity and, in some cases additional business
Web blogs can draw countless people to your Web site.
acumen, may present valuable insights. In addition the SBA
Social media like Twitter, Facebook, and Pinterest allow
provides a number of financial assistance programs for small
you to contact numerous people with short, logical
businesses. Credit umions and insurance companies may also
updates. Any blog visited should provide the opportu-
provide financing to diversify their portfolios.
nity to comment, which should be used to drive traffic
 Consider segmenting the money needed into startup
to the practice blog or Web site.
 Target marketing to the consumer helps to define the
example an accountant can help determine if a lease is best
specialty area and narrows the focus of marketing to
for acquiring various pieces of equipment needed for the
 Aaae u aedioned jeu sqn se yons sdnog e[noned
practice. At all costs the temptation to use credit cards for
tracking, lure coursing, and so on.
financing. as many small business owners have done,
 Print advertising can take many forms, including arti-
should be avoided. If venture capital funding partners
cles written about the facility and the services per-
are used, be certain to have an attomey(s) review any
formed. This media is probably considered more
repayment agreements. Examine the various costs of reha-
"'promotion"' than advertising, but the fact that the facil-
bilitation clinics and detenmine the needed equipment.
ity appears in print is the important point for branding
Constructing a needs list and a wants list may be helpful
and self-promotion.
in determining the best financial strategies.
 Cable TV is effective and relatively low cost in most
areas. Cable companies do a terrific job of targeting the
 Marketing and Advertising
message to the area you specify. The key is to create a
As the practice and team expand, consider adding someone
commercial that is eye catching and memorable. A pro-
who can market the practice (whether it is yourself or
fessional presentation that focuses on the practice's
someone experienced in dealing with customers). One of
strengths draws attention to the services provided. Pro-
the most important and sometimes underused focuses for
motion of the practice will be assisted by creating a
any successful business is marketing. Practically speaking
commercial that includes a tag line that is memorable.
if nobody in the practice has a marketing background, a
Repeatability is one of the keys to successful television
professional should be sought to assist in marketing efforts.
advertising. Crafting your spot to make it adjustable
The day-to-day responsibilities of the practice, coupled
offers much fexibility and gives the most efficient use
with the responsibilities as a business owner or manager,
of money. Placement of the commercial on specific sta-
leave little time to dabble in marketing. Moreover, with
tions is paramount and is based on demographic infor-
online marketing tools, such as blogs, Web pages, and social
mation for your area. This infonmation should be
 media like Twitter, Pinterest, and Facebook, a great deal of
 thoroughly researched before signing a contract.
time may be required to simply update the electronic mar.
 Promotion through continuing education is easy and
keting presence of the business. In today's society, Face-
can cost relatively little. Hosting or participating in
book and Twitter are both social media sites that are a must
educational seminars, hosting an open house, volunteer-
for any small business to market their product.
ing to speak at dog club events about the benefits of
Marketing does not have to be expensive to be done
rehabilitation, or participating in local pet expos is a
well. Creativity in industries related to animals is wel-
great way to get the word out about your practice and
comed and appreciated. Your marketing strategy should
promote the amazing things that rehabilitation can
include most, if not all, of the following elements:
accomplish for a client's animals.
·Brochures
· Advertise your success stories on your Web site, social
·
Web site
 media, and clinic with many photographs, quotes from
·Target marketing
owners, and progressions. People love to hear success 
·Print advertising
stories about animals, especially heartwarming stories.
·Cable TV advertising
· Word of mouth in the canine world should never be
·Self-promotion through participation in
underestimated. Happy clients refer more clients. Each
·Seminars
time an existing client refers a client, a personalized
· Local conferences and pet expos
letter or card of gratitude should be sent.
·Local referral groups
· Marketing to referral sources will encompass all of the
·Professional associations
preceding points. In addition, meetings with referring
662
Section Vll
Business Considerations in Veterinary Rehabilitation
veterinarians and regular in-service training programs
Expertise of the DVM
to the staff should be part of the marketing plan. Packets
 Evaluation for illness or other rehabilitation services
of brochures, referral pads, and other marketing materi-
Pool/treadmill/manual manipulation
als such as magnets and pens should be distributed to
 Specialized equipment, such as therapeutic laser
 potential referral sources. Computer software programs 
 Specialized treatments, such as acupuncture or chiro-
may be used to track referral sources and the number
practic manipulation
of referrals from each clinic. Communication with the
Information Technology Systems
referring veterinarians and clinics through evaluation
letters, progress notes, and discharge summaries will
Information technology (IT) has become increasingly
enhance the relationship.
 important in running an efficient business. It allows for
· Be certain to obtain written permission from the owner
the integration of many functions, eliminating the need to
before posting any pictures of their animal or informa-
do or write things more than once. In all likelihood the
tion about the patient or owner.
  d  e saa m   
budget than might originally be anticipated. Fortunately
Suppliers
this new technology can ultimately help save time and
Competitive bidding from specific suppliers and manufac-
money. New technologies are developed regularly for
turers and/or distributors can be invaluable in reducing
 client billing, communication, documentation, correspon-
purchasing costs. The 80/20 rule can be applied when it
dence, medical records, video conferencing, and so on. A
comes to suppliers. This philosophy gives a favorite vendor 
 myriad of practice management software programs can
the majority of product sales, but keeps him or her com-
 seamlessly integrate accounting and operational functions.
petitive because competitors are always trying to gain more
For example it is possible to attach radiographs and other
market share. Common products sold in rehabilitation
image files directly to client files where they can be viewed
clinics include hamesses, slings, fitness equipment, supple-
from any designated computer. Consultations with special-
ments, and educational DVDs. There is also a market for
ists can be efficiently and conveniently managed by sending
 prescription foods, especially those related to rehabilitation
files electronically to anyone in the world. The investment
and weight loss.
in equipment, which is expandable and secure, offers
immeasurable returms by offering the business owner tools
Overhead and Burden
that can help operate the business and communicate with
When evaluating the financial implementation of a reha-
clientele. In fact, many programs allow client interaction 
bilitation center, overhead and burden must be considered.
via the Intermet if desired.
Overhead is the cost of doing business and is generally
 Practice management software allows reminders to be sent
composed of rent/mortgage for the space, utilities, equip-
to clients to increase compliance in a rehabilitation practice,
ment, and staff costs. Overhead costs often overlooked in
appointment scheduling, patient information updates online,
a rehabilitation setting include increased electricity, dehu-
amd client surveys based on specific services.
 midification, water costs for aquatic therapy, cleaning costs
Roles and Integration of Staff Members in a
for the center, insurance coverage for the clinic inclusive
Rehabilitation Facility
of the aquatic therapy, liability coverage, and workers'
compensation for staff members. Burden, specifically labor
Most state practice acts stipulate that a licensed veterinar-
burden, refers to the benefits that are paid to employees. It
ian must oversee and regulate the rehabilitation facility.
is critical to have the correct personnel in place who are
Because rehabilitation naturally encompasses modalities
well trained and capable of providing outstanding cus-
related to physical therapy, it is not only important to
tomer service. Most clients of rehabilitation services are
understand the veterinary practice acts in your state, but
repeat customers because of the nature of ongoing care. In
 additionally, an understanding of the physical therapy prac-
the case of geriatric animals, there is a long-term relation-
tice acts is critical to the successful administration of a
ship, and clients appreciate the continued interface with the
rehabilitation practice.
therapist. Trained personnel who have completed an edu-
 The unique nature of animal rehabilitation has made it
 cational rehabilitation program, such as veterinary techni-
possible for physical therapists, initially trained to work
cians or physical therapist assistants, can command salaries
with humans, to now work with animals. Unheard of only
that range from $35,000 to $50,000 annually, depending
 20 years ago, it is now practical for both a veterinarian and
upon experience and skill sets. Physical therapists trained
physical therapist to work together to create a comprehen-
in canine rehabilitation may command salaries between
sive program that addresses both the biologic and physi-
$50,000 and $100,000 annually.
ologic well-being of animals. Ideally the rehabilitation
Billing rates for services provided to the customer can
 team should be led by a veterinarian who is responsible for
range from a low of $50 per hour to $75 or more per hour.
the overall health of the animals, and a physical therapist
The rates vary depending on the facility and location.
who develops the therapeutic programs and administers
Additional fees can be recovered through:
treatment to the animals.
Chapter 38
Development of a Rehabilitation Facility
663
To be practical, the success of any business depends on the
multiple patients at the same time, and the space should
volume of service it is able to offer. To that end, veterinary
allow this through half walls, private rooms, aquatic rooms,
technicians should be employed to help provide hands-on care
and exercise rooms. Modalities and manual therapies are
for the animals in addition to regular client interaction and
best provided in a quiet section, and aquatics and therapeu-
education. This interaction enables the client to be more pro-
tic exercises are best provided in their individual sections.
active in the animal's home environment through education
The fow of the patients must be considered for both check
 amd training, and assists the animal's rehabilitation (e.g..
in and check out.
at-home exercises), which provides continued therapy
When evaluating the potential case load consider reha-
 designed to further the results of in-house rehabilitation.
bilitation clients as well as weight loss and conditioning
After a treatment regime has been determined the vet-
programs. Programs for conditioning and weight loss may
erinary technician can perform many of the day-to-day
 consist of aquatic therapy and therapeutic exercise only.
treatments of the animal. Having a veterinary technician
These programs may be very profitable; offering continued
 perform many of the treatments allows the veterinarian and
wellness programs after weight loss goals are accomplished
physical therapist to perfomm other professional duties,
and skilled rehabilitation is completed is another source of
including consulting on additional cases. Of course it is
revenue. For example a dog that has undergone rehabilita-
vital to have frequent communication among the veterinary
tion for a repaired cranial cruciate ligament may be dis-
technician, veterinarian, and physical therapist.
charged to a conditioning program to maintain the progress.
Furthermore veterinary assistants can be invaluable in
 Facility design is a priority item in the business plan.
helping veterinary technicians with some tasks, such as
Design, plan, and functionality determine costs associated
supervising routine treadmill sessions or drying patients
with the relocation or construction of a new facility. After
after aquatic treatments. They can also assist with notations
the building's structure is completed and the interior walls
in the medical record during patient evaluations with the
are set, it becomes extremely costly to make any changes
veterinarian or physical therapist. This promotes an eff-
or modifications. Therefore in-depth planning is critical for
cient workflow, and perhaps more accurate recording of
the success of the project. Before committing to construc-
notes. Technology also currently exists that allows dicta-
tion plans visit or view photos of other rehabilitation prac-
tion of notes directly to the computer.
tices to determine what works best for your practice.
For a business owner it is natural to provide training to
team members according to the needs of the practice. In
 most businesses this is practical and, indeed, necessary for
Assessment of the Concept and Design
processes to be performed correctly. Continuing education
is also critical for employees to obtain new information and
The first priority is to engage a licensed architect who has
to incorporate new methods and practices. It is also benef.
experience in the design and construction of animal hospi-
cial from the standpoint of running a business to encourage
tals. Always interview potential business vendors and sup-
and support personnel in their desire for advancement in
pliers and obtain references. Your investigation should
the feld. Therefore it is imperative for the owner of a
include site visits when ever possible to view previously
successful rehabilitation facility to maintain a provision
completed projects and discussions regarding the process,
for continuing education of all employees on the profit &
 cost overruns, punctuality, and responsiveness of the archi-
loss statement. Any technician who works directly with
tect and his or her subcontractors. Your questions should
patients should receive training in veterinary rehabilitation.
cover documentation, scheduling, change orders, materi-
Specialized training not only provides personnel with
als, and systems used. When evaluating design criteria with
needed information, but it will also be evidence to current
the architect, be sure basic needs are captured in the design.
and potential clients that the staff are properly trained and
 Be proactive and clear in your demands for the features
enthusiastic about providing the utmost quality of care.
required and desired in the facility. It is important to
keep in mind that many architects have not created
Facility
a canine rehabilitation facility and will need to be
The size of a rehabilitation facility is generally dictated by
educated on the dynamics of the facility regarding fooring.
the services offered as well as the anticipated patient flow.
noise control, aquatics, offce fow, humidification and
Like an animal hospital the design of a rehabilitation facil-
maintenance.
ity must take into account the fow of patients (how they
 The approximate space requirement for a rehabilitation
will move from room to room), the amount of time they
practice is 500 to 2500 square feet, depending on the type
are to spend at each station/room, and the number of
and amount of equipment and potential client base. This
patients receiving services at any given time. The foor plan
does not include examination/assessment rooms (Figure
for new office space should include an entrance and an exit
38-3) and kennel/run areas (Figure 38-4), which can easily
so dogs have minimal interaction with one another. Half
add an additional 2000 square feet. If adding a rehabilita-
walls offer views of the facility but do not allow visual dog
tion facility to an existing medical facility, certain in-
interactions. Successful rehabilitation practices ideally see
house areas, such as the examination and housing areas,
664
Section Vll
Business Considerations in Veterinary Rehabilitation
respect to water. The walls will get wet whether there is an
underwater treadmill, a pool, or both. The walls should be
comprised of a surface that will endure the constant splash-
ing of water. Tiles, faux tiles, epoxy coating, or specialized
paints are options. The surrounding fooring must with-
stand the water and be safe for the dogs, staff, and owners.
HVAC requirements and humidification should also be a
prime consideration in the design.
Kennel areas should be as comfortable as possible, and
 heating and cooling considerations are necessary. If the
clinic will be performing long-tenm boarding for dogs,
radiant heat fooring provides a good option for both
heating and practicality. Sound-proofing the walls provides
 a more peaceful environment for the rehabilitation clinic
and there are many options available. Ideally the kennel
 area should be easily accessible to the rehabilitation area,
 but also far enough away to offer a quiet area.
Architectural Design
Architectural design should encompass the following:
· A clean and simple flow for movement of patients and
staff throughout the building. The fow of movement
including check in area, treatments, and check out
should be considered. Handicapped access and access
for dogs in carts must be considered.
· A plan for maintenance and repair of equipment. Be
sure that access points to essential components, such as
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC), elec-
trical, and plumbing are not hidden behind walls or
hard-to-move equipment. While in the design process,
Figure 38-3  Patient assessment areas.
consider if you want the equipment to be seen by only
staff members or the owners. Many designs allow the
majority of the equipment to be placed out of view of
the public, but allow easy access. For example, the
holding tanks and the equipment associated with aquatic
therapy are often loud and may need to be in an area
away from patient care. A proper design allows easy
access to the equipment, but is aesthetically pleasing to
the clients and staff.
· Always specify materials that are both cost effective and
readily available. Also incorporate materials that can
easily be sanitized. Avoid expensive, one-of-a-kind
materials that can be hard to replace.
 During the design phase it may be appropriate to engage
an HVAC/air purification expert who can address air
fow and potential odor issues throughout the facility.
Dehumidification is essential in a clinic with aquatic
therapy and should be addressed before the construction
Figure 38-4 Kennels/runs.
process.
· Most architects will make recommendations regarding
are usually used in conjunction with the rehabilitation
 specific manufacturers and products with which they
facility.
 have had experience. Usually this applies to plumbing.
Proper fooring in the aquatic and exercise areas is para-
electrical, and HVAC components. It can save both time
mount, as is noise control if kennel areas are planned. The
and money in the end if you do your own research with
walls surrounding the aquatic area must be considered with
various manufacturers. Technology changes quickly
Chapter 38
Development of a Rehabilitation Facility
665
Box 38-1
Considerations for Evaluating
Location
Area needs for services to be provided
 Potential competitors in the area, specifically within a
 5-mile radius of your new facility
 Type of facility/services you would provide. For example, a
rehabilitation center with 24-hour boarding facility or one
with more traditional hours of operation
 Staff needed to support the planned facility.
·
 Demographics of potential clientele in trade area
 Business growth potential in the area
 Ease of entering and exiting the facility. Consider traffic
patterns, ability to make left-hand turns, future highway
construction projects that may limit access, and so on.
 Space outside of the building for animal elimination
Figure 38-5  Reception/waiting area.
 purposes and areas clients may walk dogs, and space for
yons juaudinbe sueuoed ioy jeguod pue sis feue na
as jumps, obstacles, and space for running. Fencing
 and animal hospitals built as little as 2 years ago have
requirements must be considered in accordance with the
systems that may already be either outdated or not envi-
municipal ordinances.
ronmentally friendly.
·Flooring is a major component of the building process
and may be a major expense. There are many fooring
Location of a New Facility
options available. Floor surrounding the aquatic area
must be able to absorb or drain water, provide a non-
When building a new facility, location should be one of the
slippery surface, and be easy to clean. Ergonomically it
highest priorities in the evaluation process (Box 38-1).
should possess a friendly surface for staff to stand on
After the area has been established for the site, due dili-
for prolonged periods of time. This type of fooring is
 gence is required. This is usually accomplished in one of
often more expensive than other fooring. The reception
two ways.
area (Figure 38-5), private offices, staff areas, and other
 1. Engaging a reputable and experienced real estate broker 
areas may not require expensive fooring. The fooring
designs should be implemented before construction.
needs
· New technology should not be avoided if the principles
 2. Searching the trade area looking for signs or checking
are sound and the equipment has some track record. An
 in the local newspaper for available properties
example is tankless hot water heaters. These new
After site selection and preparing a contract to purchase
systems, although more expensive to purchase and
with the sellers, contingency clauses should always be
install, have a more efficient operating cost along with
 inserted into the contract relative to financing and zoning
better longevity and fewer space constraints. They also
approval.
provide hot water on demand.
Zoning and Contracting
· Operating systems necessary for the rehabilitation
 center include a heating and cooling system.
 Considered a minor issue by some, improper zoning of the
location and the time it will take to make the necessary
City and Municipality Permits
changes can add 2 to 6 months to the acquisition and build-
 Before planning an addition or building a new rehabilita-
ing processes, and in some cases, changes in zoning regula-
tion center, it is essential to begin the process with the legal
tions may be denied. The zoning process itself is usually
entity controlling permits. Local regulations may or may
a one-time process and can take two to three face-to-face
not allow the addition of the center, especially with aquat-
meetings with city council members and sometimes local
ics. A swimming pool is often the issue and may require
residents, who usually reside within 100 feet of the pro-
specialized locks and gates for the center. Stand-alone
posed site and want to voice their opinion. The process can
facilities may face difficulties with individual town regula-
cost $3000 to $10,000 for attormey fees and services to
tions because of the nature of the business. Canine reha-
make changes.
bilitation does not fall into a specific category and many
 After the purchase contract and zoning issues have been
towns have a difficult time categorizing the clinic. Over-
resolved the contractors and builders who will build the
night boarding, noise control, aquatic management, waste,
facility should be engaged. Individual budgets must be
and physical waste management are often issues.
considered in this process. For smaller facilities general
666
Section Vll
Business Considerations in Veterinary Rehabilitation
Box 38-2
Design/Build Concept versus Traditional Concept
Design/Build
·Electrical
 This concept uses a specific architect and a general contractor
·HVAC
working together as a team, or an architectural firm that has a
·Roofing
 construction arm or affliation.
·
Interior framing/dry wall and finishing
·Other
Pros
 One source responsibility
Pros
 Changes to scope and design are done quickly. Very little
·
This can be more cost effective.
interface with construction arm as it deals with change
 The general contractor can solicit bids from numerous
orders.
 contractors to get the most competitive price.
 Fewer subcontractors are generally involved in the bidding
 A diversified subcontractor base can lead to better design
·
process
with cost-effective changes.
Minimal documentation as it relates to bank draws
There is good control of the project.
· Fewer people are invol ved in the whole process
·
 If subcontractors must be replaced, changes generally can
be made quickly.
Cons
·
 Architectural interface is usually minimal unless design
· Can be more expensive than the traditional method because
issues arise.
fewer subcontractors compete in the bidding process
·
 Day-to-day issues are acted on in a timelier manner.
 Relationships can become strained if problems develop
·
There is consistent oversight of subcontractors and the
during the construction cycle.
project.
 Communication with all parties can be challenging and time
·
 Changes can be made quickly.
consuming.
·
 Disputes can be resolved quickly.
 Problems may arise if subcontractors need to be replaced
·
Timelines are more often met.
for nonper formance iss ues.
·
 Bank draws are certified before submission to the title
Traditional Method (Use of a General Contractor)
company.
This concept requires that an independent general contractor be
·
 Documentation is addressed quickly.
engaged directly. After the architectural plans are completed
 The scope of changes can be justified or denied quickly.
and approved, a general contractor is engaged. A contractor 
 The potential time and cost savings can be significant.
who has experience in building animal hospitals is highly
Cons
recommended. Be cautious in engaging a general contractor
 There is a high reliability on subcontractors instead of the
who has no experience building health care facilities and may
architect.
not be familiar with critical codes and regulations.
 There are multiple layers of communication.
Most general contractors solicit bids from at least two or
Conflicts may arise if there are problems.
 more subcontractors for the many different components of the
·
 More extensive paperwork and lien waivers are required for
process, which include:
draw payouts to subcontractors.
Site preparation
 Staging and sequencing can become a problem.
 Foundation
The time element can be increased because of the
Structure (masonry, frame, etc.)
complexity of construction.
Plumbing
contractors may be able to help with the design of the
construction price. The benefit is usually a 10% to 20%
facility and may eliminate the need for an architect. There
overall saving on the project, including the time factor of
are two basic concepts that must be addressed to determine
making on-site decisions. Many smaller facilities adding
the best situation for your purposes (Box 38-2).
on to their existing facilities may find that general contrac-
Regardless of which method is chosen management of
tors familiar with veterinary clinics are often the most
the entire process can be handled effectively with the use
beneficial to making additions to the clinic, and usually
of a third-party owner's representative that has an architec-
 have architectural support services available to them.
tural or construction background. The role of this individual
In short the construction process can be complicated
is to oversee the entire project on behalf of the owner. The
and confusing. The ability to rely on construction profes-
third-party provider usually does daily on-site visits,
sionals and the opportunity to have an individual or group
reviews change-orders with the owner, and reviews all bank
who can act on your behalf helps to make the process
draws for accuracy. Issues that may arise are cleared
easier. Finding those individuals can be tricky, but a little
through this third-party representative. The cost of this
research on your part, concentrating on the experience,
service can vary based on the amount of interface required,
references, and review of past projects of the candidates,
 p    e nn si ag a p
is the key in choosing those resources.
Chapter 38
Development of a Rehabilitation Facility
667
 Rehabilitation Equipment
"You get what you pay for,' but that does not mean that
There are two basic ways to acquire rehabilitation equip-
the highest-priced item should always be purchased either.
ment, which can be costly (e.g., whirlpools, underwater
The key is the relationship with vendors and the service
treadmills, therapeutic laser).
1. Purchase: Generally there are financing options through
working unit can cost a great deal in lost revenues when it
a bank or other source.
 cannot be used to provide rehabilitation services. When a
2. Lease/Lease with Option to Buy: This is common prac-
call is made for service, will assistance be provided in a
tice and a very good option for both tax purposes and
timely manner? Determine who will service your equip-
acquisition of updatable technologies. This method
ment, especially the aquatic units and where they are
allows the practice to take full advantage of tax credits 
 located. Some companies only offer one service provider
 for an entire region of the United States.
older technology with new, state-of-the-art equipment
without having to sell or trade the old units.
No matter how well manufactured, all equipment needs
maintenance and occasionally breaks down. When select-
ing vendors be certain to form an ongoing working rela-
tionship with companies that provide service of the
equipment. Price is not always the most important factor
 in making the decisions. There is some truth in the saying.
Figure 38-6  Treatment mat.
Box 38-3
 List of Supplies and Equipment for a Model Rehabilitation Facility
General Patient Management
 Electrodes and ultrasound gel
·Bandage material
Extracorporeal shockwave
 Booties, different sizes 
 Therapeutic laser
 Harnesses, different sizes 
Aquatic Therapy
 Slings, different sizes
Underwater treadmill—1 or 2
Clippers
Whirlpool (ideal but not necessary)
Leashes, with rehab facility logo
 Swimming pool (ideal but not necessary)
 Muzzles, different sizes
Life jackets, different sizes
Padded table
Cage dryers
 Rolling lift system with supporting sling
·
Towels (consider towels with company logos)
Rolling low gurney to transport weak/paralyzed patients
·
Harnesses for aquatic therapy
Mats
 Cleaming supplies specifc to the aquatic systems
 Goniometers
Water treatment—chlorine, bromine, pH, etc.
Gulick II tape measures
Hi Lo table
Practice/Office Equipment
 Scale
·
 Freezer/refrigerator
·Force plate analysis—stance analyzer
Microwave
Camera with video capability
Exercise Equipment
 Computers/color printer
Wobble board
 Potential mobile computer devices for staff documentation,
 Quadruped balance board
such as iPads
 Cavaletti poles
Office furniture—desk, phone, chairs, file cabinets
Vertical weave poles
 Telephone/facsimile system
Land treadmill1
Desk and chairs
Limb weights
 Client seating/office furniture
Stairs/ramp
Office Management
 Therapy balls/physio rolls, different sizes
 Thera-bands
·
Washer/dryer
Mats
Wet vacuum
·
·Mirrors
·
Dry vacuum
Cleaning supplies
Modalities
Mop bucket
 Cryotherapy-cold packs, ice compression systems
Tool kit
Hot packs
 First aid kit
 Combo neuromuscular electrical stimulation/ultrasound unit
Trash cans
668
Section Vll
Business Considerations in Veterinary Rehabilitation
The total cost of equipment for a rehabilitation facility
answer a few questions, especially if they do not have to
can range from $10,000 to $150,000 depending on what
write a dissertation. Immediacy is also important. A call to
is required to provide the desired services. To choose the
the customer to inquire about the experience is an invalu-
necessary items, consult with practices or organizations
 able tool. Web surveys are also an inexpensive, data-rich
that currently offer rehabilitation services or distribution
tool that can be used to improve service. In fact, some
networks that supply components to similar businesses.
software can be programmed to send the Web survey auto-
A basic list of suggested items such as treatment mats
matically after the patient's appointment. Most customers
(Figure 38-6) is provided in Box 38-3.
who have a good experience are happy to refer your ser-
vices if they are asked. But customers who have a bad
Strategic Alliances
experience may take every opportunity to tell everyone
Strategic alliances with manufacturers of equipment and
they know about that experience, whether asked or not.
suppliers can allow the practice to run more efficiently
 Bad news generally spreads quickly while good news
and offer an opportunity to try new medications, equip-
spreads slowly.
ment, and so on. It is generally easier for manufacturers or
How is the staff trained?
aay au gi aet a ou shnpid iau n on sadns
 Take a course on the basics of customer service
a proven track record, so many are willing to allow a trial
 Evaluate and improve how things are done on a daily
of new products (sometimes at a reduced cost) if a testi-
basis
monial is offered. Most appreciate honest opinions regard-
 The do's and don'ts of customer interface
s a t an  o sd n 
 Decision on attitude (a bad attitude in an organization
can spread like wildfire.)
Customer Service
An often overlooked but important detail is appearance. As
Who are the most important people in your organization?
an example consider that you are about to board an aircraft
Veterinarians? Veterinary technicians? Physical therapists?
and you look in the cockpit and see that the pilot is wearing
The answer is yes, but without committed and caring cus-
a t-shirt with holes in it, and has uncombed hair and a 3-day
tomer service representatives there will be no long-tenm
beard. Most people would probably get off the aircraft.
business. Customer service begins with the receptionist,
Image! Today's world is very image conscious. Make
who usually answers the phone, and the person who takes
sure that personnel are well-groomed and have a neat
the client and his or her pet into the exam room. People do
appearance. Shirts, polo shirts, tops, and sweaters with the
business with people they like! If a customer has a bad
 company's logo are beneficial and provide a great image
experience, how does he or she react? Nine out of ten
to clients.
simply do not retum. How is a difficult situation handled?
Most people do one of three things: (1) Nothing, (2) hope
for the best, or (3) confront the situation head-on. The best
Summary
response of course is the third choice. Most people appreci-
Ainyadou pun ssnosp o Auoddo au pue Aisauou an
In summary, four basic components must be considered
rectify a situation. It may require a phone call or personal
when opening a rehabilitation practice:
interface from the veterinarian or therapist. Personal
 A good business plan
contact is usually the best way to resolve an issue.
 The right team members
Canine physical rehabilitation allows a bond to be
 Marketing and customer service
established between clients and practitioners that is not
· Personnel who are properly trained and educated in the
always witnessed or allowed from a time management
science and art of rehabilitation
point of view in other areas of traditional veterinary
As a veterinary practitioner one of the last things you
medicine.
may want to think about is the business of running your
How do we understand what customers want? Ask
business. Most people would rather spend their time and
them. Customer surveys are a great way to receive feed-
efforts concentrating on veterinary medicine and rehabili-
back. Surveys should be concise, short, have no ambiguous
tation rather than managing an office. With proper planning
questions, and should allow targeted and meaningful
and atop notch staff you willbe able to set up your practice
feedback to the practice. People are generally willing to
and work with your team to make it successful.
Protocol Development
and Protocols
APPENDIX
Andrea Henderson, David Levine, Darryl Millis, and Marti Drum
The sample protocols in this appendix are designed to
with the clinician to determine an appropriate course of 
address common conditions in patients not experiencing
action.
complications. Individual patient characteristics must be
 considered when designing an individual patient protocol.
Contents
These are working protocols that should be modified
according to clinical necessity, efficacy, and each patient's
Orthopedie Conditions
progress within the rehabilitation program. These proto-
Hip
cols are not to be rigidly adhered to, but serve as guides to
 Femoral Head and Neck Ostectomy, 703
allow an effective rehabilitation plan of care. Furthermore,
 Total Hip Replacement, 725
 diagnosis and treatment should be provided by trained
Hip Luxation—Craniodorsal, Closed Reduction, 707
personnel.
Stife
During rehabilitation, particular attention should be
CCL Rupture—Extracapsular Repair, 670
paid to any deterioration in the patient's progress. Specifi-
CCL Rupture—TPLO/TTA, 674
cally, attention should be focused on lameness, stiffness,
Patellar Luxation Repair, 713
Or pain following activity. If the patient appears to have
Distal Femoral Physeal Fractures, 686
stiffness or increased pain or lameness at any time after a
Elbow
therapy session, the level of activity should be decreased
 Elbow Dysplasia—Post-Arthroscopy, 692
 and a slower rate of progression should be instituted. It is
General
very important that dogs be as comfortable and pain-free
Osteoarthritis, 711
 as possible during the rehabilitation period.
It is important to realize that the dog may not be totally
Neurologic Conditions
normal even with intensive physical rehabilitation. The
Cervical Spondylomyelopathy (Postoperative), 678
patient's condition may preclude retum to normal function.
Thoracolumbar IVDE (Postoperative), 719
However, rehabilitation is key in obtaining and maintain-
 Degenerative Lumbosacral Stenosis—Conservative
ing as much function as possible. If the dog does not
Management, 689
appear to be making progress, has any complications, or
Fibrocartilaginous Embolic Myelopathy, 698
if there are any questions, the patient should be discussed
Degenerative Myelopathy, 683
669
670
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
toe-touching on
and severity of
as a sequela of
 be perfonmed
osteoarthritis
unstable stifle.
motion on an
operated limb
pinous Aigins 
diagnosis to
perioperative
Movement to
reduce the
progression
Criteria for
Next Phase
 Consistent
Adequate
analgesia
Decreased
 incisional
extension
resting
s
?
 subjective pain
bilateral stifle
other joints if
 applicable)--
bilateral thigh
circumference
 Postoperative
 bilateral stifle
ROM (other
 bilateral thigh
circumference
goniometry
 goniometry
Response to
activity and
Assessment
Measures
Baseline
 Baseline
joints if
walk
Outcome
Weight
ROM i
a
t
 Cryotherapy (15-20 min BID)
 Oral chondroprotective agents
 Inpatient status preferred during
more than five
 Oral chondroprotective agents
 e snuu ay uu aou ou
 extension of operated limb
 Rest in a confined space
 PROM for stifle flexion/
 Slow, controlled leash-
 Injectable polysulfated
Tramadol, Tylenol 3
 NMDA antagonists
Therapeutic Exercises
 minutes at a time
Home Program
Medications
this phase
NSAIDs
(1L-08
Medications
Modalities
Modalities
a time
If home:
 ensure patient comfort and compliance 
-o-s n   
(aans fo snou dt um saivN
 PROM for stifle flexion/extension of
no more than five minutes at a time
 SID-TID)
SID)
8
· Passive Range of Motion, 10-20
walking speed, 5 min SID-TID
muscle strengthening
(g sdai oz-on) qul paerado
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
 Oral chondroprotective agents
(Kans fo sinou tZ uym
 Injectable polysulfated
 Injectable polysulfated
repetitions, SID-BID
Therapeutic Exercises
(15 min SID PRN)
NMES for 1
Medications
Modalities
Modalities
CCL Rupture—Extracapsular Repair
postoperatively
 From diagnosis
Immediate to
48-72 hours
Timeframe*
 to time of
Expected
surgery
 Postoperative to
trol
Early Toe-
Touching at
Swelling and
Improve stifle
Preoperative
edema con
Limit muscle
Prepare for
surgery
a Walk
atrophy
ROM
Phase
Goals:
Step 1
Goals:
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
671
each stride on
 complications
operated limb
bearing with
 Minimal pain
ROM 60-80
 No evidence
 of pain with
ROM 40-60
flexion, >150
Consistent
 Consistent
bearing on
with light
activities
 Incisional
120-135
extension
extension
weight-
degrees
flexion,
degrees
weight-
 partial
degrees
degrees
and other joints
subjective pain
Gait evaluation
subjective pain
and other joints 
 Reassess thigh
postoperatively
if applicable
circumference
activity and
 Response to
Gait scale at
walk and trot
 Response to
Stifle ROM
 activity and
muscle girth
at 2, 4, and 
6 weeks
Weight
Thigh
10.1
level
Cryotherapy (15-20 min BID)
· Oral chondroprotective agents
 Slow consistent leash walking
 PROM and flexion/extension
five
BID-TID, prior to exercises,
PROM and flexion/extension
stifle stretches of operated
 Slow leash walking only to
 minutes at a time BID-TID
warranted (minimizes loss 
stifle stretches of operated
progressing well BID-QID
 than
Heat therapy (10-15 min
 initiated at this phase if
· Injectable polysulfated
 glycosaminoglycans
 of lean tissue mass).
normal ROM not yet
Therapeutic Exercises
Therapeutic Exercises
(sda1 07-01) q
surgery or if acute
postoperatively
Medications
Modalities
achieved
PRN
Gentle weight shifting at a stance and walk
add 5 min
Underwater Treadmill
 a e je snut aay ueyi aout ou
wobble board or moderately unstable
encourage weight-bearing and joint 
Heat therapy (10-15 min BID-TID,
prior to exercises, NOT within 72
 PROM and flexion/extension stifle 
BID-TID) if nonmal ROM not yet 
(begin at weeks 3-4 postoperatively)
hours after surgery or if acute
 Cryotherapy (15-20 min BID)
 Oral chondroprotective agents 
 Slow consistent leash walking-
inflammation is present)
 Injectable polysulfated
 Therapeutic Exercises
position awareness
surface 5-10 min
Aquatic therapy-
 Medications
Todalities
achieved
6
M
postoperatively
 postoperatively
48-72 hours to
two weeks
Reduce swelling
[o
toe-touching
Achieve normmal
bearing at a
walk and trot
Weight-
Continue pain
to a
 Bearing at
Bearing
control
weight-
bearing
 Consistent
Weight-
Walk
weight-
more
state
Increase
ROM
Improve
 dens
672
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
a
[uou j0 j0.n
Minimal to 1
 pain with
Criteria for
Next Phase
activities
peads
6
?
 subjective pain
Gait evaluation
Response to
 walk and
Measures
Outcome
level
10.11
minutes daily (begin at weeks
reps
1-2 reps up
beginmming at 1-2 minutes and
Begin slow jogging 2-5
BID—begin at 4 weeks
 Uphill inclines jogging.
begin at 4-6 weeks
 Injectable polysulfated
3-4 postoperatively)
Sit-to-stand exercises-
Therapeutic Exercises
to 15-25 min TID
NSAIDs—PRN
Home Program
Stair climbing-
postoperatively
per session
Medications
needed
产
 up and down
-15-20 reps BID
 s
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises per
with PROM and stretching if needed
 pue ued se Suol se 'T uu sz-S1
5-10 reps
Cavaletti Rails 5 reps X 6 rails to
result in lameness and pain early
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
 sdau sI-01 on dn Suyom 
at 4-6 weeks postoperatively
Underwater
auoypfo iundsnpauiofiad
(15-20 min BID)
 Stair climbing—1-2 reps L
 Sit-to-stand exercises
 Jaser PRN
 gradually raising rails
 Therapeutic Exercises
times per week-
CCL Rupture—Extracapsular Repaircont'd
upi8oid
Therapeutic I
Cryotherapy
Modalities
walking
begin
业
 postoperatively
Timeframe*
Six to twelve
Expected
weeks
Improve ability
some speed
au1 asn
a Trot
Phase
Step 4
Goals:
3
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
673
 Stifle range of
motion within
5-10 degrees
(depending on
continued as
lameness or
 is not
[ou jo
Progressions
pain with
 If this occurs,
activity by
observed.
 50% for i
week and
may be
long as
activity
decrease
values)
weekly.
limits
Reassess thigh
 muscle girth at
subjective pain
10-12 weeks
postoperative
 Response to
 Gait scale at
 activity and
Weight
level
1-2 flights
days with trotting program)
 Sit-to-stand exercises, 15-20
 Stair climbing—1-2 flights
exercises per session. Doing
sSIl umop pue dn Suuuny
Doing
Controlled ball play at fast
 trot or slow lope (altermate
 una und pun ssauau
una und pun ssauau
 Chondroprotective agents
Caution: Choose only 1-2
 Injectable polysulfated
Therapeutic Exercises
distances regularly
 Trotting up stairs-
 NSAIDs—PRN
daily
· Polysulfated
reps BID
Medications
 Medications
minutes
J! -a uu sI-01) Ad jeH
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises per
m saf yo asn pue peds susu
Caution: Choose only 2-3 exercises per
asaxa suou p fo und sp paufiad
 Ground treadmill walking with leg
program. Doing all exercises may
 Ground treadmill jogging with leg
'-Mg u I-01) Ade a 
and/or resistance bands
session. Other exercises may be
Trotting up stairs 1-2 flights, 2
following exercises if needed
 Aquatic therapy—UWTM for
Cryotherapy (15-20 min BID)
 following exercises if needed 
needed for stretching
 Therapeutic Exercises
repetitions BID
Modalities
weights a
available
week
Modalities
rad
业
postoperatively
Twelve weeks
and beyond
 Improve stamina
 Improve muscle
 No Lameness
Minimal to
mass and
endurance
nproving
speed at a
proving
 improving
endurance
 Returm to as
strength
Continue
Continue
nonmal
Goals:
.
674
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 Surgery should be
osteoarthritis as
degrees flexion,
 performed as
possible after 
motion on an
unstable stifle.
Movement to
diagnosis to
a sequela of 
perioperative
swelling and
ROM 60-80
Criteria for
Next Phase
reduce the
pue nosuo
severity of
 Early toe-
Adequate
Decreased
analgesia
incisional
touching
drainage
120-135
extension
soon as
resting
lack of
degrees
bilateral stifle
 other joints if
bilateral thigh
circumference
 Postoperative
 bilateral stifle
 other joints if
 Postoperative
bilateral thigh
goniometry;
 goniometry;
applicable
 Response to
applicable
activity and
Assessment
Baseline
subjective
pain level
Lameness
score at a
e ans
Measures
 Baseline
ROM-
Weight
ROM—
Outcome
Weight
walk
Inpatient status during this phase
 Oral chondroprotective agents
 Cryotherapy (15-20 min BID)
*spisno os o <uo Suyem 
no more than five minutes
Rest in a confined space 
48 hours of surgery)
Home Program
a time
edications
Modalities
M
sanuu 0g-
joddns 
sunou t isu asepuq aunssad p 
 Brief training to aquatic therapy to
o - sdai in qI paado
Transcutaneous electrical stimulation
s(g uu o-s1) Aderayori
 PROM for stifle flexion/extension (
8
cln)
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
Cryotherapy (15-20 min BID)
 Slow leash walking with sling
 Therapeutic laser therapy SID
adinsfo sinou  um
 pain relief (15-20 min SID)
outside
per day)
3
ussas Adniau isaf oi od
NSAIDs (administration.
 Injectable polysulfated
 Therapeutic Exercises
5 minutes, 2-3 times j
tissue mobilization
recommended)
 Opioids PRN
Medications
SID PRN)
Medications
Modalities
Modalities 
 From diagnosis
 postoperative
Immediate to
48-72 hours
 to time of
Expected
surgery
Toe-Touching
Preoperative
bearing to
Phase
dais
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
675
on all strides at
healing without
inmprovement in
weight-bearing
to no more than
subtle lameness
 No evidence of
degrees flexion,
partial weight-
operated limb
 Minimal pain
complications
>150 degrees
limb at a walk
ROM 50-60
>150 degrees
ROM 40-60
Consistent
with light
extension
Consistent
Incisional
pain with 
activities
extension
activities
a walk
Goniometry-
postoperative
 Stifle ROM
Response to
activity and
 activity and
applicable
subjective
Stifle ROM
Reassess
subjective
pain level
 Lameness
score at a
stance and
Response t
 pain level
and other
at 3
and other
joints if
joints if
weeks
·Weight
girth 
walk
walk
 inflammation are still present)
 PROM and flexion/extension
walking, 5 minutes working
warranted (minimizes loss of
BID-TID, prior to exercises,
 stifle stretches of operated
NOT within 72 hours after
Weight loss program can be
 initiated at this phase if
inclines introduced at 4-5
8
 consistent leash
5-10 minutes of uphill
Sit-to-stand exercises-
following exercises
nerapeutic Exercises
lean tissue mass).
progressing well
NSAIDs-PRN
against a wall
Modalities
lking-
Slow
亡
BID-TID) until near normal stife ROM
bi-directional balance board for weight-
Underwater Treadmill
Underwater Treadmill
BID-TID, NOT within 72 hours after
sdai oz-o ql prado jo sus
wobble board or moderately unstable 
Cla-s uu oe-s I on dn uut on-s
BID-TID) if nommal ROM not yet
 Balance exercises on a 360-degree
Therapeutic Exercises
 Therapeutic Exercises
are still present)
surface 5-10 min
Aquatic therapy-
achieved
bearing
Modalities
exercises
achieved
begin
postoperative
postoperative
 three weeks
72 hours to
Three to six
weeks
Bearing
 Consistent
Bearing
Edais
676
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
weight-bearing
No evidence of
Movement to
Consistent
Criteria for
 Next Phase
at a trot
pain with
activities
·
 Response to
Gait scale at
walk and trot
girth at 7-8
postoperative
activity and
subjective
Assessment
pain level
Outcome
Measures
weeks
Weight
Walking in circles to left and
10 min BID,in a straight line
5-10 stairs up
IL-a dai 1ad uu I-oes 08
healing of osteotomy site are
Controlled on-leash trotting.
beginning at 5 working up to
 Sit-to-stand exercises, 20-30
Controlled tug-of-war, 5 min
 min BID-TID, longer 
per session to tolerance SID
proprioception (beginning
 Chondroprotective agents
Trotting in Figure 8s, no
Chondroprotective agents
(sun lamoiinu spinmo1
and down, BID-TID
 Therapeutic Exercises
NSAIDs-PRN
Home Program
leash allowed
Medications
reps BID
 Medications
30-40 1
Swimming several times per week, 5 up
-perfonm in conjunction
with PROM and stretching if needed
UWTM walking
 gradually reducing distance between
(-g uu sI-01) Adern neH
 Controlled tug-of-war, 5 min per 
Cavaletti rails 10-20 reps BID,
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
session to tolerance SID
exercises if needed
 Therapeutic Exercises
exercises if needed
Aquatic therapy-
Modalities
CLL-1I8
Modalities
rails
-- 
postoperative
Timeframe*
Six to eight
Expected
weeks
Bearing at
Trot
Phase
tdas
a
Appendix 1
Protocol Development and Protocols
677
hisrtlsbliraaeisttdi
 be continued as
activity by 50%
for 1 week and
presence/degree
of osteoarthritis,
including age,
musculoskeletal
again
considerations,
status of other
lameness or 
ou
multifactorial
f
by 10-20%
pain with
activity is
observed.1
decrease
ong as
increase
weekly.
Goals are
limbs.
pue
Gait scale at
walk and trot
eventually at
Reassessmen
g y o
goniometry as
 Response to
 activity and
faster gaits
subjective
pain level
and joint 
applicable
Weight
Suipuadap ql I-s'0 1e u3ag)
 Stair climbing—1-2 flights
 Program may continue as
Rumming in a straight line
 Chondroprotective agents
before with the below
Therapeutic Exercises
NSAIDs—PRN
additions
Medications
 indicated for strength and speed
UWTM for
 Jogging up hills and stairs
 Therapeutic Exercises
exercises if needed
Aquatic therapy-
 Playing ball
available
Modalities
week
 Nine weeks
beyond
post-
Bearing at
Consistent
Weight-
a Trot
S dans
678
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 Postoperative
Movement to
 Standing in
bearing with
Criteria for
Next Phase
 Incisional
maintained
comfort
 integrity
moderate
support
Limb muscle
 Limb muscle
circumference
required in
muscle mass
Assessment
 Subjective
Subjective
Measures
standing
scapular
Outcome
support
 Use of soft bedding with
support as needed on a
 Cryotherapy at cervical
rotation every 4-6 hours
Assisted standing with
thoracic and abdominal
,20 min
 Therapeutic Exercises
 prevent decubital
 been used)/opioids
 Bladder expression
BID-TID)
NMDA receptor
Home Program
BID-TID PRN
incision site,
antagonists
Modalities
ulcers
reps 
electrical stimulation across incision site,
ao siny Z-8t isa -a u1 o7
cervical and shoulder musculature SID
TENS, premodulated or interferential
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
( ya y - sd
 Therapeutic Exercises
15-20 min SID
 min SID
Modalities
(Auaains
tolerated
PRN
15
postoperatively
fi ve to seven
Timeframe*
 Immediate to
Expected
days
Maintain incisional
Weight-bearing in
standing with
 muscle atrophy
Maintenance of
Minimize limb
urination and
 joint ROM 
Independent
Pain control
defec ation
health
Phase
Goals:
Rest
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
679
 motor activity
 stepping
 Standing with
 minor support
Minimal pain
Voluntary
 in all four 
activity all
distances
Incisional
with light
 activities
healing
limbs
Early:
short
gait patterming
circumference/
Limb muscle
active cervical
 Response to
 activity and
muscle mass 
01 spuooos)
appropriate
comfortable
subjective
required in
endurance
motion
subjective
 Degree of 
support
standing
walking
minutes)
scapular
ROM
·
weight-shifting/rhythmic
Heat therapy at cervical
 corticosteroids have not
Use of soft bedding with
s BID-TID for
rotation every 4-6 hours
 Assisted standing and
stabilization, gradually
decreasing support (eg
 PROM with bicycling
impractical formany
all limbs (10-15 reps
hindlimb musculature
Note: A home exercise
Therapeutic Exercises
incision site, 10 min 
physioball beneath
prevent decubital
size and function
 NMDA receptor
TID-QID PRN
NSAIDs (if
abdomen)
(8-10 reps
each limb)
antagonists
BID-TID
BID-TID
 Medications
Modalities
ulcers
Other
 Assisted standing and weight-shifting/
musculature as needed for contraction 
during supported standing if
 Bladder expression TID-QID PRN
rhythmic stabilization, gradually
NMES to hindlimb and forelimb
10 min BID-TID (after 72 hours 
abdomen, standing in water)
Therapeutic Exercises
15 min EOD-SID
BID-TID
feasible
Modalities
TID)
Other
 postoperatively
One to two
weeks
Motor Function
 movement of all
supported early
 Self-righting into a
=
Minimize muscle
 stemal position
Partial Weight
Continued pain
Weight-bearing
m supuis
walking
control
 atrophy
Voluntary
Goals:
680
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 of all limbs at
Minimal pain
proprioceptive
a slow walk
endurance of
5-10 minutes
Movement to
 Consistent
with breaks
 
appropriate
Next Phase
activities
Walking
placement
Early
limb
which
proprioception
circumference/
Limb muscle
active cervical
Response to
activity and
time walking
Length of
land
propriate
comfortable
Assessment
subjective
pain level
Length of
time with
minimally
aquatic
Aouanbs
subjective
Degree of 
Measures
standing
therapy
scapular
Outcome
.n
is used
steps i
ROM
.n
 Slow leash walking with
 Standing PROM with
bicycling movements :
reinforcement held at
weight-shifting on a
LIO
 Therapeutic Exercises
eps PRN based on
(concentrate efforts 
and forelimb
 after exercise
various locations
the weaker side)
NMDA receptor
NSAIDs PRN
Home Program
Medications
antagonists
surface
Modalities
joints c
ROM)
sling
PRN :
uo Sunus-usiam pue supueis peodains
locations (BID-TID, concentrate efforts on
Aquatic therapy: Swimming 5-10 minutes
assisting personnel in the UWTM at early
 Sh-on) sq e jo shuo! te suuao
Auna
Turming exercises during standing with
breaks) SID. Cervical patients should
Caution: Choose only 2-3 exercises per
asiaxa suou p fo uind sp pauiofiad
 oj amenssnut quu on siN 
od au u pasiad usissn
session. Other exercises may be
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
a bi-directional balance board 
20 min PRN after exercise
contraction 15 min PRN
wear lifejacket and be
Therapeutic Exercises
odalities
ROM
M
postoperatively
Timeframe*
Two to four
Expected
weeks
 Function to Good
 Motor Function
unstable surface
 Proprioceptive
Maintain nonmal
balance during
when standing
 muscle mass
tums or on a
Initial Motor
limb ROM
Increase limb
Maintenance
moderately
Deficits
activity
Phase
with
Goals:
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
681
proprioception
Minimal to no
active cervical
patterming at
 Near-nonmal
 pelvic limb
Normal gait
Consistent
at a walk
painwith
moderate
controlled
activities
a walk
ROM
Frequency of
steps in which
Limb muscle
circumference
muscle mass
Cavaletti rails
Response to
activity and
unsupported
appropriate
 Tightness of
endurance
navigated
successfully
subjective
pain level
Length of
time with
minimally
supported/
subjective
Walking
scapular
executed
Cervical
AROM
turms
exercises during standing
Walking in circles and
rising from an elevated
minutes gentle inclines/
Assisted standing and
weight-shifting on an
reinforcement held at
(concentrate efforts on
Therapeutic Exercises
Tuming/stretc hing
unstable surface
various locations
the weaker side)
NSAIDs PRN
 NMDA receptor
with positive
SID-BID
 Medications
antagonists
BID-TID
declines
e uo Sunus-usiem pue Supuens psisss
in lameness and pain early in the program
Aquatic therapy: Underwater Treadmill
1 walking: weave
Low cavaletti rails 5-10 reps SID-BID
session. Other exercises may be
 360-degree balance board
Therapeutic Exercises
or harmess
frequent breaks
lifejacket
 postoperatively
Four to eight
weeks
 moderate activity
 Limb muscle mass 
 proprioceptive
deficits to near 
 proprioception
cervical AROM
balance during
obstacles while
 function with
 approaching
approac hing
Maintenance of
nonmal gait
negotiating
ou poo
with slow-
Comfortable
Consistent
tums and 
nonmal
nonmal
walking
Goals:
682
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 Minimal to no
proprioception
 at a controlled
moderate-to-
Movement to
 Next Phase
comfortable
Criteria for
pain with
extensive
controlled
activities
Nonmal
gait and 
Nonmal
cervical
AROM/
PROM
10.0
turms in which
maintained at
Cavaletti rails
Limb muscle
circumferencel
muscle mass 
controlled trot
 Response to
activity and
Walking and
subjective
pain level
endurance
balance is
a walk and
Height and
 distance of
Assessment
navigated
Outcome
Measures
trotting
trot
shifting on an unstable
veave poles 10-20 reps
 Standing and weight-
Leash walking 15-20
minutes BID with 5-8
moderate inclines and
3-5 minutes controlled
8
SID-BID at a walk
epetitions SID-BID
trotting (working up 
minutes mild to
confined space
longer periods)
Home Program
surface
jn e on dn sum suem snut oi-s
Higher Cavaletti rails 10-20 reps SID-BID
-s sd n-oi ssiaxa ps-oi-s
patients
asaxa auu pfo und sp paufiad
program.Gradual increase to normal
 p uo suns-uaiam pue supus 
therapy: Swimming 15-20
session. Other exercises may be
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
activity can be initiated as
goals listed at this stage.
Therapeutic Exercises
Aquatic t
10.11
 postoperatively
 Eight or more
Timefr ame*
Expected
weeks
Near Normal Gait
 to Normal Gait
AROM/PROM
Maintenance of
balance during
obstacles while
Elimination of
walking and
 muscle mass
controlled
Nonmal limb
pue sum
trotting
trotting
Phase
Goals:
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
683
proprioception
ataxia at a trot
Criteria for
Next Phase
Inconsistent
pelvic limb
paraparesis/
Moderate-
paraparesis!
at a walk 
ataxia when
Moderate
ataxia at 
a walk
Severe
severe
tuming
subjective pain/
exertion level
Walking and
endurance on
Frequency of
steps in which
proprioception
rails
circumference/
Response to
activity and
endurance in
underwater
appropriate
muscle mass
Assessment
treadmill 
J0) pesn
Height of 
Cavaletti 
navigated
Outcome
Measures
 pe[ Ap
Walking
deficits
present)
trotting
Thigh
ai si-ot ssiaxe pis-on-
 Hemi-standing or diagonal leg
surface such
1 foam mattress 10-15 laps
exertion and
 Consider use of paw protective
proprioceptive deficits
 minutes of trotting as able
Walking/trotting as capable
g as capable
incorporating inclines and
uisad au ufna ud
performed pace/distance,
Therapeutic Exercises
Controlled ball play 
 Effleurage BID-TID
across an unstable s
Walking/trotting :
Home Program
BID-TID
Walking
SID-BID
Modalities
develop
ou
boots
BID
her
S
capable 5-10 min SID-BID. Add incline
 Consider use of paw protective boots as
8
SID-BID
 Cavaletti Rails (walking or trotting as
 challenge pelvic limbs or decline to
,5-10 working up 1
Caution: Choose onty 2-4 exercises per
aul u!
Weave Poles (walking or trotting 2
 musculature SID-BID prior to or
 Rehabilitation Clinie Program
I treadmill walking/jogging 2
be
a ud p uoaxa-ana 
proprioceptive deficits develop
 sads aeua ne uu oe-07
auou p fo jund sp pauuofiad
Therapeutic Exercises
(UWTM) walking,
following exercise
 15 min SID-EOD
with breaks
BID-TID
umi8oid
 Modalities
Land
Other
.n
Timeframe*
Degenerative Myelopathy
Expected
Variable
Minimize loss of
Early Stage:
Pelvic limb
 and ataxia
strength/
endurance
muscle
of life
Phase
Goals:
time
684
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 proprioception
pelvic limbs in 
weight-bearing
 paraparesis or
paraplegia at a
Criteria for
Movement to
Next Phase
 Poor pelvic
at a walk 
Extensive
assistance
Severe
limb
walk
proprioceptive
weight
circumference/
Response to
frequency of
activity and
muscle mass
subjective
underwater
 Ability to
Assessment
8
Presence
walk
6
voluntary
movement
Measures
Walking
placing i
treadmill
Loddns
Height o
Outcome
obstacl
Thigh
.8
 refex exercises for pelvic
on level
assistive
bands at
with sling
 pelvic
8
Fitting fora four-wheel cart if
limbs (10-15 reps BID-TID)
 prescribed) at routinely
BID-TID
cart
bones
desired can take place at
performed pace/distance (
BID-TID
Iks (with four-wheel (
Choose only 2-3 6
PROM with bicycling
rear
istance
tarsus/metatarsal
Sit-to-stand exercises
 Effeurage BID-TID
nerapeutic Exercises
 and
harness with resis
Home Program
Walks in front 2
moderately
this time
needed; 5
Modalities
Flexor 1
Caution:
when
BID
 on a foam pad or bi-directional balance 
board with assisted pelvic limb support
assistance if needed 10-15 reps BID
Low Cavaletti Rails 5-10 laps as able
 0 ( 5e ) s 2 
forces on pelvic limbs, +/- resistance
 band to help encourage proprioceptive
-BID
may
d  ss x 
I-Is sod Apis e ne uru i-5
 Sit-to-stand exercises with sling
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
g
Land treadmill slow walking a
session.Other exercises may 
performed as part of a home 
program. Doing all exercises f
Therapeutic Exercises
limbs, 10 reps BID
the program
BID-TID)
reps BID
placing
BID
Timeframe*
Expected
Variable
Early-Mid-Stage:
severe pelvic
proprioceptive
Maintain quality
 Moderate to
 paraparesis
and ataxia
Delay loss of
strength/
feedback
muscle
limb
Provide
of life
Phase
time
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
685
pqouad pun
Complete loss
of voluntary
 thoracic limb
motion of
paraparesis
A aspas
variable
fecal
 Proprioception
thoracic limbs
 Patient attitude
 Pelvic/thoracic
Patient attitude
and postural
limb reflexes
thoracic limb
reactions of
limb reflexes
Subjective
movements all joints of all limbs 
movements all joints of all limbs 
and thoracic limbs, 10 reps BID
protective boots on pelvic limbs
 Flexor refex exercises for pelvic
 proprioceptive deficits increase
Iks (with four-wheel cart) at
 Use of soft bedding with rotation
 Bladder expression TID-QID
Use paw protective boots as
 every 4-6 hours to prevent
-15 min BID-TID. Use
PROM with bicycling
cart unless limbs are
(-aI sd1 SI-0)
Therapeutic Exercises
decubital ulcers
coutinely
Flexor
PRN
Other
her
0
· Gentle massage of limb and paraspinal
(- sda I-0) s  o s
 Use of soft bedding with rotation every
with
 Flexor reflex exercises for pelvic and
achieve limb movement and for safety
46 hours to prevent decubital ulcers
Aquatic therapy: Swimming 10-15
contraction 15 min EOD-SID PRN
Aquatic therapy: Swimming 10-15
 minutes with supported standing
10-15 minutes SID. Use fotation
devices/resistance bands to assist 
 proprioceptive placing if needed.
 NMES to hindlimb musculature f
all joints of all limbs (10-15 reps
proprioceptive deficits increase
Use paw protective boots as
Therapeutic Exercises
 Therapeutic Exercises
15 min SID-EOD
BID-TID)
Modalities
Modalities
Other
110
 post-diagnosis
 post-diagnosis
Variable; up to
Myelopathy.Vet Intern Med 2006:20:927-932.
Variable; 6-9
months
 proprioceptive
Maintain patient
Pelvic limb
Reduce loss of
 paraplegia
endurance
Paraplegia
Late-Stage:
strength/
 continued
feedback
Stage:
muscle
 of life
comfort
Goals:
Provide
Limb
Goals:
Late
686
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 Criteria for Movement
 Incisional integrity
 operated limb on all
 Minimal pain with
Early toe-touching
weight-bearing on
 Minimal pain with
 Consistent partial
 Incisional healing
 partial weight-
strides at a walk
light activities
Postoperative
 complications
 to Next Phase
 maintained
comfort
PROM
bearing
without
8
 Response to PROM 
—stifle
joints if applicable
Thigh muscle girth/
 to activity
Lameness score at a
-stifle
 subjective pain
 subjective pain
ROM and other 
stance and walk 
Goniometry-
Goniometry-
Measures
symmetry
Weight
Weight
ROM
pue
level
pue
level
flexion/extension (10-15
reps TID-QID). Specific
pind aq pnous uouan
 Cryotherapy (15-20 min
 BID) following exercises
 PROM and gentle stife
Balance/weight-shifting
weight-bearing BID-TID
 Opioids—BID-TID PRN
exercises to encourage
 extension hip stretches
.aap-06/aa.1aap-0n
 exercises on a
sessions for 2-4 days i
-daily PRN
 Immobilization between
 Therapeutic Exercises
 PROM and flexion/
, 5-10 min
soft foam pad for
Home Program
reps BID-TID)
stifle
Medications
walking,
Modalities
Balance 
 NSAIDs-
surface
sling**
in the :
 sdan oi uonendueu ep
flexion/extension on the operated
(10-MIL sda1 sI-01) uoisuajxa
encourage
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
Cryotherapy (15-20 min frst
 PROM bicycling movements 
sr p-t 
treadmill walking, 5-10 min
BID-TID to encourage active
Balance and weight-shifting
 TENS across fracture site
SID-BID. Consider edema
and stifle fexion/extension
 Opioids—BID-TID PRN
Elicit flexor reflex with
exercises BID-TID to é
daily PRN
 Therapeutic Exercises
BID-TID
Medications
Modalities
NSAIDs-
limb
limb
 postoperatively
postoperatively
Distal Femoral Physeal Fractures
48-96 hours
 s096-8
Timeframe*
Immediate to
10 days
Expected
 ROM and hindlimb
Early Weight-Bearing
Continued pain control
Near-normal ROM and
hindlimb extension
 Swelling and edema
 atrophy of operated
Encourage/improve
Achieve consistent
Minimize muscle
partial weight-
Immobilization
Pain control 
extension
control
Phase
Goals:
Goals:
limb
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
687
 substantial weight-
1 operated
 limb on all strides
 Minimal pain with
 Near-normmal stifle
passive ROM
·Consistent
 bearing on 
effusion
-stifle
joints if applicable
 Response to activity
and subjective pain
 ROM and other
Goniometry-
level
 BID) following exercises
of operated limb (10-15 
 Balance exercises on an
weight-bearing BID-TID
extension hip stretches
TID-QID to encourage
active range of motion
 Include inclined surface
(3-5 minutes with each
Slow, controlled leash
quadriceps and gluteal
walking session) for
muscle strengthening
Therapeutic Exercises
unstable surface for
in the stifle
Modalities
contralateral foot during exercise
"(- sdai s I-01) uisxa 
increasingly unstable surfaces to
 present, should be considered
 across fracture repair site
(Nd uu oz-s) adenoki
Underwater treadmill walking.
SID-BID if hindlimbs are used
improve muscular adjustments
 Use of a syringe cap or other
 m te ynou pnuuon 
 Heat therapy to quadriceps 
encourage active range of
non-harmful irritant on
Continued sling use to
for analgesia SID-BID
10-15 min SID-BID to
with removal only for
rehabilitation sessions
 Therapeutic Exercises
on the operated limb
motion in the stifle
BID-TID
postoperative
Modalities
exercise
TENS :
 Ten days to three
postoperatively
weeks
Maintain normal ROM
 and hindlimb fexion
 lameness at a walk
 moderate-
 Consistent Weight-
intensity activity
Reduce and prevent
 and extension
 further muscle
Achieve minimal
low- to
atrophy
Goals:
688
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 Criteria for Movement
 Minimal to no pain
 Consistent partial
weight-bearing on
evidence of bone
Radiographic
postoperatively
with extensive
 to Next Phase
activities
trot
·Lameness score at a ·
Outcome Assessment
-stifle
muscle girth at 7-8
weeks postoperative
 Response to activity
 and subjective pain
 Lameness score at a
Re-evaluate thigh
 stance and walk
 stance, walk, and
and other
Goniometry-
Measures
Weight
ROM
joints i
Weight
level
10.11
 Opioids—SID-BID PRN ·
Evidence offracture healing
Cryotherapy (15-20 min
0 min
Incorporate challenging
to increase stifle flexion
Note: Ensure radiographic
 30 sec-2 min BID-TID
o to 5 flights BID-TID
10-15 min of inclines 
Cryotherapy PRN after
snow, sand, tall grass-
andimplant integrity
 Sit-to-stand exercises
 Heat therapy PRN
Leash walks 20-30
 Dancing exercises
 before activity
10-20 reps BID
 NSAIDs—PRN
Home Program
minutes BID
Medications
NSAIDs-
Medications
Modalities
surfaces 
Modalities
exercises
walking 15-20 minutes SID-BID
Land treadmill walking with caudal
wait until 4-6 weeks postoperative
evidence of fracture healing and
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
Cryotherapy (15-20 min PRN)
Cavaletti rail walking 5-10 reps
inflatable disk or 360 degree
before active exercise PRN
 Swimming 20-30 minutes
 Heat therapy to affected
Note: Ensure radiographic
 Therapeutic Exercises
encourage quadriceps
10 min BID-TID
 5 flights BID-TID
over 5 rails
Modalities
SID-BID
Modalities
BID
 postoperatively
Three to eight
Timeframe*
Expected
weeks
 Partial Weight-Bearing
Pain-free moderate- to
Normal muscle mass
Achieve soundness at
high-intensity
patient care
 of operated
at a Trot
hindlimb
activity
Goals:
a trot
Phase
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
689
 Subjective pain level
Outcome Assessment
hyperextension, and
proprioception and
postural reactions
 Ability to navigate
L7-S1, dorsal tail
elevation, back 
rectal palpation
obstacles while
jogging/turming
challenging
Hindlimb
Measures
[ as aisun ra e uo ae 
Walking in sand, snow, low water or across a
Introduce gradually as tolerated by the patient
four limbs) or semi-inflated disk (hindlimbs)
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises per session.
lad sun e-z snut oi-s ssamu uoy
variable terrain, 5-10 min SID. Ensure the
 incorporating 5 minutes of mild-moderate 
sdau oz-I on dn suom g puis-on-s 
Moderate leash walks 20-30 min BID,
 Doing all exercises may result in over-
 5-8 flights SID-BID. Add this 
Therapeutic Exercises
5-10 min SID-BID
Home Program
SID-BID
week.
 board (all four limbs)
 Swimming 5 working up to 20 minutes adding jets 2-3
pad or mattress 5
 a physioroll
asiaxa auu p fo ind sn pauofiad aq anu sasiiaxa
 8-S on dn Sulyom z-1 'suies umop pue 
surface
 peanut. Apply gradually increasingly challenging
 5-10 min
Conservative Management *
working up to 10 laps through 6-8 poles SID-BID
 10 reps, increasing
SID-BID
prevent spinal hyperextension with this activity.
Introduce gradually as tolerated by the patient
SID-BID
and antebrachii or forepaws balancing on 
exertion and pain early inthe program
 Balance 0n a 360-degree balance b
I on dn suom g seu meea
 to 10 reps SID-BID
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
 20-30 min BID variable speed
pain is well controlled
Therapeutic Exercises
up to 10 min BID
working
Walking 
Perfonm at all gaits
activities without
 paraspinal pain
and balancing
 muscle atrophy
Eliminate limb
No spinal/
Strengthen
Mild Pain
muscles
Goals:
pain
Stage
690
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
Outcome Assessment
 Subjective pain level
hyperextension, and
Thigh circumference
t digital pressure
 proprioception and
L7-S1, dorsal tail
 Ability to navigate
obstacles and mild
 inclines at a walk
und piu on anou
elevation, back
rectal palpation
If consistent pain
Hindlimb
Measures
 Balance with very gentle displacement forces
Introducegradually as tolerated by the patient
exercises per session.
 Effleurage BID-TID before exercise PRN
Ainjui jo uojgan [eudseed on Adeuayoi 
 Effleurage BID-TID before exercise PRN
10 - IS-2T sse Sd u
 NSAIDs, NMDA antagonists and other 
Moderate leash walks 10-20 min BID,
 20 min after exercise PRN
0 min after exercise PRN
(-8 sda1 S1-01)
Therapeutic Exercises
 analgesics PRN
Home Program
Modalities
Tedications
Modalities
6
M
displacement forces in multiple directions to encourage
siiaxa auou pfo ind s pafiad aq ru ssiiaxa
 a physioroll
. 5 min SID.
surface
r peanut. Apply gradually increasingly challenging
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises per session. Other
 Balance on a bi-directional balance board (all four
linmbs) or semi-inflated disk (hindlimbs) 5 min SID-
 Aquatic therapy: Underwater Treadmill (UWTM)
Introduce gradually as toleratedby the patient
 Gentle massage of lumbar epaxial and limb
TENS across L7-S1 15-20 min SID-EOD
Low Cavaletti rails 5-10 reps SID-BID
exertion and pain early in the program
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
musculature SID-BID
Therapeutic Exercises
steady pace
Modalities 
BID-TID)
PRN
BID
 pain with activity
Early strengthening
Moderate Pain**
Mild-to-minimal
Prevent/minimize
navigation on
limb muscle
Maintain normal
challenging
 of paraspinal
limb ROM
Controlled
surfaces
atrophy
muscles
Goals:
Stage
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
691
ede s uneeqpusasudde
 Response to activity
Length of time with
which appropriate
and subjective pain
level when active
alking in aquatic
roprioception is
Height of objects
navigated cleanly
aiapou oi aou
Length of time
circumference/
unsupported
muscle mass
 at rest
standing
Thigh
pue
land
uind
6.
Introduce gradually as tolerated by the patient
SID-BID
or reflex exercises for affected limbs
 PROM pelvic limbs 10-15 reps BID-TID
 NSAIDs, NMDA antagonists, and other
 NSAIDs, NMDA antagonists, and other 
exertion and pain early in the program.
IO
eights,
: 5-10 min BID
 circles and figure
pelvic limb muscle spasms
week.
 pelvic limb muscle spasms 
 reps BID-TID)
BID
Apu
Therapeutic Exercises
 PRN
Doing all exercises.
walks
 analgesics PRN
analgesics PRN
Walking in c
Slow leash
 Medications
Todalities
Tedications
(10-15 1
E
M
exercises may be performed as part of a home exercise
N axa    IT se S 
walking, 2-5 min working up to 10-15 min SID slow,
 Flexor reflex exercises for affected limbs (10-15 reps
Other
 Gentle massage of lumbar epaxial (if tolerated) and
 NSAIDs, NMDA antagonists, and other analgesics
 papsu ji dod uneu pss npid
 idea as  Nd sexa ssn
Therapeutic laser lumbar epaxial muscles SID
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises per session.
 Gentle massage of lumbar epaxial and limb
Introduce gradually as tolerated by the patient
TENS across L7-S1 15-20 min SID-EOD
TENS across L7-S1 15-20 min SID-EOD
BID-TID
exertion and pain early in the program
 5 reps SID-BID
sda
limb musculature SID-BID
musculature SID-BID
Therapeutic Exercises
Low Cavaletti Rails :
muscle spasms
muscle spasms
cohse
pace
(11-18
edications
Medications
fodalities
odalities
steady
PRN
M
M
 spasm reduction
unstable surface
Pain and muscle 
Increase affected
Maintenance of
balance during
limb muscle
turms and on a
Severe Pain **
 limb ROM 
moderately
692
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 Movement to Next
 toe-touching on
 Adequate resting
swelling and no
fexion, 135-150
80-100 degrees
healing without
operated limb
 perioperative
 partial weight-
bearing with
each stride on
complications
Comfortable
elbow ROM
 Minimal pain
Criteria for
 Consistent
Decreased
incisional
Consistent
drainage
extension
with light
activities
 Incisional
Phase
(other joints if 
subjective pain 
Gait evaluation
and subjective
Gait evaluation
Postoperative
elbow PROM
Response to
activity and
Response to
light activity
Elbow ROM
Assessment
pain level
at a walk
and other
applicable
Outcome
Measures
Weight
at walk
joints if
level
Slow leash walking only to go
Cryotherapy to affected elbow
 Oral chondroprotective agents
thoracic limb (with emphasis 
 Slow, steady leash walking on 
 elbow flexion/extension),
 Gentle massage (effleurage)
range affected thoracic limb
 PROM within comfortable
minutes at a time, with a
 NSAIDs/other analgesics
flexion/extension), 10-15
Gentle PROM affected 
(15-20 min BID-TID)
 Injectable polysulfated
 Therapeutic Exercises
glycosaminoglycans
Therapeutic Exercises
Home Program
 Medications
harness
Modalities
harmess
 outside, no more than five minutes 
flexion/extension), 8-10 repetitions
Land Treadmill: Begin with slight
minutes at a slow, steady pace BID
Gentle PROM affected thoracic
   sn s
 PROM within comfortable range
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
limb (with emphasis on elbow
 Oral chondroprotective agents
incline or level surface, 5-10
extension), 10-15 repetitions
affected thoracic limb (with
emphasis on elbow flexion/
Transcutaneous electrical
 NSAIDs/other analgesics
at a time, with a harmess 
 Injectable polysulfated
(15-20 min BID-TID)
 Therapeutic Exercises
glycosaminoglycans
Therapeutic Exercises
shoulder muscles)
BID-TID
Medications
Modalities
BID-TID
postoperatively
postoperatively
48-72 hours
Timeframe*
Immediate to
two weeks
Expected
Postoperative to
Touching at a
 improve elbow
Elbow Flexion
edema control
postoperative
Continue pain
Improve elbow
Early Toe-
Pain control
Swelling and
Bearing.
Moderate
Maintain/
control
Step 1
Walk
Goals:
ROM
Goals:
ROM
Phase
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
693
flexion, 145-155
 on operated limb
weight-bearing
s.aap 08-09
Elbow ROM
Consistent
extension
pain with
degrees
at walk
moderate
activities
thoracic limb
subjective pain
Gait evaluation
muscle mass 
 Response to
activity and
Subjective
moderate
Weight
walk
level 
 Flexor withdrawal stimulation
 Oral chondroprotective agents
warranted (minimizes loss of
exercises for thoracic limbs
(begin training if applicable)
range affected thoracic limb
 Gentle massage (effleurage,
(15-20 min BID-TID PRN
Weight loss program can be
 PROM within comfortable
exercises
 NS AIDs/other analgesics
 Balance/weight-shifting
 initiated at this phase if
(with emphasis on elbow
flexion/extension), 10-15
n a semi-finm surface
 Injectable polysulfated
5-10 min BID-TID
8-10 reps BID-TID
 glycosaminoglycans
repetitions BID-TID
scapular muscles)
lean tissue mass).
thoracic limb
after exercise)
Medications
Modalities
hamess
6
M
 Flexor withdrawal stimulation 8-10
minutes at a slow, steady pace BID
 Balance/weight-shifting exercises
limb 15 min SID/PRN for atrophy
 Land Treadmill: Begin with slight
 on a bi-directional board or soft
reps BID affected thoracic limb
NMES muscles affected thoracic
e Nd -a ut o-)
 PROM within comfortable range
training if applicable) 8-10 reps
for
foam pad 5-10 min BID-TID
stimulation across the elbow 
incline or level surface, 5-10
affected thoracic limb (with
extension), 10-15 repetitions 
emphasis on elbow flexion/
 Transcutaneous electrical
 NSAIDs/other analgesics
 Injectable polysulfated
glycosaminoglycans
Therapeutic Exercises
 5-10 min SID-BID
with a hamess
BID-TID
exercise)
Medications
BID-TID
Modalities
 postoperatively
Two to four
weeks
weight-bearing
Prevent/minimize
thoracic limb
muscle atrophy
 Near-Normal
Elbow Flexion
Increase toe-
touching
Walk,
694
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
Movement to Next
·Elbow PROM
flexion, >150
Criteria for
extension
degrees
Phase
Goniometry-
Elbow ROM
thoracic limb
muscle mass
applicable
Subjective
Assessment
Measures
 pu
Outcome
joints if
Weight
 Flexor withdrawal stimulation
01
 Oral chondroprotective agents 
antebrachium as tolerated for
exercises for thoracic limbs
1 a semi-unstable surface
Gentle massage (effleurage,
10-15 reps BID-TID. Add
(15-20 min BID-TID PRN
·Balance/weight-shifting
light weights to proximal
 PROM exercises 10 min
muscle strengthening.
 inflammation present)
5-10 min BID-TID
glycosaminoglycans
Home Program
thoracic limb
 after exercise)
Medications
Modalities
6
 Swimming 5-10 minutes 3-4 times 
  s m 
Balance/weight-shifting exercises
reps BID affected thoracic limb
 session. Other exercises may
auou pfo und sp pauuofiad
exercises may result in lameness
(15-20 min BID-TID PRN after
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
unigaid au u kpana upd pun
this activity until 4-6weeks
 proximal antebrachium as
exercise program. Doing all
stimulation across the elbow 1
signs of acute inflammation
Transcutaneous elecrical
observedwithforelimb
for atrophy prevention
10 min BID-TID
Todalities
exercise)
M
Timeframe*
osteoarthritis is
ROM (unless
Improve weight-
Minimize pain
bearing at a
limb muscle
mass/strength
Achieve near-
 significant
exercises
during
present)
walk
Phase
Goals:
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
695
bearing at a trot
 No evidence of
moderate-intense
Partial weight-
 Normal elbow
range of motion
Minimal to no
lameness at a
pain with
walk
Gait evaluation
heavy activity
and subjective
Elbow ROM
thoracic limb
 walk and
muscle mass
moderate/
pain level
applicable
Subjective
Response
and other
joints if
Weight
trot
feasible depending on patient
 Heat therapy at elbow prior to
10-15 reps BID-TID. Light
Doing
 a semi-unstable surface
10-15 seconds BID. Begin 
(15-20 min BID-TID PRN
(with ermphasis on elbow
flexion/extension), 10-15
exercises
Wheelbarrowing 5-8 reps
s tolerated for muscle
Caution: Choose only 2-4
lameness and pain early
exercises per session.
repetitions BID-TID
 5-10 min BID-TID
"Shaking paw"
strengthening
after exercise)
needed
weights t
 Modalities
flat
6
affected thoracic limb in the water
Low Cavaletti Rails 5-10 reps BID
introducing light weights/flotation 
walking 10-15 minutes SID-BID
flexion/
Balance/weight-shifting exercises
 distal
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises
 a 360-degree balance board
exercises 10-15
suou p fo lind sn pauiofiad aq
 Oral chondroprotective agents
 Land Treadmill: Level surface
PROM affected thoracic limb
Swimming 10-15 minutes 3-4
uaaid auu kna ud pu
Treadmill(UWTM) walking
postoperatively. as feasible
exercise program. Doing all
gradually introducing light
NSAIDs/other analgesics
on elbow1
 Injectable polysulfated
 glycosaminoglycans
10 min BID-TID
limb in the water
with a hamess
(with ermphasis (
Medications
 postoperatively
Four to eight
weeks
 Normal Elbow
Normal limb use
Improve thoracic
 Improve stamina
 and endurance
 bearing at a
limb muscle
Early weight-
 mass and
Consistent
strength
Step 4
Goals:
trot
696
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 Movement to Next
 Progressons may
decrease activity
 activity is not
week and then
or pain with
Criteria for
by 10-20%
observed.
weekly.
Phase
subjective pain
t evaluation
every 2 weeks 
until symmetry
and
at walk and 
thoracic limb
muscle mass 
8
Subjective
Assessment
Response
evaluation
Outcome
Measures
activity &
Weight
Gait 
trot
 Oral chondroprotective agents 
 Continue weight loss program if
6
 ym a e ne s si m
range affected thoracic limb
PROM within comfortable
exercises for thoracic limbs
Injectable polysulfated
 Balance/weight-shifting
repetitions BID-TID
glycosaminoglycans
5-10 min BID-TID
Home Program
 NSAIDs PRN
Medications
needed
0 with a harmess
 not within normal limits
affected thoracic limb in the water
20-30 min SID-BID at moderate/
flotation device on distal affected
times per week with breaks, light
0 nd m e A 
for
(15-20 min BID-TID PRN after
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
agents
PROM affected thoracic limb
Swimming 15-20 minutes 3-4
pain relief (15-20 min PRN)
Treadmill (UWTM) walking
thoracic limb in the water
 PROM exercises 10 min
 Injectable polysulfated
 glycosaminoglycans
 Therapeutic Exercises
(with emphasis (
 NSAIDs PRN
Medications
ROM is 1
Modalities
exercise)
f
 Eight to twelve
 puo faq pue
Timeframe*
Expected
weeks
Weight-Bearing
with minimal
to no lameness
muscle mass,
strength, and
Trot working 
stamina and
 improving
improving
at a Trot
endurance
Continue
power
Phase
 dais
Appendix 1
Protocol Development and Protocols
/69
I process.
I anconeal
n ssad pi  pa un peau ea au po suas so
10-15 reps BID-TID. Weights
feasible depending on patient
and leash) 1-2 flights working
 Oral chondroprotective agents
 harmess
Doing
10-15 seconds BID. Begin c
d    n 
min
.6
(15-20 min BID-TID PRN
to distal antebrachium as
lameness and pain earlyi
Caution: Choose only 2-4
 Injectable polysulfated
tolerated for muscle
(slow, controlled on 
Controlled ball play
 glycosaminoglycans
strengthening
after exercise)
theprogram
SID-BID
Medications
Modalities
 Balance/weight-shifting exercises
seconds BID. Begin at 6-& weeks
' exercises 10-15
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises
1 a 360-degree balance board
Cavaletti Rails 10-15 reps BID
auoy pfo uind sp pauofiad
exercises may result in lameness
(15-20 min BID-TID PRN after
 PROM exercises 10 min PRN
Cryotherapy to affected elbow
 Injectable polysulfated
muscle strengthening
 glycosaminoglycans
 guidelines and may b
min BID-TID
5-6 flights BID
 NSAIDs PRN
exercise)
Medications
Modalities
intended
口
following:
ee
who
timelines
the
6
as
these
that
puu
6
 only
ised
 nonmal activity
in
keep
as possible
Retum to as
e therapist must 
698
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
weight-bearing
with minimal
attempting to
 Standing in
Criteria for
 Next Phase
movement
voluntary
moddns
stepping
Initial
when
walk
comfort level
affected) limb
circumference
 Pelvic (and
muscle tone
 Subjective
Degree of
required in
Assessment
Measures
support
standing
Outcome
Thigh
1 of injury 20 min TID
 Bladder expression TID-QID
BID-TID
6
paraspinal
 Use of soft bedding with
movements all joints of
rotation every 4-6 hours
e uo papeau se joddns
PROM with bicycling
prevent decubital ulcers
(10-15 reps BID-TID)
 Flexor reflex exercises
Therapeutic Exercises
(beginning 24 hours
Cryotherapy to 
Home Program
(Kanfu}-isod
pelvic (+/-
BID-TID)
 needed
edications
odalities
Muscle 1
region
PRN
PRN
f
M
M
0
Aquatic therapy: Underwater Treadmill
(UWTM) standing, 3-5 min SID-BID,
- thoracic) limbs
 Jo uojgan [eudseed o Aderayoi -
NMES to pelvic limb (+/- thoracic
Gentle massage of limb musculature
 Flexor reflex exercises for affected
Bladder expression TID-QID PRN
needed on a stable, high-traction
-sod snou t uaq) aneins
limb) musculature for contraction 
· Muscle relaxants BID-TID PRN
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
limbs (10-15 reps BID-TID)
(10-15 reps BID-TID)
Therapeutic Exercises
joints of pelvic (+/-
15 min SID
as needed
Fibrocartilaginous Embolic Myelopathy*
Medications
Modalities
(Aanfu)
Timeframe*
Expected
Immediate
to three
 seven
days
post-
injury
Weight-bearing
with minimal
Minimize limb
pu un
Initial Weight
Appreciable
limb tone
Independent
defec ation
Support
support
muscle
atrophy
Phase
Goals:
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
699
 motor activity
voluntary
standing
·Limb
subjective pain/
 Length of time
steps in which
 gait patterming
circumference/
 Response to
muscle mass
effort level
Number of
standing
Thigh
with
shifting/rhythmic stabilization,
movements all joints of pelvic 
Slow leash walking with sling
 gradually decreasing support
rotation every 4-6 hours if not
 thoracic) limbs (10-15
 Bladder expression TID-QID
 of hindlimb
 Muscle relaxants BID-TID
Use of soft bedding with
support 5 minutes TID,
PROM with bicycling
encouraging stepping
musculature BID-TID
Therapeutic Exercises
BID-TID)
self-rotating
(1-18
Medications
bathtub)
Modalities
-/+)
reps.
PRN
PRN
uns-rsiam pue suis pnsisss
 Aquatic therapy: Supported swimming
Turming exercises during standing with
 Slow leash walking with sling support
 minutes TID, encouraging stepping
beneath abdomen, standing in water)
locations (concentrate efforts on the
weaker side), encouraging stepping
[eqoisAud sa) uoddns suiseaop
 Bladder expression TID-QID PRN 
rhythmic stabilization, gradually
 Gentle massage of affected limb
Muscle relaxants BID-TID PRN
contraction 15 min EOD-SID
4-6 hours if not self-rotating
(10-15 reps BID-TID)
 Therapeutic Exercises
SID-BID
Medications
Modalities
 post-injury
One to two
weeks
Weight Support
Pain-free activity
Movement of all
 four limbs at a
Minimize limb
Full weight-
 bearing in
 standing
supported
Function
Self-rotation
Motor
muscle
Goals:
slow,
walk
700
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
movements at
with moderate
Movement to
Consistent
strong limb
Criteria for
 Next Phase
Minimal
activities
a walk
subjective pain
Length of time
Length of time
aquatic therapy
pueI A1p uo pue
steps in which
circumference/
Response to
activity and
unsupported
walking in
muscle mass
Assessment
Measures
standing
Outcome
used
level
with
 -aiam pue Supus pnsissy 
movements all joints of pelvic 
t various
iduuaudp
 limbs (10-15
pafiad aq u sasiiaxa
surface such as a mattress
Caution: Choose only 2-4
PROM with bicycling
standing with positive
 BID-TID PRN)
reinforcement held at 
 Therapeutic Exercises
 the weaker side)
surface
Home Program
unstables
BID-TID
reps BID
eights:
-/+）
uo suns-siam pue supns pansissy .
Use flotation devices/resistance bands to
(UWTM) walking, 10-15 minutes SID.
 5-10 minutes SID with resistance band
Turning exercises during standing with
SID-BID
hindquarters on an elevated surface or
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises per
in over-exertion and pain early in the
assist with proprioceptive placing if
Aquatic therapy: Swimming 10-15
(10-15 reps PRN based on ROM)
nu
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
a bi-directional balance board
Low Cavaletti rails 5-10 reps
session. Other exercises may
auoy pfo jind sppauofiad
program. Doing all exercises
Therapeutic Exercises
with sling support
weaker side)
use PRN
needed.
upi8oid
Modalities
breaks
Timeframe*
Two to four
post-injury
Expected
weeks
balance during
Function with
Maintain nonmal
Increase affected
Maintenance of
a
Function to
Good Motor
limb muscle
tums and on
Initial Motor
 limb ROM
moderately
Deficits
activity
unstable
Improve
surface
Goals:
Phase
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
701
Minimal to no
patterming at a
proprioception
over-exertion
or pain with
Normal gait
 Consistent
pelvic limb
at a walk 
extensive
activities
10.11
subjective pain
Length of time
tums in which
Frequency of
steps in which
Cavaletti rails
circumference/
 Response to
activity and
Jo ss
muscle mass
balance is
maintained
appropriate
standing
endurance
Height of
navigated
Walking
used
level
with
 Assisted standing and weight-
shifting on an unstable surface
Stair Climbing 1 working up
spaced low obstacles 10-15 
as part of a home exercise
 Turming exercises during
Trotting 2-3 minutes over
surface such as a mattress
BID-TID with 5 minutes
pain early in the program
gradually decreasing in
Caution: Choose only 2-4
walking: weave poles
to 5 flights SID-BID
Therapeutic Exercises
inclines/declines
 ground BID
10-15 reps BID
reps BID
even
Assisted standing and weight-shifting on
 Turming exercises during walking: weave
a-s sda oi-s ssiarxa pueis-o-s
Sunp supuns poddns uim sannu
 PRN. Introduce trotting for 1-2 minutes.
nsa rnu sasiaxa  suoa uiaaid
 punoig uaaa raao sannuut e-z suoi
 Gait patterming on a ground treadmill,.
Aquatic therapy: Swirmming 20-30
(UWTM) walking, 15-20 minutes 
in lameness and pain early in the
Cavaletti rails 10 reps SID-BID
a 360-degree balance board
auoy pfo jnd sp pauofiad
Therapeutic Exercises 
SID-BID
breaks
BID
post-injury
Four to six
weeks
proprioceptive
deficits to near
 proprioception
ith moderate-
balance
while walking
function with
normal gait
Affected limb
muscle mass
 approaching
 negotiating
ojou poog
high-
 intensity
 obstacles
 activity
nonmal
Maintain 
sunp
Consistent
trotting
Goals:
and
W
702
Appendix 1
Protocol Development and Protocols
-ddpudspdusudemeasp
Minimal to no
with extensive
proprioception
at a trot and at
Normal gait
faster speeds
Movement to
 
Next Phase
activities
pue
subjective pain
turns in which
Response to
activity and
Walking and
 Tightness of
 Pelvic limb
muscle mass
Height and
distance of
Assessment
navigated
Measures
trotting
balance i
Outcome
maintain
level 
thigh
Assisted standing and weight-
shifing on an unstable surface
 Turming exercises with weave
BID with 10 minutes variable
spojad 1asuol on dn Suyuom
exercises per session. Other
program. Doing all exercises
inclines and 5-10 minutes 
as part of a home exercise
u ssaa
pain early in the program
Caution: Choose only 2-4
Therapeutic Exercises
repetitions SID-BID
Controlled ball play
Home Program
reps SID-BID
reps BID
trotting
 Stair Climbing 5-10 repetitions SID-BID
Aquatic therapy: Underwater Treadmill
 Gait patteming on a ground treadmill,
 -s sdai si-oi si me
Aquatic therapy: Swimming 20-30
 with weave poles
session. Other exercises may be
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
 a 360-degree balance board
 canine reabilitation.
5-10 minutes at a trot
Therapeutic Exercises
 Controlled ball play
variable speeds
 been trained in 
SID-BID
minutes
program
10.1
 rehabilitation
post-injury
timel
6
 o xis
difficult
 progression
Expected
weeks
these
hat
I is often
in mind
pue
licen
sion. Caution should be taken
Maintain balance
 Normal Gait
high-intensity
Nonmal affected
limb muscle
while trotting
Elimination of
during turms
Near Normal
activity
obstacles
Gait to
Goals:
mass
Phase
and
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols 
703
perioperative
swelling and
Criteria for
Movement to
Next Phase
Decreased
·Early toe-
touching
Adequate
analgesia
drainage
resting
lack of
subjective pain
Lameness score
bilateral "hip"
applicable via
 at a stance and
 Postoperative
bilateral thigh
circumference
PROM and
goniometry
activity and
Assessment
Outcome
Measures
Weight
level
walk
sling support available, only
pseudoarthrosis PROM for
 Gentle massage around the
 pseudoarthrosis, thigh, and
Slow leash walking with
 Inpatient status preferred
beginning immediately
S on dn) apisino o o
semi-finm surface for
minutes, TID-QID)
lumbosacral regions 
session immediately
 during this phase
weight-bearing
Home Program
postoperative
 NSAIDs
Modalities
If Home:
 PROM for operated limb focusing
 Balance exercises on a soft foam
e  uut oz- ) Adeno
 Slow, gentle hip pseudoarthrosis
while recovering from anesthesia
(IIO-T sda1 01) uojsuajxa uo
postoperative while recovering
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
immediately postoperative in
 Gentle massage around the
pseudoarthrosis, thigh, and
 Transcutaneous electrical
 stimulation for pain relief
 Opioids: injectable/CRI
(15-20 min SID-TID)
Therapeutic Exercises
lumbosacral regions 
from anesthesia)
 Medications
NSAIDS
Modalities
activities)-
Femoral Head and Neck Ostectomy
postoperative
 Immediate to
48-72 hours
Timeframe*
Expected
Toe-Touching
Bearing to
Non-Weight-
Phase
704
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
weight-bearing
weight-bearing
complications
weight-bearing
·Minimal pain
Criteria for
· Consistent
on operated
limb on all
strides at a
Goniometry—Hip · Consistent 
on operated
limb on all 
Next Phase
with light
 Incisional
strides at a
consistent
activities
partial
healing
without
at a trot
walk,
partial
walk
 dH-Anuouo
Lameness score at
joints if applicable
a stance and walk 
muscle girth at 3-4
weeks postoperative
ROM and other
ROM and other
e-evaluate thigh
subjective pain 
subjective pain
 Response to
activity and
 Response to
activity and
Assessment
Measures
Outcome
Weight
level
eve]
Sit-to-stand exercises 5-10 reps
hip stretches of operated linmb
Cryotherapy (15-20 min BID)
 including 5-10 min of inclines
extension and target gluteal
 Balance exercises on a soft
 BID-TID, prior to exercises,
NOT within 72 hours after 
 inclines to encourage hip
 Heat therapy (10-15 min
Leash walks 15-20 min
 Balance exercises on an
(10-15 reps BID-TID)
(10-15 reps BID-TID)
Therapeutic Exercises
Therapeutic Exercises
bearing BID-TID
Home Program
-PRN
_PRN
Medications
muscles
spiodo
Modalities
BID
 Balance exercises on a soft foam pad
within72
sdai si-oi qu prado jo sus
 treadmill, 10-15 min with increased 
Slow, controlled walking on a land
mild
incline settings to encourage hip 
inflarmmation are still present)
Therapeutic laser therapy PRN
 poq a9om ap 0 10
weight-bearing 5 min BID-TID
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
treadmill, 5-10 min including 1
 Controlled walking on a land
Therapeutic ultrasound SID
 incline angle and speed SID
(10-15 min BID-TID, NOT 
weight-bearing BID-TID
following exercises
 Two to four weeks Therapeutic Exercises
Femoral Head and Neck Ostectomy--cont'd
exercises
Modalities
Massage
SID-BID)
6
0M1 0 sInou ZL
postoperative
 postoperative
Timeframe*
weeks
Early Weight-
Bearing
Consistent
Weight-
Phase
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
705
weight-bearing
 Lameness score at · Minimal pain
· Minimal to no
 on operated
limb at a trot
Goniometry—Hip · Consistent
moderate to
with light
activities
 pain with
extensive
activities
 a stance, walk and
weeks postoperative
muscle girth at 7-8
Lameness score at
ROM and other
Re-evaluate thigh
subjective pain
a stance, walk,
 Response to
activity and
Weight
j0.1n pue
Weight
10.0
level
Aep rad uur s-e sujssof nys!]
Heat therapy (10 min) before
 PROM and flexion/extension
Light jogging 3-5 min per day
inclines, may use weights on
affected limb or pulled with :
including up to 10-15 min (
surfaces to walks, eg snow,
Sit-to-stand exercises 10-20
Stairs: 2-4 flights SID-BID
Stairs: 1 flight SID-BID
Cryotherapy (15-20 min)
Leash walks 20-30 min
sand, when possible
following exercises
Therapeutic Exercises
NSAIDs—PRN
 NSAIDs—PRN
Medications
reps BID
Medications
 Modalities
operated limb at 3-5% body weight or
ls paads pue aue auu paseau
 Balance exercises on an inflatable disk 
syringe cap under contralateral foot)
5-10 minutes once incision is sealed
Aquatic therapy: UWTM walking
BID-TID, applying weight on
d l ao o ss
week
BID
Cryotherapy (15-20 min BID)
e e  
 Controlled walking or light j
 Swimming 3-5 days per 
15-30 minutes SID-BID
Therapeutic Exercises
 Massage PRN
SID-BID
Modalities
Modalities
postoperative
Five to eight
weeks
Bearing at
Consistent
Weight-
a Trot
706
Appendix 1
Protocol Development and Protocols
his prtlis fblinerl whaetri inanerhabitihthapistmust kmn tha the tinareitedasuili anmeibymayfatr fftin
indviualzd patiet caratiens eeving fmrahead an nkueryas arelt oftrama has fracturef th acetablm geerallrqirelne e thatherecevin sugeas aeulf sere
weight-bearing
limb at a trot;
Minimal to no
Movement to
on operated
Criteria for
deficits may
 Next Phase
 Consistent
permanent
mild gait
pain with
extensive
activities
persist
Goniometry every
muscle girth every
Lameness score at
 Re-evaluate thigh
subjective pain
 3-4 weeks if
Response to
activity and
Assessment
Outcome
Measures
needed
and trot
Weight
level
 PROM for operated limb PRN 
distances tolerated, including
fast walks up inclined surfaces 
increasing times and distances.
Stairs: walking and trotting.
Ball-playing with gradually
 Heat therapy PRN before
Leash walks at times and
 Jogging: working up from
 Swimming or walking in 
10-15 minutes per day
reps as needed
 NSAIDs—PRN
Home Program
Modalities
exercises
tolerated
Medications
activity
time
Jo jed se panunuoo sq Aeui sasjiexa
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
a Home Exercise Program.
P,1u03-
Femoral Head and Neck Ostectomy-
postoperative
 and beyond
Timeframe*
Expected
with Minimal
Lameness
to No
Phase
dysplasia.
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
707
du pauu
reduction with
sagittal plane,
tissue healing
analgesia after
Movement to
appropriate
capsular/soft
 
Next Phase
within the
indicating
under way
Adequate
reduction
Well-
closed
mmobilization
circumference
inmmobilization
weight-bearing
immobilization
pelvic limb
joints after 
 affected
ssss
Morbidity
the sling
limb after
Outcome
Measures
motion e
period
Thigh
period
period
eight
after
maintainthelimbabducted
uinpainiai
Heat therapy at coxofemoral
.n
Ehmer sling for 2 weeks
.5 minutes only to:
 Massage of lurmbar spinal
 NSAIDs/other analgesics
reduction through early
healing of joint capsule
 with Ehmer sling i
hours 
joint (only after acute
at least 72 hours after
20
muscles (while limb i
Therapeutic Exercise
closed reduction, 2
Home Program
joint. This
 inmmobilized)
fo sadou
outside
Todalities
walks
place,
TID
M
The patient's affected pelvic limb should be
 Slow, controlled leash walks with Ehmer 
 is immobilized)
 subsided, at
I accessible
after closed reduction, to maintain the
 TENS across coxofemoral joint 20 min 
maintaininghipreductionthrough
 coxofemoral joint for
least 72 hours after reduction) 10 min 
go
early healing of joint capsule and
Rehabilitation Clinic Program 
Massage of lumbar spinal and 
after acute inflammation has s
 thigh muscles (while limb i
periarticular soft tissues.
· NSAIDs/other analgesics
Hip LuxationCraniodorsal, Closed Reduction*
Cryotherapy 8
CLL-08
Medications
outside
Modalities
Timeframe*
Immediately
Expected
weeks
to 2
post-
Immobilization
coxofemoral
[e1npano.d 
 coaptation/
reduction
Minimize
Maintain
joint in
Phase
-isod
pain
708
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
weight-bearing
Minimal pain
current activity
Maintenance
reduction at
·Consistent
 affected
limb on all 
strides at a
 
with light
Next Phase
activities
>130-140
s
ex tension
partial
walk
of hip
level
extension only)
and subjective
post reduction)
circumference
(evaluate at 2
(flexion and
and 4 weeks
Hip ROM
and other
applicable
Assessment
Response t
Lameness
score at a
stance and
Measures
joints if
Outcome
Weight
with hindlimbs at a
at coxofemoral
s in inoooiou op du
6
(10-15 reps SID-BID. It is
Care must be taken with all
nns  u uu
 NSAIDs/other analgesics
Balance on a semi-finm
0 min BID-TID before
, 5 min TID-QID
 joint 20 min PRN after
surface such as a sofa
critical to maintain
abduction), 5-10 min
efleurage
Therapeutic Exercises
needed
Home Program
support as
SID-BID
Massage-
Medications
PROM :
cushion 
lodalities
exercise
stage.
walks,
other
plane
PRN
fat
Cryotherapy at coxofemoral joint 20 min
TID-QID on flat surface or mild incline,
board
ensureextemalrotation andadduction
with hindlimbs at a wide base (in slight 
Care must be taken with all exercises to
    s s
 si ss  poe s 
 controlled leash walks, 5 min 
as needed 10-15 reps SID-BID. It is
o dn S g m ()
abduction), 5-10 min SID-BID
 NSAIDs/other analgesics PRN
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
weeks after reduction
coxofemoral joint SID
Therapeutic Exercises
papeeu se joddns
EOD-SID PRN
Medications
Modalities
exercise
muscles
Timeframe*
Two to four
reduction
Expected
weeks
-sod
Early Weight-
Minimize pain
 reduction
 muscle mass
with early
 Maintain hip
uonou jo
Bearing
 affected
activity
weight-
Improve
activity
Increase
Phase
limb
Goals
.n
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
709
weight-bearing
weight bearing
 Minimal pain
with moderate
50-55 degrees
Hip PROM:
Consistent
limb on all
strides at a
walk, early
activities
140-150
extension
at a trot
degrees
Hip ROM and
every 2 weeks)
subjective pain
circumference
Goniometry-
(re-evaluate
activity and
applicable
Lameness
score at a
level
uoa
6
flexion/extension stretches
maintain movement in the
 adducted) 5-10 min
Sit-to-stand 5-10 reps BID
Care must be taken with all
 20 min TID-QID on flat
f affected hip and other
 Stair climbing 1-2 fights
rotation and adduction 
6
slightly increased width
Caution: Choose only 2-4
joint and thigh muscles 
10 min BID-TID before
surface or mild incline
SID-BID. It is critical 
over-exertion and pain
 joint 20 min PRN after
hindlimbs at a normal 
 Light jogging 1-2 min
unisaid au u kuna
Therapeutic Exercises
sagittal plane
Medications
 per day
exercise
stage.
(never
BID
6
 Cryotherapy at coxofemoral joint 20 min
 PROM, bicycling, and flexion/extension
Land Treadmill: 5 minutes SID walking
s e 1 -S u 07-01 (1))
ensureextermalrotation and adduction
p uo (o- uu 0z 0n dn Suom
pq a aa-e e uo
 Therapeutic ulrasound (continuous) to
Care must be taken with all exercises to
: only 2-4 exercises per
sax uu fo ud s paiad
in over-exertion and pain early in the
as on dn sum ans n uo
increased width (never adducted)
 NSAIDs/other analgesics PRN
 controlled leash walks,
Sit-to-Stand 5-10 reps BID
coxofemoral joint PRN
Therapeutic Exercises
 PRN after exercise
sagittalplane
Medications
inclines
Modalities
exercise
reduction
eight
post-
Improve range
 muscle mass
Maintain hip
 increased
affected
Weight-
activity
Improve
linmb
Increase
710
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
weight-bearing
strides at a trot
Minimal pain
with moderate
Movement to
 Consistent
 on affected
limb on all
Hip PROM
Criteria for
Next Phase
activities
Hip ROM and
circumference
subjective pain
Goniometry-
Response to
activity and
stance, walk,
e-evaluate
sssn
Lameness
Measures
Outcome
Weight
level
pue
1 ball-playing with
BID
sa
Leash walks 20-30 min
 inclines,
 pulled with a haness 8
d pun uaxa-ia
Light jogging 3-5 min
sand, across a foam
uisaid a u kua
lerated/required
s to walks, 6
Home Program
mild-moderate i
and distances 
Controlled l
BID
odalities
activity
exercises
Kep
SID-1
3
3
M
session. Other exercises may be performed
Huoa uudaid asiiaxa suu n fo und sn
stretches of affected hip and other joints 
PROM, bicycling and flexion/extension
Aquatic Therapy: Underwater Treadmill
affected limb as tolerated. Incorporate 
 Balance on a 360-degree balance board 
all exercises may result in over-exertion
and
 Cryotherapy PRN after exercises
Cavaletti Rails 10-20 laps BID
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
 Stair clibing 3-5 flights BID
surface or mild incline
Therapeutic Exercises
SID-BID
Modalities
uun du po unal laia io panan aq reu
Timeframe*
reduction
Expected
Eight to
twelve
weeks
-1sod
care
 Bearing at a
Normal muscle
 in reduction
Maintain hip
through all
 movements
affected
limb at all
Consistent
Weight-
activity
weight-
bearing 
uoou
Phase
10.1
Nommal
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
711
measurements
Bilateral limb
circumference
 Goniometric
Individualized
for affected
Force plate
gait analysis
(using tools
measures set
.2
Assessment
evaluation
Subjective
functional
beginning 
treatment,
range of
analysis
for each
Outcome
motion
(suo!
Stance
such
 on the side of inclines with affected side
days of rest each week are recommended, in which
exercises should consist only of PROM, stretching.
of affected joint(s), 15-20 repetitions, SID-BID
uu o-s Aaqedeo s nuaned au o sedodde
Controlled stair or ramp climbing 1-3 flights per 
Sit-to-stand exercises (if pelvic limb(s) affected)
Controlled leash walks with mild inclines 10-30
Trotting on lead (as tolerated, to add to program
se <[uo ueBoud on ppe o1) TIL-I8 uoisss
minutes as tolerated TID-QID
and short leash walks
Therapeutic Exercises 
10-15 reps BID
Home Program
BID
performed per session in order to prevent pain due to excessive activity. At
suans aosnu pue aoueragon suaned uo supuadap la-as uu oe-oz
Exacerbate the patient's lameness. No more than 2-4 exercises should be
 Passive Range of Motion within comfortable range of affected joint(s),
least two days of rest each week are recommended, in which exercises
 Balance/weight shifting on surface with stability appropriate to the
 n pe ol -a uoiss ad s e o s pao
 Swimming 5 working up to 20 minutes 2-4 times per week 
Uphill (for OA involving thoracic limbs)
Cavaletti Rails 10-15 reps BID
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
15-20 repetitions, SID-BID
Therapeutic Exercises
Osteoarthritis
endurance
712
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
rising from a
uisod umo
Assessment
Difficulty
sit or lie
Difficulty
navigating
Outcome
Measures
Weight
stairs
Osteoarthritis is adiss charactrizedbexacerbation andrmisioherhabittirramhlbeaprriatadjuste taccmmde the varing phasdgreeof thiscio
 muscle groups of affected limbs: 10 minutes before
 [nne-qad jo asessut pue ssenae :aaessn ·
exercise and stretching to improve pain-free range
suse uee sors pnsod aqe 
Aaaa u uo  ou Ai Nd sn
su ueiso.d sso uaiam 1o juaueeuut uaiem
 Opioids/Acetarminophen/NMDA Antagonists
 0 6  1 [  
 Omega-3 Fatty Acids (EPA/DHA)
"aen uaed pazlenpipu buae sloe Auew Aq pauanju aq Aew pue s
PROM and exercises
other day long tenm
Home Program
uonou fo
Modalities
Medications
Transcutaneous electrical stimulation across affected joint(s) for pain relief
 Jo [og yim aedo.de se uesod sso usiam 1o juuasueu yaiem
 Intra-articular corticosteroids; or hyaluronic acid, platelet rich plasma,
 Jo sdnog aposnu ie[none-uad jo asesseu pue enane :asessen 
 affected limbs: 10 minutes at the start of each session
I as guidelines 
 Therapeutic Laser 10 J/cm? to affected joint(s)
 Opioids/Acetaminophen/NMDA Antagonists
papuaaesauwsy  puu d sn de
Extracorporeal shock wave treatment
 Omega-3 Fatty Acids (EPA/DHA)
 Oral chondroprotective agents
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
 and/or stem cell therapy
Osteoarthritis-cont'd
range of motion
BCS 4/9 to 5/9
Medications
Modalities
Other
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
713
toe-touching on
 Adequate resting
swelling and no
degrees flexion,
120-135 degrees
operated limb
partial weight-
bearing with
each stride on
 operated limb
 Minimal pain
Movement to
Consistent
ROM 70-90
Criteria for
 Next Phase
analgesia.
 Decreased
 incisional
 Consistent
drainage.
extension
with light
activities
subjective pain
t evaluation
subjective pain
Gait evaluation
walk and trot
Stifle ROM and
Postoperative
 bilateral stifle
ROM (other
 applicable)-
 bilateral thigh
circumference
 Response to
activity and
Goniometry-
 other joints if
goniometry
Response to
activity and
Assessment
applicable
Measures
joints if
ta walk
Outcome
Weight
level
Gait
level
t
patellofemoral OA exists
walking 5 working up to
-s  o si
 Inpatient status preferred
glycosaminoglycans if
 minutes at a time
Therapeutic Exercises
Therapeutic Exercises
Slow, steady leash
 during this phase
with sling support
agents/injectable
surface 5-10 min
Home Program
 Gentle massage
 NS AIDs/other
BID-TID)
Medications
analgesics
Modalities
BID-TID
NOTE: It is critical that motion
10 repetitions BID-TID. Include
 Slow leash walking only to go
 Oral chondroprotective agents/
B e snuu oi oi dn suyom
motion is limited to the sagittal
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
Gentle PROM affected stife
hip/tarsal PROM of operated
limb. NOTE: It is critical that
Gentle PROM affected stifle
Gentle massage (effleurage,
 NSAIDs/other analgesics
patellofemoral OA exists
time with sling support
injectable polysulfated 
Therapeutic Exercises
 at a time
 thigh muscles)
 Medications
minutes &
Iodalities
M
postoperatively
 postoperatively
Immediate to
48-72 hours
 s 7-
Timeframe *
two weeks
Expected
Maintain/ improve
Postoperative to
 Touching at a
 edema control
Reduce swelling
Early Toe-
 Swelling and
Continue pain
Pain control
Bearing
control
Step 1
Walk
stifle
Goals:
Step 2
Goals:
Phase
714
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 healing without
of operated limb
weight-bearing
weight-bearing
complications
ROM 60-80
on operated
limb at walk
Movement to
 Early partial
Criteria for
Next Phase
Incisional
extension
Consistent
at a trot
 pain with
moderate
activities
postoperatively
 circumference
subjective pain
Gait evaluation
activity and
at walk and
t 2 weeks
Goniometry-
 Stifle ROM
sssn
Response t
applicable
Outcome
Measures
Thigh
Weight
level
10.11
be initiated at this phase
'(sst snss uel jo sso
y to affected
affected pelvic limb 10 
the sagittal plane.
 PROM all joints of 
 Gentle massage
Home Program
 NSAIDs/other
(efleurage)
poly sulfated
Modalities
Medications
pain
SID
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program
agents!
 Slow consistent leash walking
balance board/unstable surface
exercises on a bi-directional
 Heat therapy prior to PROM
stimulation across stife for
NMES 15 min for affected
BID-TID (PRN). Maintain
motion in the sagittal plane.
quadriceps and hamstring
Balance/weight-shifting
 NSAIDs/other analgesics
patellofemoral OA exists
Balance/weight-shifting
 inflammation is absent 
 Therapeutic Laser SID
injectable polysulfated
5-10 min BID-TID
add 5 min every
BID-TID
Medications
odalities
M
postoperatively
Timeframe*
Two to five
Expected
weeks
weight-bearing
 Prevent/minimize
muscle atrophy
Achieve nonmal
Improve weight-
stifle ROM
bearing at a
Increase toe-
touching
at a Walk
Consistent
Goals:
walk
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
715
Stifle PROM
40-60 degrees
extension
degrees
circumference
postoperatively
at 3 and 5
weeks
Weight
 PROM exercises 10 min
muscles) prior to PROM
 patellofemoral OA exists
 Oral chondroprotective
 Slow consistent leash
add 5 min
Heat therapy prior to
 minutes of gentle 
5-10 reps BID. Use
sling or beginwith
(effleurage, thigh 
every week if
exercises PRN)
PRN
poly sulfated
BID-QD
Medications
walking-
Modalities
Gentle 1
auou p fo und sp pauuofiad
(15-20 min after exercises PRN)
uitoid au uAquna upd pun
 Oral chondroprotective agents/
 Low Cavaletti rails 5-10 reps
5-10 min SID-BID at a slow,
a slow,
 prior to PROM
 Cryotherapy to affected stifle
, beginning at 4 weeks
relief (15-20 min SID-TID
Transcutaneous electrical
Land Treadmill (LTM):
patellofemoral OA exists
5-10 min SID-BID at :
 injectable polysulfated
min
 NSAIDs PRN
therapy
steady pace
 Medications
Iodalities
steady
BID,
Heat
M
 bearing at a trot
Improve operated
limb muscle
mass/strength
Early weight-
716
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
 bearing at a trot
 nonmal speed
range of motion
Minimal to no
 lameness at a
partial weight-
 Normal stifle 
Criteria for
 Movement to
Next Phase
pain with
activities
walk.
Gait evaluation
heavy activity
and subjective
 Reassess thigh
Response to
Goniometry-
at walk and
at 7-8 weeks
 Stifle ROM
moderate/
pain level
applicable
Assessment
Measures
and other
Outcome
joints if
10.11
limb 10 repetitions PRN.
 if progressing
joints of affected pelvic
uphill inclines on walks
increasing tightness of
a oi pappr suisss
BID-TID if acceptable
 PROM/stretching all
walking—add 5 min 
 minutes trotting
Sit-to-stand exercises
Continue weight loss
 program if needed
Therapeutic Exercises
5-10 reps of 5-10-
Controlled leash 
second intervals
stairs, 1-2 flights
well BID-QID
added to walks 
10-15 reps BID
Home Program
to owner
BID-TID
every
2-3 1
  ee se sa
balance board/unstable surface
Cavaletti rails 10-15 reps BID
band use (in
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
mass/strength improvement in
affected pelvic limb 10
 Balance/weight-shifting
Land Treadmill (LTM):
Therapeutic Exercises
 5-10 min BID-TID
15-20 min SID-BID
incline. Resistance
the operated limb
plane.
BID
 postoperatively
Patellar Luxation Repair-cont'd
Timeframe*
Five to eight
Expected
weeks
Consistent Partial
Normal limb use
 use the limb &
Improve muscle
Improve stamina
and endurance
at a Trot
at a walk
pue sseu
a trot
Phase
Step 4
Goals:
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
717
 be continued as 
long as lameness
or pain with
activity is not
 increase again
this occurs,
by 10-20%
observed.
week and
weekly.
J
subjective pain
Gait evaluation
Evaluate thigh
circumference
every 2 weeks
Response to
activity and
at walk and
increasing
achieved
Weight
level
10.11
 patellofemoral OA exists 
Caution: Choose only 2-4
Other exercises may be
p fo upd sp pauofiad
home exercise program.
 exercises 10 min PRN
ted
 Oral chondroprotective
glycosaminoglycans if
 in circles and
BID-TID building reps
 min after
BIL
BID-TID if acceptable
8
Controlled ball play.
 Therapeutic Exercises
5-10 min SID-BID
weekly as tolerated
exercises
 5-10 reps of 15-20-
prior
Leash walks up to
 3-5 flights
pain early in the
second intervals
exercises PRN)
-PRN
Heat therapy
stifle (15-20 1
polysulfated
 Medications
"Dancing"’ 
Modalities
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises
 muscle group strengthening PRN
auoy p fo lund sn pauofiad aq
(15-20 min after exercises PRN)
needed for muscle mass/strength
increasing height and decreasing
Cavaletti rails 10-15 reps BID,
Land treadmill 10-15 minutes
s tolerated. Add leg weights
exercise program. Doing all
patellofemoral OA exists 
with inclines, adding 2-3
minutes of jogging and
 distance as appropriate
injectable polysulfated
weekly as tolerated
 NSAIDs PRN
Modalities
BID
M
postoperatively
and beyond
Eight weeks
 No Lameness 
strength, and
 improving
improving
improving
stamina and
endurance
Continue
Continue
power
Continue
 dais
Goals:
718
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
Criteria for
 Next Phase
Outcome
Measures
patellofemoral OA exists 
0 min PRN
 Oral chondroprotective
glycosaminoglycans if
 Sit-to-stand exercises
min after
pain early in the
Home Program
 NSAIDs PRN
exercises 10
-20
stife (15-
Medications
upi8oid
Modalities
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises
O-1 (euad on psne
Aquatic therapyUWTM for
and use of jets when available
unilaidauu kquna und pun
 Oral chondroprotective agents/
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
distance and increasing speed
 Swimming 10-15 minutes 3-4
exercise program.Doing all
d personnel who have been trained in canine rehabilitation.
week
 NSAIDs PRN
10 min PRN 
reps BID
Medications
Modalities
单
Timeframe*
licensed
nonmal activity
Auo
s protocol is for use
Returm to as
as possible
Phase
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
719
weight-bearing
 Postoperative
with minimal
Movement to
maintained
Standing in
Criteria for
Next Phase
 Incisional
comfort
integrity
support
muscle tone
 Subjective
pain level
Hindlimb
Degree of 
Assessment
required in
Measures
support
standing
Outcome
abdominal support as needed on 
 Muscle relaxants BID-TID PRN
 of pelvic
/ at thoracolumbar
limbs (10-15 reps BID-TID)
 NSAIDs (if corticosteroids 
rotation every 4-6 hours to
Use of soft bedding with
prevent decubital ulcers
PROM with bicycling
(beginning 24 hours
movements all joints (
 Therapeutic Exercises
not used)/opioids
Home Program
Cryotherapy
Medications
Modalities
PRN
Other
Rehabilitation Clinie Program
musculature for contraction
Gentle massage of hindlimb
musculature +/- tapotement 
traction surface (beginning
rotation every 4-6 hours to
needed on a stable, high-
24 hours postoperatively)
pelvic limbs (10-15 reps
Therapeutic laser therapy
Use of soft bedding with
PROM with bicycling
movements all joints of 
10
prevent decubital ulcers 
 interferential electrical
 Therapeutic Exercises
abdominal support &
 Bladder expression
BID as tolerated
TID-QID PRN
min SID
Cryotherapy
BID-TID)
Modalities
PRN
5
five-seven days
postoperatively
Immediate to
Timeframe*
Expected
hindlimb tone
Weight-bearing
with minimal
pue uonun
 in standing
Pain control
Appreciable
 Independent
defec ation
 hindlimb
muscle
atrophy
Minimize
Phase
Rest
720
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
motor activity
Minimal pain
Pelvic limb
Criteria for
Movement to
 Next Phase
voluntary
with light
activities
standing
1 which
gait patteming
circumference/
Response to
activity and
muscle mass
Assessment
subjective
pain level
time with
standing
Hindimb
Measures
Outcome
Length e
steps in 
used
心
shifting/rhythmic stabilization,
 incision site, 20 min PRN after
 Assisted standing and weight-
ysioball beneath abdomen)
are
limbs (10-15 reps BID-TID)
 Gentle massage of hindlimb
 NMDA receptor antagonists
 Bladder expression TID-QID
NSAIDs (if corticosteroids :
Use of soft bedding with
prevent decubital ulcers
musculature BID-TID
Therapeutic Exercises
not used)/opioids
Home Program
Cryotherapy
Medications
Modalities
exercise
PRN
phy
Rehabilitation Clinie Program
Aquatic therapy: Swimming
 Gentle massage of hindlimb
10 minutes with supported
'uu zi-01 on dn uut s-e
(concentrate efforts on the
movements all joints of
pelvic limbs (10-15 reps
Ensure incision is sealed
standing during breaks
musculature BID-TID
15 min EOD-SID PRN
 Assisted standing and
abdomen, standing in 
PROM with bicycling
Underwater Treadmill
standing with positive
reinforcement held at 
Therapeutic Exercises
NMES to hindlimb
various locations
weaker side)
BID-TID)
therapy
Modalities
water)
 postoperatively
Timeframe*
One to two
Expected
weeks
Continued pain
Movement of all
 four limbs at
Full weight-
supuens
 Self-rotation
 bearing i
Minimized
hindlimb
control
muscle
atrophy
Motor
a slow,
Phase
Goals:
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
721
movements at
 Minimal pain
with moderate
Consistent
activities
a walk
limb
steps in which
Cavaletti rails
circumference/
unsupported
time walking
01
activity and
appropriate
muscle mass
Response
pain level
Length of
time with
Length of 
aquatic
standing
6
pasn
Height :
1
limbs (10-15 reps PRN based on 
locations (concentrate efforts on
walking: weave poles gradually
movements all joints of pelvic
 incision site, 20 min PRN after 
-arem pue Supuens paisiss 
reinforcement held at various
PROM with bicycling
standing with positive
Therapeutic Exercises
unstable surface
the weaker side)
 NSAIDs PRN
SID-BID
 Medications
Modalities
exercise
ROM)
bi-directional balance board 
distance 5-10 reps SID-BID
NMES to epaxial muscles 
rotation every 4-6 hours to
tterming on a ground
 Use of soft bedding with
 prevent decubital ulcers
movements all joints of
pelvic limbs (10-15 reps
PROM with bicycling
puu
PRN based on ROM)
Underwater Treadmill
standing with positive
(concentrate efforts on
weight-shifting on a
10-15 minutes with
reinforcement held at
 Therapeutic Exercises
Assisted standing a
Aquatic therapy:
various locations
the weaker side)
EOD-SID PRN 
TID-QID PRN
 after exercise
minutes SID
Gait patt
breaks
Other
postoperatively
100M
weeks
 Function with
 Proprioceptive
Good Motor
nonma
Increase pelvic
limb muscle
Maintenance of
 Function to
during turns
 Initial Motor
moderately
Deficits
walking
balance
unstable
activity
Maintain
surface
Goals:
mass
pue
722
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
proprioception
Minimal to no
patterming at a
Normal gait
Criteria for
pelvic limb
 Next Phase
Consistent
at a walk
pain with
extensive
activities
10.11
turms in which
 Response to
activity and
unsupported
subjective
pain level
Length of 
endurance
maintained
Assessment
time with
Measures
standing
Walking
Outcome
balance
walking: weave poles gradually
Stair Climbing 1 working up to
 rs  ue 
 Assisted standing and weight-
Sit-to-stand exercises, rising 
Therapeutic Exercises
flights SID-BID
Home Program
reps SID-BID
SID-BID
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
Cryotherapy at thoracolumbar
pafiad q u sasiiaxa
Aquatic therapy: Swimming
musculature for contraction
360-degree balance board
supported standing during
· Low Cavaletti rails 5-10
(UWTM) walking, 15-20
Caution: Choose only 2-4
 sa  sasaa
Assisted standing and
Underwater Treadmill
program. Doing all
 NMES to hindlimb
EOD-SID PRN 
Aquatic therapy:
reps SID-BID
 after exercise
Modalities
breaks
minutes
 postoperatively
Timeframe*
xis o 
Expected
function with
proprioceptive
 proprioception
moderate- to
high-intensity
deficits to
 near nonmal
o poo
activity
mild
Phase
with
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
723
Minimal to no
proprioception
at a trot and at
Nommal gait
faster speeds
pain with
extensive
pue
Frequency of
steps in which
appropriate
Cavaletti rails
 Pelvic limb
muscle mass
Response to
activity and
Tightness of
navigated
subjective
endurance
maintained
used
trotting
balance
thigh
turms
 incision site, 20 min PRN after
Sit-to-stand exercises 10-20 reps
 Cryotherapy at thoracolurmbar
anns aqnsun ue uo suns
  - s 0-01 so
Stair Climbing 5-10 repetitions
 Assisted standing and weight-
BID-TID with 5 minutes
Therapeutic Exercises
inclines/declines
 NSAIDs PRN
Modalities
Medications
SID-BID
exercise
SID-BID
10.11
Aquatic therapy: Swimming
surface 5-10 reps SID-BID
u kquna upd pun ssauun
 20 min PRN after exercises
asaxa auu n fo und sn
minutes at variable speeds
with resistance band use
Cavaletti rails 5-10 reps
treadmill, 5-10 minutes
 to 5 flights SID-BID
 rising from an elevated
walking: weave poles
-to-stand exercises,
Underwater Treadmill
program. Doing all
Therapeutic Exercises
weight-shifting on a
Aquatic therapy:
Cryotherapy at
20-30 mimutes
SID-BID
Modalities
PRN
postoperatively
  xi
weeks
while walking
proprioceptive
deficits during
high-intensity
 muscle mass
approaching
during turns
negotiating
 Nonmal Gait
Elimination of
Pelvic limb
Near Nommal
obstacles
nonmal
balance
Gait to
activity
Maintain
pue
724
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
Movement to
Criteria for
Next Phase
Cavaletti rails
circumference/
Pelvic limb
muscle mass
·Height and
distance of
Assessment
navigated
Measures
Outcome
thigh
·
 Leash walking 20-30 minutes
BID with 10 minutes variable
working up to longer periods
inclines and 5-10 minutes
· Controlled ball play
Home Program
trotting
Rehabilitation Clinic Program
 Gait patterming on a ground 
 treadmill, 5-10 minutes at a
as part of a home exercise
u auna und pun ssauau
Cavaletti rails 10-20 reps
Turming exercises with
Caution: Choose only 2-4
 Controlled ball play
program. Doing all
SID-BID at a trot 
SID-BID at a trot
reps SID-BID
the program
Thoracolumbar IVDE (postoperative)cont'd
10.11
Timeframe*
Expected
while trotting
 limb muscle
during turms
negotiating
obstacles
Maintain
balance
mass
Phase
pue
surgery.
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
725
perioperative
swelling and
no incisional
Movement to
Criteria for
Next Phase
Early toe-
touching
Adequate
analgesia
drainage.
resting
 Postoperative
plane PROM
bilateral thigh
circumference
hip sagittal
goniometry
 Response to
activity and
Assessment
 and other 
joints as
subjective
minimal
 pain level
Measures
Outcome
Weight
 Slow leash walking with
Weight-shifting exercises
weight-bearing (begin at
 Slow, gentle PROM for
fexion and extension
 a stable surface for
3-5
days after surgery, use
assisted sling support)
 Effeurage, avoiding
 after light activity)
 Antagonists
early toe-touching
early toe-touching :
Home Program**
TID-QID)
Tedications
Todalities
NSAIDS
Opioids
NMDA
6
M
M
only—abduction and adduction of
muscle groups (15 min SID), begin 
 Slow, gentle PROM for operated
stimulation to hip for pain relief
 inflammation has been addressed
Rehabilitation Clinic Program**
extension BID). Sagittal plane 
the hip must be STRICTLY
postoperatively
avoiding the incision
(15-20 min SID-BID)
NMDA Antagonists
(oddns sus
immediately 
Medications
 Modalities
 NSAIDs
 spioido
postoperatively
Immediate to
Timeframe*
2 weeks
Total Hip Replacement
 edema control
Early limb use
Slow/minimize
Non-Weight-
 Bearing to
Pain control
 Swelling and
muscle
atrophy
Phase
Goals:
726
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
weight-bearing
 Minimal pain
complications
Movement to
 Consistent
Criteria for
Next Phase
limb on all 
strides at a
with light
activities
 Incisional
partial
healing
without
walk
Lameness score
Hip ROM and
subjective pain
Bilateral thigh
circumference
 at a stance and
other joints if 
Goniometry-
Response to
applicable
activity and
Assessment
Outcome
Measures
Weight
level
walk
pun uouonpqn
finm sling support, 3-5 min
adduction of the hip must
 Flexor reflex exercises of
reps
uitaid aui u kqana und
semi-firm stable surface
BID-TID. Begin at 8-12
-10
1-2
with bicycling of the
result in lameness and
 Therapeutic Exercises
steady walking TID
Balance and weight-
shifting exercises on
operated hindlimb
hindquarters on an
Caution: Choose only
BID-TID before
light activity)
activities)
Modalities
Treadmill (UWTM) walking: begin at
un uo sienpu um pus-on-
 elevated surface, 5-10 reps BID-TID.
performed as part of a home exercise
Slow leash walking with finm sling
Low Cavaletti Rails: 8-10 reps BID.
flexion and extension BID before
program. Doing all exercises may
Rehabilitation Clinic Program**
of the operated linmb (8-10 reps 
activities). Sagittal plane only
support, 3-5 min working up to
SID-BID. Begin at 3-4 weeks
weeks postoperatively
 Therapeutic Exercises
postoperatively
Balance
(uoddns
postoperatively
 2-12 weeks
Expected
Toe-Touching to
 Partial Weight-
 further muscle
Bearing at a
Continued pain
atrophy, early
 Improved limb
 function at a
Consistent
Prevention of
control
Walk
Phase
Goals:
walk
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
727
weight-bearing
partial weight
Minimal pain
with moderate
bearing at a
 Consistent
limb on all 
strides at a
consistent
activities
walk,
10.1
Lameness score 
Hip ROM and
Bilateral thigh
subjective pain
other joints if
muscle girth 
walk, and trot
 Goniometry-
3
applicable
at a stance,
 Response 
Weight
level
 Chondroprotective agents
as needed for other joints 
 Stretching of the operated
limb (8-10 reps BID-TID
inclines and 3-5 min slow
pain early in the program
trotting on a flat surface
 Incorporate 5 min light
Sit-to-Stand 10-15 reps
 Controlled stair walking
Caution: Choose only 2-3
Doing all exercises may
exercises per session.
Balance and weight-
shifting exercises on
herapeutic Exercises
semi-unstable surface
Slow leash walking
available if needed)
before activities).
15-20 min BID.
 Medications
L-18
SID-BID
Stretching of the operated limb (8-10
 3-5 min leash walk with 30 sec-1 min
Controlled stair walking on leash: 1-2
0 min SID-BID (have sling support
 muscle groups (15 min EOD-SID)
ut oz-h jea ud oy d o 
and treadmill walking 5-10 min
Cavaletti Rails: 10-15 reps BID
trotting as a warm-up
 Therapeutic Exercises
available if needed)
15-20 min SID-BID
after light activity)
 NSAIDs SID-PRN
SID-BID PRN)
flights SID-BID
 for other joints
 Medications
Modalities
NMES-
 postoperatively
12-16 weeks
Weight-Bearing
Early Trotting
walk, improved
 strengthening
function at a
Near-normal hip
Nonmal limb 
function at
faster gaits
 PROM in
Consistent
flexion/
extension
Goals:
Muscle
728
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
weight-bearing
Minimal to no
 Hindimb muscle
Movement to
 Consistent
on operated 
moderate to
 
 Next Phase
limb at all 
pain with
extensive
activities
subjective
symmetry
gaits
Lameness score
 Hip ROM and
 other joints if
Bilateral thigh
intense activity
and subjective
 Goniometry-
muscle girth
 applicable
pain level
at a stance,
Assessment
moderate-
Outcome
Measures
Weight
 Chondroprotective agents
semi-unstable surface (leg
Sit-to-Stand 15-20 reps
(15-20 min PRN after
shifting exercises on a
limb (8-10 reps PRN
moderate inclines and
Balance and weight-
 Cryotherapy to hip
Therapeutic Exercises
(10 min PRN with
Slow leash walking
Incorporate 5-min
stretching before
Home Program**
before activities)
15-20 min BID.
NSAIDs PRN
exercises)
exercises)
Iedications
BID-TID
Modalities
SID-BID
6
M
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises per
 Chondroprotective agents as needed
resistance band applied in the sagittal
s
 speeds
program. Doing all exercises may
Land treadmill walking 10-15 min
 Rehabilitation Clinic Program**
before exercises)
SID-BID on a flat surface, with
Swimming: 20-30 min SID with
 Limbo crawling: 10-15 reps BID
Cavaletti Rails: 10-15 reps BID
15-20 min SID-BID, variable 
Balance and weight-shifting 
 Therapeutic Exercises
for other joints
10 min SID-BID
with stretching 
 after exercises)
 NSAIDs PRN
Medications
Modalities
breaks
5
6
 postoperatively
Expected
>16 weeks
 function at a
walk and trot
at a Trot
symmetry
Nonmal limb
muscular
Normal hip
Early to
Hindlimb
PROM
Phase
Goals:
Appendix 1
 Protocol Development and Protocols
729
dby many factors affecting
s and may be influenced 
2-3
result in lameness and
lloid au u quna ud
pun
endurance are observe
(15-20 min PRN after
 Controlled ball play,
Caution: Choose only
individual progress.
stretching before
aq lou pnous
· NSAIDs PRN
exercises)
Modalities
exercises)
Caution: Choose only 2-4 exercises per
performed as part of a home exercise
result in lameness and pain early in
Sit-to-Stand 15-20 reps BID-TID
s and yona uo pasnq pasnainu
pamop q ou pnus suan dinrs
and endurance are observed.
flights SID-BID
 after exercises)
NSAIDs PRN
the program.
Modalities
 Medications
Joint Motions and Ranges
APPENDIX
Normal Range of Motion
Joints
 Joint Motions
for Dogs (degrees)
Forelimb Joints
Shoulder (including scapular motion)
Flexion
30-60
Extension
160-170
Abduction
40-50
Adduction
40-50
 Intermal rotation
40-50
 Extemal rotation
40-50
Elbow
Flexion
20-40
Extension
160-170
Hyperextension or overextension
Radioulnar
Pronation
40-50
 Supination
80-90
Carpus (Wrist)
Flexion
20-35
Hyperextension
190-200
Radial or medial deviation
5-15
 Ulnar or lateral deviation
10-20
Hip
Flexion
55
Extension
160-165
 Abduction with a fexed hip
120 (Stife at 90)
Adduction with a fexed hip
65 (Stife at 90)
Abduction with an extended hip
85
Adduction with an extended hip
63
 Intermal rotation
55
 Extemal rotation
50
Stife (knee)
Flexion
45
Extension
160-170
Talocrural, tarsocrural, ankle
Flexion
40
Extension
170
NOrE: Presently, the tendency is to call the straight joint position 180° rather than 0° being established. Range of motion is expressed in degrees unless noted
otherwise.
730
Appendix2
Joint Motions and Ranges
731
Goniometry of the Forelimb and Hindlimb
Figure 1   Goniometry of the forelimb. Carpal flexion and extension
Figure 2 Goniometry of the hindlimb. Tarsal flexion and extension
are measured as the angles formed by the long axis of metacarpal
[esneieiaw jo sixe buol aut Aq pawoy sajbue aul se painseaw ane
bones Ill and IV and the line joining the cranial to caudal midpoint 
bones Ill and IV and the long axis of the tibial shaft. Flexion and
of the antebrachium at the level of the ulnar styloid process and the
extension of the stifle joint are measured as the angles formed by
lateral humeral epicondyle. Elbow flexion and extension are mea-
the long axis of the tibial shaft and the line joining the lateral femoral
sured as the angles formed by the line joining the cranial to caudal
epicondyle and greater trochanter. Hip joint flexion and extension are
midpoint of the antebrachium at the level of the ulnar styloid process
measured as the angles formed by the line joining the lateral femoral
and the lateral humeral epicondyle and a line joining the lateral
epicondyle of the femur and greater trochanter and a line joining the 
epicondyle to the point of insertion of the infraspinatus muscle on
tuber sacrale and ischiadicum.
the greater tubercle of the humerus. Shoulder flexion and extension
are measured as the angles formed by the line joining the lateral
humeral epicondyle and the point of insertion of infraspinatus muscle
and the spine of the scapula. Carpal varus and valgus are measured 
as the angles formed by the long axis of metacarpals Ill and IV and 
The figures and Table 1 used by permission from Jaegger G, Marcellin-Litle Dl, Levine D:
the long axis of the medial border of the radius.
Reliability of goniometry in Laborador retrievers, Am J Vet Res 63: 979-986, 2002
732
Appendix 2
 Joint Motions and Ranges
96
.200
b.buNCH·20
Figure 3  Carpal flexion.
Figure 4  Carpal extension.
b.buN<H ·200l
b.buNcH ·2ool
Figure 5  Carpal valgus.
Figure 6
Carpal varus.
Appendix 2
 Joint Motions and Ranges
733
166"
b.buvCt ·2o01
H·200l
Figure 7  Elbow flexion.
Figure 8  Elbow extension.
65
D.bu
b.buNcH-20
Figure 9  Shoulder flexion.
Figure 10  Shoulder extension.
734
Appendix 2
 Joint Motions and Ranges
b.b.200
b.buv ·200l
Figure 11   Tarsal flexion.
Figure 12  arsal extension.
D.bwct - 2al
b.buNcH-2a
Figure 13 Stifle joint flexion.
Figure 14  Stifle joint extension.
Appendix 2
Joint Motions and Ranges
735
50
162
b.buNCt · 2o0l
b.buNcH · 200l
Figure 15
 Hip joint flexion.
Figure 16  Hip joint extension.
Table 1 
 Range of Motion (degrees) of Various Appendicular Joints Measured by Goniometry in 16
Healthy Labrador Retrievers
Joint
Position
Mean
SD
95 % CI of the Mean
Median
Carpus
Flexion
32
2
31-34
32
Extension
196
2
194-197
196
Valgus
12
2
11-13
12
Varus
7
1
6-8
7
Elbow
Flexion
36
2
34-38
36
Extension
165
2
164-167
166
Shoulder
Flexion
57
2
54-59
57
Extension
165
2
164-167
165
Tarsus
Flexion
39
2
37-40
38
Extension
164
2
162-165
165
Stifle
Flexion
42
2
40-43
41
Extension
162
3
160-164
162
Hip
Flexion
50
2
48-52
50
Extension
162
3
160-164
162
CI = Confidence interval.
Page numbers followed by "f" indicate figures, "t" indicate tables, and "b" indicate boxes.
A
Advertising, 66 1-662
American Board of Veterinary Specialties
AAHA/AAFP Pain Management Guidelines
Age, 628
(ABVS), 4, 17
for Dogs and Cats, 246, 250
bone loss and, 134f
 American College of Veterinary Behaviorists,
ABPTS. See American Board of Physical
effects of remobilization on bone and, 138
17
Therapy Specialties
exercise capacity and, 172
American College of Veterinary Emergency
Absorption,328
 geriatric patients and, 629t
and Critical Care, 17
ABVS. See American Board of Veterinary
medical considerations for, 628-630
 American College of Veterinary Internal
Specialties
muscle fibers and, 172
Medicine, 17
AC. See Alternating current
muscle mass recovery, 113
American College of Veterinary Nutrition,
Acceleration, 402
muscle regeneration and, 117
17
Accelerometers, 225
VO, max, 172
American College of Veterinary Sports
Accessory motion, 448
Aggression
 Medicine and Rehabilitation, 4, 17
Accounting, 660
barking and, 31-32
American College of Veterinary Surgeons
Acetabulum secondary fractures, 557
facial expressions and, 33f
(ACVS), 1, 17
Acetaminophen, 249
fear and, 34
 American Massage Therapy Association,
3-O-acetyl-1l-keto-β-boswellic acid
handing of, 39f
464
(AKBA), 261
Aging
American National Standards Institute, 363
Acetylcholine receptors, 1ll-112
effects of, 629b
 American Physical Therapy Association
Acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA), 157
environmental modification and, 250
(APTA), 1
N-acetylcysteine, 122
muscle and, 107, 113
accreditation,17
ACL. See Anterior cruciate ligament
muscle satellite cells and, 113
AMVA and, 13 
Actin, 84
quality of life and, 630
founding of, 16
during muscle contraction, 155f
resistance exercise and, 113
history of, 16-17
in myofibrils, 164-166
 spinal motor neurons and, 113
 orthopedic section of, 17
in sarcomere, 154-155
strength training and, 120
PAC, 16
Action potential, 162-163
Airway clearance techniques, 18
physical therapy definition by, 8
Activities of daily living (ADLs), 220
AKBA. See 3-O-acety]-1l-keto-β-boswellic
position statement, 1
as exercises, 285
acid
specialties, 16
return to function and, 235
Akt, 111
 American Veterinary Chiropractic
Acupuncture
Alternating current (AC), 343, 343f
Association, 17
analgesia mechanism of, 249
Amantadine, 248
American Veterinary Medical Association
CAVM and, 249
Ambulation
(AVMA), 1, 17
for chronic pain, 249
aids for dynamic, 50l-502
accredited programs, 18
laser, 371
assisted, 285, 500
APTA and, 13
ACVS. See American College of Veterinary
assistive devices for, 305
CAVM and, 2
Surgeons
carts for, 304f
guidelines, 1-2
Adaptil, 37
dynamic activities for, 500-502
Guidelines for Complementary and
Adduction, 52
independent, 502-503
 Alternative Veterinary Medicine of,
 Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 154-156, 
with paraparesis, 303
8-9
162-163
American Academy of Veterinary
Guidelines for Referrals, 10-11
Adenosine monophosphate (AMP), 156
Acupuncture, 17
Model Practice Act of, 8
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
American Association of Feed Contro]
rehabilitation certification and, 4
creatine and, 265
Officials, 262
VCPR and, 10
 as immediate muscle energy source,
American Association of Rehabilitation
American Women's Therapeutic Association,
156
Technicians, 3-4
16
in muscle contraction, 154-155, 162-163
American Association of Rehabilitation
Amino acids
muscle fatigue and, 107, 164
Veterinarians, 3-4
branched-chain, 122
 oxidative metabolism and, 157
American Board of Physical Therapy
muscle mass and, 122
S-Adenosylmethionine (SAMe), 260-261
 Specialties (ABPTS), 16
profiles, 260
ADLs. See Activities of daily living
American Board of Veterinary Practitioners,
supplementation, 259-260
ADP. See Adenosine diphosphate
17
AMP. See Adenosine monophosphate
736
Index
737
Amputation, 577-578, 577f
Aquatic exercises, 426-427, 514
ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate
 Analgesia
benefits of, 527-531, 529t-530t
Autonomous zones
cryotherapy as, 314
kinematic evaluation of, 535t
assessment, 195-196
ESWT as, 383
metabolic requirements for, 530
forelimb, 72f
Jadder, 247f
specific, 534-536
hindlimb, 75f
Jaser therapy as, 370-373
for strength training, 522, 531
trunk,72f,75f
mechanisms of acupuncture, 249
water leve]s for, 528f
AVMA. See American Veterinary Medical
for neurologic patients, 609
water temperature for, 531
Association
postoperative, 246
Aquatic therapy 501, 599
Avocado/soybean unsaponifiables (ASUs),
preemptive,245-246
 conditions benefiting from, 533
261
Anatomic planes, 41-42, 42f
contraindications for, 533-534
Axes of rotation, 41-42
Anatomy
equipment, 532-533
Axonal sprouting, 372
comparative, 41
prec autions for, 533-534
forelimb, 42-5 1
principles of, 526-527
B
hindlimb, 43-44
urine and, 533
Back extension, 516
lymph node, 65
Arachidonic acid, 262-263
Baikal skullcap, 264-265
spine, 44-51
Arndt-Schultz Principle, 313
Balance, 484
terminology, 41
Aromatherapy, 36
board, 490, 491f
Ancillary tests, 199-200
Arteries. See atso specific arteries
domes, 517f
Androgens, 121
forelimb, 73-76, 75f
evaluation, 212
Anesthesia
forepaw, 71f-72f
functional training exercises for, 492-493
feeding before, 257
hindlimb, 75f, 76
platform, 490, 491f
 preemptive analgesia and, 245-246
hindpaw, 74f
scores, 486t
Angiogenesis, 106
Arthrocentesis, 192, 288-289
support, 489f, 498f
Angular limb deformities, 554
Arthrodesis
training, 486-493
 Angular stability, of prostheses, 308-309
joint, 576-577
Ball playing, 523
 Animal Physical Therapist Special Interest
pancarpal, 555f
Bandages See atso Dressings
Group (APTSIG), 12, 14
pantarsal, 572f
application of, 289-291
 Animal physical therapy special interest 
tarsal luxation and, 572
checking of, 296
group,17
Arthroscopy, for elbow dysplasia, 693t-697t 
complications, 296
Anisotropy, 407
Articular cartilage
components of, 289
Annular ligaments, 65
 abnormal biomechanical stress on,
covers, 296, 296f
 Antebrachioc arpal joint
100-101
cryotherapy over, 321
caudal glide of, 455-456, 455f
 adaptive responses of, 99f
as external coaptation device, 289
cranial glide of, 456
 changes from immobilization of, 94-96,
for external fixators, 292-295, 293f-294f
kinematics at, 455b
94b
placement of, 291f
Antebrachium
collagen in, 92-93
Robert Jones, 291-292, 321-322
composition of, 93f
soft padded, 290f-291f, 291-292
contracture of flexors of, 554
debridement of, 89
Bands, 309
fractures, 553
disorders, 92-101
for dynamic ambulation, 502
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)
extracellular matrix of, 92-93
for proprioception training, 487f
deficiency, rehabilitation for, 350
HA and, 101
resistance, 520-521, 520f-522f
reconstruction
healing, 87-89
for sciatic neuropathy, 309f
NMES effects on, 348-350
normal, 92-94
Barberry, 264
NMES efficacy on, 349-350
structure and function, 87-88
Barking, 31-32, 37. See also Vocalizations
ROM after, 98
Articular surfaces, 51
BCS. See Body condition score
surgery, 114-115
Articuline F, 264
Bedding, 278f
Antibiotics
Aspirin, 101, 142, 280
decubital ulcers and, 277
for discospondylitis, 624
 Assisted ambulation, 285
 for recumbent patients, 28 1
effects of, on tendons, 132
Assisted standing, 285, 286f-287f
Behavior
ointments, 293
Assistive devices
assessments, 193
perioperative, 285-287
 abdominal sling as, 303f
modification, 34-35
resistance, 287
for ambulation, 305
pain, 234
Anticonvulsants, 248
carts as, 304f
Biceps
 Antinfarmmatory drugs. See atso
Hoyer lift, 303f
femoris muscle, 109f
Nonsteroidal antinfammatory drugs
supervision of, 305
rehabilitation of, following CCL
for OA, 636-637
for tetraplegia, 303
transection, 114
before orthopedic examinations, 192
ASUs. See Avocado/soybean unsaponifiables
palpation of, 191f
Antioxidants, 260-261, 266-267
Ataxia, 193-194
reflexes, 195
Anxiety, 36-37
with degenerative myelopathy
stretch test, 584f
Approximation, 226
early stage, 683
tendon, 584f
APTA. See American Physical Therapy
early-mid stage, 683
tenosynovitis, 191f
Association
Athletic heart, 169
Bicipital tenosynovitis (BT), 545-546,
 APTS1G. See Animal Physical Therapist 
Atlantoaxial luxation, 625f
583-586, 584f
Special Interest Group
Atlantoaxial subluxation, 279f, 30l-303,
 Bisphosphonate compounds, 141-142 
Aquatic biomechanics, 426-427
302f
Biting, 37-39
738
Index
Bladder. See atso Lower motor neuron
Bone (Continued)
Brachial plexus, 69-71, 306f
 bladder; Upper motor neuron bladder
gap healing and, 81-82
Braking impulses, 223, 223f, 411f
care, for neurologic patients, 300
hormones in, 83
Breathing. See atso Respiration
catheterization, 300-301, 302f
primary, 81-82, 82f
during exercise, 167
expression, 300, 300f
secondary, 82f
at rest, 167
infections,300
timeline, 82b
Brief Pain lnventory (BPl), 232-234
overdistension of, 299
injuries, 158
BT. See Bicipital tenosynovitis
overflow, 300
laser therapy and, 367-368
Buoyancy, 526-527, 531
postoperative management of, 298-299
long, 132-133
Burns
Blood flow. See aiso Cardiovascular system
Joss
injuries, 657
ambient temperature and, 174
age and, 134f
from thermotherapy, 325
assistive device considerations and, 305
aspirin and, 142
tissue, from US, 333
changes from exercise, 169-170
 bisphosphonate compounds and, 141
Bursae, 62
circulatory effects of massage and, 465
diaphyseal, 133
in humerus, 62
cold packs and, 317-320
histologic response to immobilization
infraspinatus muscle and, 62
decreased, from cryotherapy, 314
and, 133
synovial, 62
heat effects on, 322
 hormones and, 141
Bursitis, 336, 338
immobilization and increased, 134-135
during immobilization, 133
Business plans, 660
magnet therapy and, 393-394
immobilization duration and, 133-135,
Business strategies, 659-663
muscle, 106
134f
stress shielding and, 138
limits of, 134-135
C
Blood supply
NSAIDs and, 142
Calcaneus, 44
to bones, 81, 81f
reduction,135
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP),
to ligaments, 124
remobilization and, 138
383
to myotendinous junction, 109
risedronate and, 141
Calcium
pulmonary respiration and, 166
mass
developmental orthopedic disease and,
to tendons, 124
endurance training and, 140
254-256
Blueberries, 261
load bearing and, 140
loss, from immobilization, 135
Blythe, Linda, 2
matrix, 81
Callus formation, 82
BMC. See Bone mineral content
morphogenic protein,132, 142
Calming Cap, 36, 36f
 BMD. See Bone mineral density
normal, 132-133
Caloric balance, 159-160, 160f
BMPs. See Bone morphogenic proteins
remodeling
Campylobacter, 172
Body composition, 232, 233f, 256
exercises for, 139
Canine atlas, 45-47
Body condition score (BCS), 250, 255f
stress and, 137
Canine axis, 45-47
Body mass, 160, 160f
resorption
Canine Brief Pain lnventory (CBPl), 222,
 Body posture
 bisphosphonate compounds and,
232-234
assessments, 193
141-142
Canine Rehabititation and Physical Therapy
canine, 31, 32f
from immobilization, 159
(Millis, Levine, and Taylor), 2
feline, 33-34
sites, 135
Canter, 202-203
Body segments, 50b
response
Capsular pattern, 449t
Bone, 42. See atso Fractures
to mechanical loading, 139
Carbohydrates, 259
adaptation to stress of, 139-141
to resistance exercise, 139
muscle and, 107
biomechanical properties of, 135
strength, remobilization and, 139
neurogenic muscle atrophy and, 113
blood supply to, 81, 81f
stress shielding of, 137-138
Carbon dioxide
cancellous, 135
structure, 80-81
oxidative metabolism and, 157
changes
tendon healing and, 130
ventilation and, 166-167
with disease conditions, 135-137
trabecular, 133, 138
Cardiac contractility, 170
with total hip replacement, 135
Bone-ligament-bone complex, 125-127
Cardiac disease, 236-240
composition,132
Bone mineral content (BMC), 135-136,
Cardiopulmonary physiology, 154
cortical, 135
136f-137f
Cardiovascular system, 168-171. See atso
density
Bone mineral density (BMD), 130, 135-137
Blood flow
denervation and, 137
Bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs), 386
ESWT and, 387
immobilization and, 134-135, 134f 
Boots, 305-306, 306f
during exercise, 168-171
loss after fracture, 137
Boron, 264
Care of the Racing and Retired Greyhound
mechanical loading and, 140f 
BOSU, 600f
(Blythe, Gannon, and Craig), 2
distraction osteogenesis and, 292-293
Boswettia serrata, 261
Care of the Racing Greyhound,2
effects of disuse on, 136b
Bowels, postoperative management of,
Carpals, 43
effects of immobilization on, 133-135,
298-299
assessment, 189
136b
BPl. See Brief Pain lnventory
effects of medications on, 141-142
Braces, 306-308
dynamic hinged brace for, 308f
effects of remobilization on, 138-139
for CCLR, 566-567
extension,436f,456,731f-732f
free remobilization and, 138-139
for cervical neurologic patients, 301-303
fexion, 297, 298f, 436f, 456, 731f-732f
healing, 80-84, 386-387, 396
dynamic hinged, 308f
flexural contractures of, 556
 contact healing and, 81
placement of, 307-308
fractures, 554
electrical fields in, 83
rigid, 307-308
hyperextension, 554-556, 555f
factors affecting, 83-84
stife, 307-308
laxity, 555-556, 555f
Index
739
Carpals (Continued)
CAVM. See Complementary and alternative
Codeine,249
manual therapy for, 455-456
veterinary medicine
COG. See Center of gravity
OA laser therapy and, 376-377
CBPl. See Canine Brief Pain lnventory
Cold compresses, 283, 284f, 316, 320
restricted, 205f
CCL. See Cranial cruciate ligament
Cold immersion, 320
ROM of, 190f
CCLR. See Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
Cold packs, 317-320
valgus, 732f
Cefazolin, 285-287
application of, 318f
varus,732f
Center of gravity (COG), 204
blood fow and, 317-320
Carpofen, 262
shifing of, 490f
heat of fusion and, 318f
Cartilage. See atso Articular cartilage
during stance, 410
Cold-compression units, 320, 320f
acute infammation of, during exercise,
 Central nervous system (CNS)
Cold-induced vasodilation (CIVD), 314
100
 breathing at rest and, 167
Collaborative relationships, 13-14
adaptations, to mechanical stress, 98-101
muscle fatigue and, 163-164
Collagen
atrophic changes of, 96
 pain memories and, 245
in articular cartilage, 92-93
chondrocytes in, 92
sensitization of, 245-246
in bone composition, 132
composition of, 87-88
Cervical disk disease, 61l-613
 connective tissue and, 464
corticosteroids and, 101
Cervical spinal nerve 1, 45-47
crosslinks, 97
disorders, 92-101
Cervical spondylomyelopathy, 303, 617-618,
 in ligament structure, 123
effects of medications on immobilized,
618f, 679t-682t
in tendon structure, 123
101
Cervical tubercle, 43-44
deposition,85-86
effects of remobilization on, 96-97
Cervical vertebrae, 45-47
elastic limit of, 465
effects of training on, 98-100, 99b
Cetyl myristoleate, 264
fibrils, 81
ESWT and, 383-385
CGRP See Calcitonin gene-related peptide
hydrolysates, 265
glucosamine and, 262
Championnies, Luc as, 464
in joint capsule contracture, 102
healing, 88-89
Chemotaxis, of cells, 79
muscle hypertrophy and, 119
injury, 88-89
Chest rehabilitation, 653-656, 653t, 656b
postoperative healing of MCL and, 128
kissing lesion and, 551f
Chinese skullcap, 264-265
in remodeling phase, of wound healing, 80
Jaser therapy and, 367-368
Chlorhexidine, 285
in reparative phase, of wound healing, 83
during lifelong training, 100
Chondrocytes
stress-strain behavior of, 465b
during mild to moderate training, 99
ESWT and, 383-385
stretching of, 439
MR1 of, 100
synthesis, 87-89, 99
in tendon structure, 85
reconditioning of, 159
in cartilage, 92
type 1, 81
after remobilization, 97
Chondroitin sulfate, 93, 262, 637
Collagenase, 95, 129
during severe training, 99-100
Chondroprotectants, 261-262
Common calcaneal tendon, injuries of, 573
water in, 93
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Communication, 31-34
Carts, 304f, 310. See atso Paracarts
(COPD), 654
Comparative myology, e l-e18
for amputations, 577f
Cincinnati Knee Rating Scale, 236
Compartments, fascia in, 56
for assisted standing, 499-500
Ciprofloxacin,132
Compensation, 54
construction of, 310
Circle of Nutrition, 254
Complementary and alternative veterinary
for dynamic ambulation, 502
Circling, 514
medicine (CAVM), 2
measurements, 310
Circulatory system, 154
efficacy of, 9
standing on rolling, 515
Circumduction,53
guidelines, 8-9
 for tetraparesis, 500f
CIVD. See Cold-induced vasodilation
human hazards in, 9
for weight pulling, 521-522
Clapping, 478, 478f
Model Practice Act and, 8
Casts, 289
Classical conditioning, 34, 39
regulations, 9
application of, 295-296
Clavicle, 42
responsibilities of veterinarians for, 9
cryotherapy over, 321
Clematis vitatba,266
Compression, 226, 403, 476-477, 478b,
as external coaptation device, 289
Client education, 299
478f-479f
Catechin, 264-265
Client information form, 21f 
Computed tomography (CT)
Catheterization
Climbing, 503, 508-509, 509f
as ancillary test, 199-200
bladder, 300-301, 302f
Closing wedge tibial osteotomy (CWTO),
muscle atrophy and, 230
care, 301
568
muscle mass and, 230
female, 301
CNS. See Central nervous system
muscle measurements with, 227
male, 301, 302f
CoA. See Acetyl-coenzyme A
neurogenic muscle atrophy and, 112-113
Cats
Coagulation cascade, 79
quantitative, 256
exercises for, 523-524
Coaptation
Conditioning. See atso Endurance training:
nutrition and OA in, 267
for atlantoaxial subluxation, 302f
Reconditioning
quadriceps contracture in, 563f 
 cryotherapy with, 321
body composition and, 232
toys for, 504, 504f
devices
definition of, 154
Cat's claw, 264
external, 289
environmental considerations in, 158
Caudal cruciate ligament, 66, 187, 569
incisions and, 289
exercises,507b
Caudal vertebrae, 48-50, 49f
maintenance of, 296
muscle fibers and, 157
Cavaletti rails, 512-513, 513f, 614f
roles of, 289
musculoskeletal, 157-158
for strength training, 519-520
 of femoral fractures, 561
nutrition and, 159-160
walking, 424-425, 425t, 493f
guidelines, 289
physiologic changes from, 158
Cavilon, 277-279, 279f
in postoperative healing of Hexor tendons,
of skeletal muscle, 164-166
Cavitation bubbles, 383
128f
supplemental feeding with, 160
740
Index
Conduction,173,313
Cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) (Continued)
D
cryotherapy with, 316
muscle mass after, 115f 
Daily energy requirement (DER), 172-173,
heat applications with, 324
rehabilitation after, 114
258
Condyles, 45-47, 96-97
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture (CCLR),
Daily flowsheet form, 17
Confinement, 125
96-98, 212-214, 566-569
Dancing, 424, 424f, 509-510, 510f, 517-518,
Conformation, 203-204
kinematic gait analysis of, 224
616f
Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), 102
muscle mass changes with, 114
DC. See Direct current
Conscious proprioception, 197-198, 198f
rehabilitation for, 567t
Debridement
Consultations, 10
ROM and, 433
of articular cartilage, 89
Contact healing, 81
stabilization of, 115-116
wound, 79
Contact layer, 308-309
Cranial drawer
Declines
Continuing education, 18-19
evaluation, 213f
independent ambulation and, 503
Contracture,438
motion,186f-187f
ramps, 422-423, 423t
of antebrachium fexors, 554
Cranial tibial refexes, 194-195
Decubital ulcers, 277
carpal Hexural, 556
Cranial-to-caudal compressive loading, 45
recumbent patients and, 281
extrinsic muscle, 652
Craniocaudal axis, 41
from sleeves, 307
fibrotic, of infraspinatus muscle, 547-548
Creatine, 265
Degenerative joint disease (DJD), 350-351
forelimb, 547
Creatine phosphate (CP), 156
Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis, 61l6-617,
gracilis muscle, 603-605
Crepitus, 226
689t-691t
after immobilization, 440f
Crossed-extensor reflexes, 196
Degenerative myelopathy, 625-626, 63 1f,
infraspinatus, 588-589
Cross-sectional area (CSA)
683t-685t
joint
of muscle, 230
boots for, 305-306
passive ROM and, 432
muscle strength and, 231
Dehydration
US for, 336
Crouching, 33f
ambient temperature and, 174
quadriceps, 563-564, 563f
Crunches and hold, 515
body temperature and, 174
semimembranosus muscle, 603-605
Crural conditions, 571
Delivery of care, 218
semitendinosus muscle,603-605
Cryokinetics, 312
Denervation, 108, 137
Contrast baths, 316, 320
Cryotherapy, 249,284f,314-322
 DER. See Daily energy requirement
Control devices, 37-38
for acute phase of trauma, 316
 Desensitization/counterconditioning protocol,
Convection, 173, 313
 analgesic effects of, 314
35
cryotherapy with, 317
applications, 316-321
Detraining, 171
heat applications with, 324
for chronic pain, 316
Developmental orthopedic disease, 254-256
Conversion, as heat transfer, 313
with coaptation devices, 321
Devil's claw, 265
COPD. See Chronic obstructive pulmonary
with conduction, 316
DEXA. See Dual-energy x-ray
disease
contraindications, 321
absorptiometry
Cortical vessels, 81
with convection, 317
DHA. See Docosahexaenoic acid
Corticosteroids
duration of, 321
Diabetes, 366-367
cartilage and, 101
effects on muscle, 319f
Diagnostic joint blocks, 192
effects of, on ligaments, 132
after elbow arthroscopy 597f
Diarthrodial joints, 87-88
injections of, 132
with evaporation, 317
Diazepam, 300
Coughing, 653-654
following trauma, 312
Diet. See Nutrition
Counterconditioning, 35
frequency of, 321
Diffusion, 166
Counternutation, 53
muscle contraction with, 317
Digital fexor tendons, 139-141
Coupling cushions, for US, 329
muscle spasms and, 316
Digitigrade stance, 41
Course of recovery, for spinal cord injuries,
options,316f
Digits
239f
over bandages, 321
assessment, 184
COX-2. See Cyclooxygenase-2
over casts, 321
extension, 437f
Coxofemoral joint. See also Hip
 peripheral nervous system and, 314
Hexion, 437f
assessment, 187, 188f
physiologic effects of, 314-316
front
common conditions of, 185
postoperative, 283, 321-322
assessment, 189
CP. See Creatine phosphate
precautions, 321
common conditions of, 189
Craig, A. Marie, 2
Q10 effect and, 315-316
OA laser therapy and, 376-377
Cranial cruciate ligament (CCL), 66
skin responses to, 317
rear, common conditions of, 185
assessment, 186-187
for tissue injuries, 314
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 132
deficiency, 114
tissue temperature changes with, 313f
Direct care requirements, 13
disease, 413-414
CSA. See Cross-sectional area
Direct current (DC), 343, 343f
effects of immobilization on, 125-126
CT. See Computed tomography
 Directional planes, 41-42
injury, 114-116
CTGF. See Connective tissue growth factor
Directional terms, 41,42f
postoperative healing of, 129
Culturing, of infections, 289
Discospondylitis, 623-624, 624f
rupture
Customer service, 668
Disease. See also specific diseases
extrac apsular repair, 670t-673t
Cutaneous thermoreceptors, 322
bone changes from, 135-137
TPLO/TTA for, 675t-677t
Cutaneous trunci refex, 196
massage and, 469
tibial compression test and, 187
CWTO. See Closing wedge tibial osteotomy
multiple, 628-630
tran section
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COx-2), 247
Disease-modifying osteoarthritis drugs
BMD loss after, 136-137
Cytochrome C oxidase, 365
(DMOAD), 261-262, 544, 575, 637
muscle atrophy following, 114, 114f
Cytokines, 79
Dishabituation, 34
Index
741
Distraction, 226
Elbow(Continued)
Endurance training (Continued)
Distraction osteogenesis, 292-293
joint, 454-455
exercises, 514-522
Disuse, 159. See atso lmmobilization
levers and, 404f
goals of, 164-165
DJD. See Degenerative joint disease
ligaments, 67f
hematologic effects from, 175
DMOAD. See Disease-modifying
Juxation, 553
jogging for, 519
osteoarthritis drugs
OA, 190, 414-415, 551f
muscle blood fow and, 106
 DMSO. See Dimethyl sulfoxide
OA laser therapy and, 376
muscle capillarity and, 119
DNA production, laser stimulation of, 365 
OCD of, 551-552
muscle fibers in, 165
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 262-263
palpation of, 183, 190f
muscle oxidative capacity and, 106
Documentation,19-20
ROM of, 190
obesity and, 165
client information forms, 21f
Electrical current, 343-344. See atso
physiologic changes from, 158
daily fowsheet forms, 17
Alternating current; Direct current
skeletal muscle changes in, 165
neurologic evaluation forms, 27f-28f
amplitude, 344, 345f
treadmills for, 519
orthopedic evaluation forms, 25f-26f 
biphasic, 344f-345f
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and, 119
referral forms, 22f
interferential,353-354
VO2 max during, 170-171
referral letters, 17
parameters, 346b
Energetics, 416-427
rehabilitation evaluation forms, 23f-24f
pulse duration, 344f
 Energy. See atso Daily energy requirement;
Dominance, 34
pulsed, 343-344
 Resting energy requirement
 Dorsal plane, 41
Electrical fields, in bone healing, 83
as essential nutrition, 258
Dorsal rami, 72
Electrical muscle stimulation (EMS), 342
requirements, 258
Downer, Ann H., 2
Electrical resistance, of skin, 344
Environment
Down-to-stand exercises, 512
Electrical stimulation (ES)
ambient temperature and, 173-174
Dressings, 648f. See also Bandages
basic concepts of, 343-347
clinical, for manual therapy, 450-452
incision care and, 281
contraindications for, 348
considerations for conditioning, 158
postoperative, 282f
history of, 342
daily energy requirements and, 172-173
tie-over, 289f
 for muscle strengthening, after ACL
for geriatric patients, 639
wound, 647-648, 649t
surgery, 115-116
modification, 249-250
Du Huo Ji Sheng Wan, 265
for pain control, 353-356
preoperative,277
 Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA),
pain-relieving mechanisms of, 353
respiration and, 168
114, 234f
prec autions for, 348
for stance evaluation, 221
body composition and, 232, 256
stimulator parameters, 344-345
EPA.See Eicosapentaenoic acid
muscle mass and, 231
terminology, 342
E-pads, 355f
muscle measurements with, 227
types, 353-354
Epidurals, 280
 Dynamic gearing, 415-416
for wound healing, 650
Epigallocatechin 3-gallate (EGCG), 265
Dynamics, 408-413
Electrical waveforms, 343-344
Epimysium, 84
Electroc ardiography (ECG), 169
Epitenon, 86
Electrodes,345-347, 354f
Equipment, 667-668, 667b, e26-e29
 Eastern States Veterinary Conference, 1
for NMES, 352-353
aquatic therapy, 532-533
ECG. See Electrocardiography
for TENS, 355-356, 355f
for facilities, 667b
Ectrodactyly, orthoses for, 306f
Electromagnetic radiation
pools, 539
Edema
biological effects of, 312-313
Erythema, postoperative, 284f
distal limb, 299
Jaws governing, 313
ES. See Electrical stimulation
heat effects on, 322
spectrum, 360f
Escherichia coti, 172, 285-287
postoperative, 284f
tissue and, 313
ESF. See External skeletal fixator
sling complications and,298
Electromyogram (EMG), 114-115
ESWT. See Extracorporeal shockwave
with TPLO, 299
Electrotherapeutic modalities, 18
therapy
Education, 17
Elizabethan collars, 279-280
Ethylene glycol, 317
Effeurage, 285f, 476, 477b, 477f
for biting prevention, 38-39
Evaluation forrms
EGCG. See Epigallocatechin 3-gallate
placement, 279f
neurologic,27f-28f
Ehmer slings, 296-297, 297f
Emergency care, for wound healing, 645-646
orthopedic, 25f-26f
EIC.See Exercise-induced collapse
EMG.See Electromyogram
rehabilitation, 23f-24f
Eicosanoids, 262-263
EMS. See Electrical muscle stimulation
Evaporation, 173, 313, 317
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 250, 262-263
End feel, 212, 213f,449
Excision arthroplasty, 575-576
Elastikon, 289
 anomalies in, 214t
Exercise balls. See Therapy balls
Elbow
characteristics, 449t
Exercise rolls, 51, 226, 287f, 490-492,
Endomysium, 84
491f-492f
arthroscopic treatment of, 597f-598f
Endotenon, 86
for assisted standing, 499, 499f 
articular fractures of, 548-550
Endothelial cells, 79-80
dancing on, 510f
assessment, 190
Endurance
for proprioception, 613f
common conditions of, 189
cold effects on, 316
standing on, 516f
conditions, 548-553
heat effects on, 323
weight bearing and, 615f
dysplasia, 451-452, 550
Endurance training. See atso Conditioning
Exercise-induced collapse (ElC), 175
post-arthroscopy, 693t-697t
bone mass and, 140
Exercises. See atso Training, specific
extension, 454-455, 733f
circulatory system and, 165
exercises
fexion, 455, 550f, 733f
duration of, 158
acute inflammation of cartilage during.
incongruity, 552
ECG studies of, 169
100
742
Index
Exercises(Continued)
Exercises (Continued)
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy (EsWT)
ADLs as, 285
prograrms, 495, 506-507
(Continued)
adverse effects of, 174-175
progression of, 504-505, 524
electrohydraulic, 381
aerobic,530
quality of life and, 176
electromagnetic, 38 1
ambient temperature and, 173-174
resistance,110
generation of, 381
aquatic,426-427, 514
respiration during, 166-167
indications for, 388
biochemical effcts from, 175-176
speed,522-523
ligaments and, 385
biomechanics of, 420-427
standing, 285,496-497
for medial shoulder instability, 547
blood flow changes from, 169-170
active assisted, 497
piezoelectric, 381
for bone remodeling, 139
assisted, 496-497, 496f
precaution for, 388
breathing during, 167
standby assisted, 497
research,382-387
capacity, age and, 172
static, 401
tendons and, 385
cardiovascular system during, 168-171
static weight shifting, 218f
tissue and, 385-386
for cats, 523-524
 strategies, 496b
units, 382f
for chest rehabilitation, 656
strength training, 507b, 514-522
wound healing and, 385-386
chronic,175
temperature and, 173-174
Exudates, cleaning of, 293-295, 295f
closed kinetic chain, 350
therapeutic, 211
Eye wear, for laser therapy, 377, 377f
common, 506
 treatment considerations, 495
considerations
vasoconstriction during, 170
F
for cavaletti rails, 512-513
VO max during, 170-171, 170f
Fabellae, 44
for dancing, 510
water during, 174
Facial expressions, 33f
for down-to-stand exercises, 5 12
Extension, 51-52
canine, 31
for incline walking, 508
angle, 433f
feline, 33-34
for sit-to-stand exercises, 511
angles of, 225, 225f, 433f
Facilities, 663
for stair climbing,509
back, 516
architectural design of, 664-665
for vertical weave poles, 514
carpal, 436f, 456,731f-732f
concept and design of, 663-668
for walking in tall grass, 513
cervical spine, 473, 473f
for wheelbarrowing, 510
digit, 437f
concept,666b
core strength, 515-517
elbow, 454-455, 733f
equipment for, 667b
down-to-stand, 512
hip, 437f, 735f
location of, 665, 665b
early limb use, 495
sacroiliac joint, 53
permitting of, 665
effects of
shoulder, 436f, 453, 453f, 733f
supplies for, 667b
on FMT, 131
stife, 51, 213f, 419f, 436f, 460, 460f,
zoning for, 665-666
on heart rate, 166-167, 169f
734f
FADH. See Flavin adenine dinucleotide
on MCL, 131
tarsal, 731f, 734f
Fascia, 54-56
endurance training, 514-522
Extensor carpi radialis muscle, 62, 195
in compartments, 56
energy requirements and, 258
Extensor retinaculum, 66-67
forelimb, S5
following immobilization, 138-139
External fixators
hindlimb, 55
fracture risk and, 141
bandaging of, 292-295, 293f-294f
neck, 55
functional training, 492-493 
circular, 292-293
strong lateral femoral, 55
gastrointestinal tract and, 175
clamps, 292-293
trunk, 55
goals, 506
classification of, 292f
Fascia omobrachialis lateralis, 55
hematocrit changes from, 175
connecting rods, 292
Fascicles, 84
hematologic effects from, 175-176
llizarov ring, 292-293
Fat, 259, 314
hormonal changes from, 176
linear, 292
Fatigue
injury from, 174-175
pins, 292-293
massage for, 469
isometric,100
rehabilitation for, 577
muscle
during joint capsule remobilization, 103
transarticular, 573f
ATP and, 107, 164
joint motion, 422t, 427t, 507-514, 507b
External moments, 415
CNS and, 163-164
kinetics of, 421t
External skeletal fixator (ESF), 98
glycogen and, 164
lactic acid and, 176
 for postoperative healing of fexor tendons,
respiratory, 167-168
on land, 529-530
114f
Fatty acids, 259
limb, 616f
Extracapsular repair, of CCL rupture,
omega-3, 262-263
low intensity, 214
670t-673t
polyun saturated, 637
mental well-being and, 176
Extracapsular stabilization, 567-68
FCA arthritis models. See Freund's complete
modification, 419-420
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy (EsWT),
adjuvant-induced arthritis models
muscle satellite cells and, 113
381
 FCEM. See Fibrocartilaginous embolic
for neurologic patients, 609
as analgesia, 383
myelopathy
neutrophil activation and, 175
application of, 387-388, 387f
 FDA. See Food and Drug Administration
nutrition and, 122, 172-173
biological effects of, 382-383
Fear
for OA management, 574-575
bone healing and, 386-387
aggression and, 34
over and under, 514
cardiovascular system and, 387
crouching and, 33f
overload principle of, 164
cartilage and, 383-385
recognition, 31
perturbation, 488, 489f
chondrocytes and, 383-385
Fecal scald, 277
physiology, 162
contraindications for, 388-389
Fee splitting, 15
pneumonia and, 174-175
delivery of energy in, 381-382
Feedback,218
Index
743
Feeding
Flexion (Continued)
Forepaw(Continued)
before anesthesia, 257
hindlimb, 475, 475f
nerves, 71f-72f
changes, 635f
hip, 420f, 437f, 457, 457f, 735f
skeleton, 46f
dishes, 250
hock, 420f
Forkhead box O (FOxO), 111
with Elizabethan collars, 279-280
 joint angles of, 225f
FOXO. See Forkhead box O
factors, 254
limb circumference measurements and, 228f
Fractures, 212-214
supplemental, with conditioning, 160
 resistance, after irmmobilization, 117
acetabulurm secondary, 557
Feet
sacroiliac joint, 53
antebrachium, 553
front, common conditions of, 185
shoulder, 51, 436f, 454, 733f
articular
GRFs on, 209f
in stance, 51
of elbow, 548-550
hinged prostheses for, 309f
stife, 436f, 451, 459f, 734f
femoral, 566f
rear
stretching in, 405f
implants for, 543
assessments, 184
tarsal, 731f, 734f
rehabilitation after, 544t 
common conditions of, 189
Fexor refexes, 195, 195f
of shoulder, 543
Felid sounds, 32-33
pain assessments and, 196
of stife, 565
Feliway, 37
Flexor tendons
avulsion, 550
 Femoral artery, 76
partial lacerations of, 129-130
bicondylar, 550
Femoral condyle, 43-44
postoperative healing of, 114f, 129-130
bone density loss after, 137
Femoral head and neck ostectomy (FHO),
trauma to, 107
carpal, 554
212-214, 559, 576, 576t, 703t-706t
Flooding, 34
casts and, 289
Femur, 43-44
Flotation devices, 533f, 536
common, 295
articular fractures, 566f
Fluoroquinolone, 132
distal femoral physeal, 562-563, 686t-688t
assessment, 187
FMT. See Femur-MCL-tibia
distal radial, 553f
capital physeal fractures of, 562, 563f
 Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
femoral, 561-562, 561f-562f
common conditions of, 185
363-364
femoral capital physeal, 562, 563f
distal physeal fractures, 562-563
Force plate, 222f, 409
femoral neck, 562
fractures, 561-562, 561f-562f
data, 209f
fibular, 571
neck fractures of, 562
kinetic analysis of gait and, 222-223
hinged orthoses for, 307f
palpation of, 187f
 Forelimb
humerus, 548f
Femur-MCL-tibia (FMT)
adduction,475,475f
immobilization after, 116
effects of exercise on, 131
anatomy, 42-51
load bearing after, 141
effects of immobilization on, 126
arteries, 73-76, 75f
metacarpal, 554, 554f
FES. See Functional electrical stimulation
assessment, 183, 189-192
metacarpals, 133f
FETCH. See Functional Evaluation of
autonomous zones, 72f
metatarsal, 555f, 571-572
Cardiac Health
body segments, 50
muscle atrophy after, 116
 FHO. See Femoral head and neck ostectomy
bony landmarks, 76
nonunion, 386-387
Fibrin seal, 28 1
chronic lameness of, 191-192
pelvic, 556-558, 557f
Fibroblast growth factor, 337-338
circumduction,53
phalangeal, 554, 571-572
Fibroblasts, 79, 89
common conditions of, 189b
plated, 549f
Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy
 conditions, for performance dogs, 583-600
plate-rod technique for, 561f
(FCEM), 212-214, 619-620, 619f,
contracture, 547
repair of, 549f
699t-702t
evaluations, 474-475
risk, exercise and, 141
Fibroplasia, 85-86
fascia, 55
Salter-Harris type 1V, 548
 Fibrotic myopathy, of quadriceps muscles,
flexion,474, 474f
scapular, 543
565
goniometry, 731
spinal, 622f
 Fibrous metaplasia, 611
ligaments, 65
tarsal, 571-572
Fibula, 44
Jymph node anatomy in, 65
tibial, 571
common conditions of, 185
mobilization, 480f, 481
US for healing, 337-338
fractures, 571
muscle, 56-59
US precautions for, 333
Fibular head transposition, 567
lateral, attachment sites, 58f
Franklin, Benjamin, 342
Figure-eight walking, 514 
left lateral, 57f
Frank-Starling mechanism, 170
Financing, 661
left medial, 57f
 Freund's complete adjuvant-induced (FCA)
First depth of penetration, of lasers, 364
medial, attachment sites, 59f
arthritis models, 264
Fish oil supplements, 123
nerves, 69-71, 71f
 Functional electrical stimulation (FES), 342
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH), 157
palpation, 76-77
Functional Evaluation of Cardiac Health
Flavocoxid, 264-265
protraction of, 474,474f
(FETCH), 236-240
Fexibility, 438
retraction of, 474, 474f
 Functional questionnaires, 632f-634f
Flexion
skeleton, 43f
Functional scales, 236
angles of, 225
Jateral, 44f
 Functional scoring systems
carpal, 297, 298f, 436f, 456, 731f-732f
medial, 45f
for spinal cord injuries, 236b
cartilage immobilization and, 94-95
Forepaw
for stife, 237t-239t
cervical spine, 473, 473f-474f
arteries, 71f-72f
digit, 437f
 ligaments, 68f
G
elbow, 455, 550f, 733f
muscle
G6P. See Glucose 6-phosphate
evaluation, 213f
caudal view, 58f
Gabapentin, 248, 251
forelimb, 474, 474f
cranial view, 57f
GAGs. See Glycosaminoglycans
744
Index
Gait, 182-183, 202-203
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) (Continued)
Handling (Continued)
abnormal, 203-204
 New Zealand green-lipped mussels and,
head halters and, 34-35
analysis, 220-225, 413-415
262
in rehabilitation, 38-39
conformation and, 203-204
in PG monomer, 93, 93f
Hand-targeting commands, 39, 39f
subjective, 204-205
 during remobilization, 97
Harnesses
two-dimensional, 206
synthesis, 98, 101
for assisted standing, 281
video, 206
in tendons, 124
for proprioception training, 486-487, 487f
assessment, 193-194, 470-471
Golden retriever muscular dystrophy, 415
securing of, 487f
asymmetric, 202-203
Golgi tendon organs, 316
for weight pulling, 521-522
cycle, 412
Golgi-Mazzoni corpuscles, 124
Harpagoside, 265
for FCEM
Goniometers, 225, 225f, 735t
Haversian canals, 81
near normal, 700, 702
Goniometry
Haversian remodeling, 81
normal, 702
forelimb, 731
HBOT. See Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
inverse dynamics analysis of, 224
hindlimb, 731
HCPl. See Helsinki Chronic Pain Index
kinematic analysis of, 223-224
of joint ROM, 735t
Head halters, 34-35, 37
kinetic analysis of, 222-223
GPS technology, 225
acclimating of, 38f
lameness and, 182
Gracilis muscle myopathy/contracture,
for biting prevention, 38-39
normal, 413-414
603-605
in rehabilitation handling, 38-39, 39f
observation of, 182-183, 182f
GRAS. See Generally regarded as safe
Head trauma, 657-658
in rehabilitation evaluation, 212
Grass, tall, 513, 520
Heart disease, 107
symmetric two-beat, 182
Gravity, 529-530
Heart murmurs, 169
with thoracolumbar IVDE, 723
Greater trochanter, 188f
Heart rate, 154, 166-167, 169f
training, 500
Green tea, 265
Heat
trot, 182
Greetings, 36f
applications, 324-325
as type of locomotion, 201
GRFs. See Ground reaction forces
body, regeneration of, 313
weight management and, 260
Grotthus-Draper Law, 313
body fat and, 314
Gallop, 202-203, 203f
Ground contact pressure, 207-210
duration of contact with, 314
Gannon, James R., 2
Ground reaction forces (GRFs), 206-210,
effects on blood How, 322
Gap healing, 81-82
209f, 402
effects on endurance, 323
Gastrocnemius muscle group, 106
hip dysplasia and, 414
effects on muscle strength, 323
Gastrocnemius reflexes, 194-195
horizontal, 410-411
effects on tissue, 323
Gastrointestinal tract, exercise and, 175
kinetic analysis of gait and, 222
 of fusion
Gauze, 290-291
measurement of, 222f, 409f
cold packs and, 318f
Gearing
transverse, 411
of water, 317
dynamic, 415-416
vertical, 409-4 10, 409f-410f
inflammation and, 312
ratio, 415
Growling, 31-32. See atso Vocalizations
for joint capsule remobilization, 103
Gelatinase, 95
Growth factors
local application of, 322-323
Gender differences, in strength training, 120
in joint capsule contracture, 102
loss, 173
Generally regarded as safe (GRAS), 262
in wound healing, 89
pain reduction from, 323
GH. See Growth hormone
Growth hormone (GH), 121-122
physiologic effects of, 322-323
Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Scale,
 Guidelines for Alternative and
storage capacity, 313-314
234
 Complementary Veterinary Medicine
superficial, 312
Glenohumeral joint. See Shoulder
(AVMA), 1
surface contact and, 314
Glide, 51, 226
Guidelines for Referrals, 10-11
therapy, 322-326
cauda]
Guidelines for Veterinary Prescription Drugs,
transfer
 of antebrachiocarpal joint, 455-456,
10
mechanisms, 313-314
455f
rates, 313-314
femorotibial, 460f
H
temperature differences and, 313
of hip joint, 456-457, 457f
HA. See Hyaluronic acid
Heat stroke, 657
cranial
Habituation, 34
Helsinki Chronic Pain lndex (HCPl), 222,
 of antebrachiocarpal joint, 456
Hacking, 478, 479f
234
femorotibial, 45 1, 459f 
Hair
Hematocrit changes, from exercise, 175
description of, 51
assistive device considerations and, 305
Hemiparesis, 193
Glucocorticoids, 121
cast application and, 295
Hemiwalking, 197, 197f, 504
Glucosamine, 262, 637
Jaser therapy and, 373
Hemoglobin, 393
Glucose 6-phosphate (G6P), 156
 limb circumference measurements and,
Hemostasis, 82-83
Glycogen
228f
Hemostatic plug, 79
carbohydrates and, 259
US and, 329
Hl. See Hindlimb immobilization
depletion, 107
vapocoolant sprays and, 321
Hindlimb
muscle fatigue and, 164
Hamstring muscles, 60
anatomy, 43-44
Glycolytic pathway, 156, 156f
quadriceps muscles ratio to, 116
arteries, 75f, 76
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), 81, 88-89, 93
stretching of, 441
assessment, 184
in bone composition, 132
Hand shaking, 518-519, 519f 
autonomous zones, 75f
depletion from cartilage immobilization,
Handling. See also Control devices
body segments, 50
95
of aggression, 39f
circumduction, 53
glucosamine and, 262
forceful, 34
common conditions of, 185b
Index
745
Hindlimb (Continued)
Hopping, 197, 197f
lmmobilization, 159
conditions, of performance dogs, 600-605
Hormones
active assisted ROM and, 432
evaluations, 475
in bone healing, 83
of articular cartilage, 94-96, 94b
fascia, 55
bone loss and, 141
biochemical changes during, 95
fexion,475,475f
changes, from exercise, 176
biomechanical properties of bones and,
goniometry, 731
Horses, US therapy for, 336
135
lameness,182
Hospitalization, nutrition during, 258
BMC and, 136f
ligaments, 65-67
Hot packs, 324, 324f
bone density and, 134-135, 134f
lymph node anatomy in, 65
infections and, 325
bone mass loss during, 133
mobilization, 480f, 481
insulated, 325
bone resorption from, 159
muscle, 59-61
Howling, 31-32
of bone-tendon/bone-ligament complex,
lateral, attachment sites, 63f
Hoyer lift, 286f, 303f
124-125
Jateral, deep, 59f
HS. See Hindlimb suspension
calcium loss from, 135
lateral, superficial, 59f
Humeral head, 42
confinement as, 125
medial, attachment sites, 63f
Humeral retinaculum, 65
contracture after, 440f
medial, deep, 60f
Humeroulnar distraction, 454, 454f
for craniodorsal hip luxation, 707
medial, superficial, 60f
Humerus
with distal femoral physeal fractures,
nerves, 71-72
bursae in, 62
686
orthopedic examination of, 184-189
caudal mobilization of, 453f
duration of, 133-134, 134f
palpation, 77
common conditions of, 189
effects of
protraction of, 475, 475f
cranial mobilization of, 453f
on bone, 133-135,136b
retraction of, 475, 476f
fractures, 548f
on bone-ligament-bone complex, 125
running and, 60
 osteochondritis dissecans of, 191f
on CCL, 125-126
simultaneous palpation of, 183f
palpation of, 190-191, 191f
on FMT, 126
skeleton, 43f
Hup position, 516 
on ligaments, 123-132, 125b
lateral, 46f
Hyaluronan
on MCL, 125-126
medial, 46f
 cartilage immobilization and, 95
medications on, 101
Hindlimb immobilization (Hl), 108
PG monomer and, 93f 
on tendons, 123-132,125b
Hindlimb suspension (HS), 108
Hyaluronic acid (HA)
flexion resistance after, 117
Hindpaw
 articular cartilage and, 101
after fractures, 116
arteries, 74f
 joint capsule immobilization and, 103
hindlimb, 108
ligaments, 70f
PG and, 95
histologic response to, 133-134
muscle
Hydrogen peroxide, 281
and increased blood fow, 134-135
caudal view, 61f
Hydromorphone, 249
intensity of exercise following, 138-139
cranial view, 61f
Hydrostatic pressure, 527
joint capsule, 101-103, 103b
Jateral view, 62f
Hydrotherapy, 618f. See atso Aquatic
medications for, 103-104
nerves, 74f
therapy
ROM after, 102
skeleton, 47f
Hydroxyapatite crystals, 132
joint motion during, 95-96
Hip. See atso Coxofemoral joint; Total hip
Hyperadrenocorticism, 120
lean tissue mass and, 136f
replacement
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT), 648,
limb position during, 96
conditions, 556-561
648f
local, 133
muscles changes with, 113-114
Hyperextension, 51-52
meniscus atrophy during, 97
dysplasia, 407f, 414, 558-559
carpal, 554-556, 555f
of muscle, 107-112, 108b
muscle mass and, 113-114 
Hypermetria, 193-194
effect of GH on, 121-122
extension, 437f, 735f
Hyperreflexia, 199
effect of medication on, 120-123
fexion, 420f, 437f, 457, 457f, 735f
Hypocapnia, 173-174
effect of nutrition on, 122-123
joint
Hypoglobulinemia, 175
effect of steroids on, 120-121
caudal glide, 456-457, 457f
Hypometria, 193-194
during muscle healing, 85
laxity, 226
Hypoproteinemia, 175
 osteoporosis from, 135
manual therapy for, 456-458
Hyporefexia, 194, 199
phosphorus loss from, 135
mechanics, 457b
Hypothalamus, 173
physical condition before, 117-118
US over, 336f
temperature responses of, 314-315
in postoperative healing of fexor tendons,
ligaments, 68f
thermoregulation in, 315f
129
luxation, 559-561, 560f
Hypoxia, 106
rehabilitation considerations, 142
 craniodorsal, closed reduction,
Hysteresis, 464
remobilization after, 96b
101-10
after ruptured CCL, 96
evaluation, 187-188
1
sling, of stife, 95
OA, 188-189
lce massage, 320-321, 320f
of stifle, 96b
OA laser therapy and, 376
lce packs, 316-320
stress deprivation with, 126
replacement, total, 725t-729t
Idaho Veterinary Practice Act, 11
systemic,133
ROM of, 188-189
IGF-1. See Insulin-like growth factor 1
tendon adhesion formation and, 129
subluxation of, 188-189, 558f
liac arteries, 76
of tendons, 127
Hobbles, 297, 309
lliopsoas
trabecular bone mass during, 133
Hock fexion, 420f
anatomy, 601f
weight bearing prevention in, 133
Holding, 477
palpation of, 602f
 lmmunohistochemical analysis, 105
Homeopathy, 264-266
strains, 600-603, 602f
Impact forces, 204
746
Index
Implants
International Association of Veterinary
 Joint motion, 51-54
for articular fractures, 543
 Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy,
accessory, 51
infections and, 289, 568
3-4, 13
arthrokinematic, 51
Impulse, 409, 410f
International Canine Sports Medicine
axes of rotation, 41-42
Incisions
 Symposium, 1
as component of locomotion, 201
bilateral, 283f
 International Electrotechnical Commission,
considerations, 507-508
care of, 281
363
for cavaletti rails, 512
coaptation devices and, 289
International Racing Greyhound Symposium,
for dancing, 509
compromised, 284f
for down-to-stand exercises, 512
following surgery, 28 1f
 International Small Animal Cardiac Health
for sit-to-stand exercises, 511
 postoperative massage therapy and, 284
Council (1SACHC), 236-240
for stair walking, 508-509
Inclines
 lnternational Symposium on Rehabilitation
for wheebarrowing, 509
 independent ambulation and, 503
evaluation of, 225-227
leash walking, 508f
Medicine, 2, 13, 18
during exercise, 422t
ramp, 422, 423t, 639f
International Veterinary Academy of Pain
exercises, 427t, 507-514, 507b
unning, 517
Management, 250
during immobilization, 95-96
trotting, S17
Interosseous arteries, 73-76
intraarticular pressure with, 433-434
walking, 507-508, 517
 lnterphalangeal joints, luxation of, 556
joint posture versus, 54
Indomethacin, 121
Interventions, in physical therapy, 8
kinematic assessment of, 224f
Infections
Intracapsular stabilization, 568
lameness and, 182-183
bladder, 300
Intrapulmonary pressure, 166 
limb, 51-53
control measures, 285
Inverse dynamics solution, 413
naming of, 51
culturing of, 289
Invertebral disc extrusion (1VDE), 719t-724t
pain during, 226
discospondylitis and, 623-624
Invertebral disk disease (IVDD), 303,
patterns, 224
food-borne, 172
610-616
pelvic, 53-54
hot packs and, 325
 Invertebral foramina, 73
physiologic, 51
implant-associated, 289, 568
lontophoresis, 356
quality of, 226
inflammation of, 288
ISACHC. See International Small Animal
range of, 54
LLLT and, 367-368
Cardiac Health Council
in rehabilitation evaluation, 212
monitoring of, 288
Ischial tuberosity, 60
sacroiliac, 53
MRSA, 287-288
lsokinetic exercise, 159
shape of articular surfaces and, 51
orthopedic surgery and, 287
Isokinetic torque, 114-115
during sit to stand exercise, 425t
pin tracts, 295
Isometric contraction, 417-418
in spine, 51-53
postoperative orthopedic, 285-288
Isometric exercise, 159
stress deprivation and, 126
signs of, 288-289
Isotonic exercise, 159
during walking, 425t
wound healing and, 644-645
 JVDD. See Invertebral disk disease
while cavaletti rail walking, 425t
wound management of, 289f 
IVDE. See lnvertebral disc extrusion
while treadmill walking, 422t
Inflammation
Jumping, 425-426, 426t
antinfammatory effects of LLLT and,
1
 Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis, 558
365
Jaw tone, 198
DMSO and, 132
Jogging, 519-520
K
heat and, 312
Joint. See atso specifc joints
Kennels, 664f
of infections, 288
arthrodesis, 576-577
Keratan sulfate, 93
muscle satellite cell activation and, 118
biomechanics, 226
Ketotifen, 104
 omega-3 fatty acids and, 262-263
contracture
Kickbacks, 15
passive ROM and, 434
passive ROM and, 432
Kinematics, 41l-412
reduced, from cryotherapy, 314
US for, 336
analysis
special milk protein concentrate and,
convex-concave relationship of, 448
quantitative, 205-206
263-264
effusion
subjective, 204-205
urmeric and, 263
 joint proprioception and, 485
at antebrachiocarpal joint, 455b
warm compresses and, 283-284
in tarsus, 184-185
decline ramp, 423t
 Information technology systems, 662
laxity, 226-227
evaluation, of aquatic exercises, 535t
 Infrared cameras, 412f
mobilization, 21l, 448f
gait analysis, 413-415
Infrared electrophysical agents, 312-313
 posture, joint motion versus, 54
incline ramp, 423t
Infrared lamps, 325
proprioception, 484-485
kinetics and, 412-413
Infraspinatus contracture, 588-589
reduction, 553
of stair ascent, 423t
Infraspinatus muscle
replacement surgery, 575
of stair descent, 423t
bursae and, 62
ROM, 730t, 735t
of stife joint, 459b
fibrotic contracture of, 547-548
stability, 124
trot, 421t
lnsulin, 122-123
Joint capsule
of walking, 42 1t 
lnsulin-like growth factor 1 (1GF-1), 385
contracture, 102-103
Kinetic analysis, 206-210, 207f-208f
Interleukin-8, 337-338
immobilization, 101-103, 103b
Kinetic chain
Interleukin-10, 384
medications for, 103-104
closed, 350
 Internal moments, 415
ROM after, 102
 open versus closed, 451-452
International Association of Physical
remobilization of, 103, 103b
Kinetics, 408-409
Therapists in Animal Practice, 3-4
thermal shrinkage of, 130-131
of exercises, 421t
Index
747
Kinetics (Continued)
Lasers (Continued)
Ligaments (Continued)
gait analysis, 413-415
intensity, 361
load-deformation curve of, 124f
of jumping, 426t
Jight,360f
loading of, 123-124
kinematics and, 412-413
penetration, of skin, 364
postoperative, 128
Kissing lesions, 551, 551f
properties of, 359-363
mechanoreceptors along, 124
 Kneec ap. See Patella
pulsed versus continuous, 362-363, 362f
metabolic changes in, with training, 131
Knee-drawer tests, 226-227
in rehabilitation, 364-365
nuchal, 70f
Knees
stimulation of DNA production, 365
patellar, 185-186
 joint pain, 116 
transcranial, 372
pelvis, 68f
OA in, 116
 Lateral collateral ligament, 65, 67
postoperative healing of, 127-131
Lateral epicondylitis, 370
reconditioning of, 159
L
Law of action and reaction, 402
response of, to remobilization, 126-127
Lactic acid, 156-157
Law of dynamics, 401-402
restraining force provided by, 124
exercise and, 176
Law of statics, 401
shoulder, 67f
muscle fatigue and, 164
 Laws of motion, 401
spine, 69
Ladders, 599
Laxatives, 298-299
stifle, 69f
Lameness
 LDH. See Lumbar disk herniation
multiple injuries to, 128
chronic, of forelimb, 191-192
Lean tissue mass
structure, 123-124
degrees of, 180
immobilization and, 136f 
transverse, 55
with distal femoral physeal fractures, 688
post-surgical changes in, 135-136
Light
evaluation, 221b
Learned helplessness, 35
laser, 360f
factors affecting, 182-183
Learning, 34-35
pupillary responses to, 198
gait and, 182
associative, 34
white, 360f
hindlimb, 182
instrumental, 34
Light emitting diodes (LEDs), 366
joint motion and, 182-183
nonassociative, 34
Limb
score, 182b, 221-222
Pavlovian, 34
 alignment, 54
subtle, 182
Leash walking, 502, 508f
carriage, 182-183
Largus, Seribonius, 342
LEDs. See Light emitting diodes
exercises, 616f 
Laser therapy, 359. See atso Low-level laser
Leed's hypothesis, 98-99
joint motion, 51-53
therapy
Leg weights, 508f, 517f, 520-521, 521f
placement, 615f
as analgesia, 370-373
Legal entities, 660
prostheses,578
application of, 374
Legal support, 660
Limb circumference measurements, 227-230,
of biceps tendon, 584f
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease, 113-114, 559,
227f-228f
biological effects of, 362b, 365
560f
biases in, 230
bone and, 367-368
Leucine, 122
Hlexion and, 228f
cartilage and, 367-368
Levers
hair and, 228f
chronic pain and, 371
Class 111, 404f
muscle atrophy and, 229f, 230
diabetes and, 366-367
 classification of, 404
muscle mass and, 229f
dose guidelines, 375b
elbows and, 404f
muscle strength and, 231-232
after elbow arthroscopy, 598f
systems, 403-406
sedation and, 229f
hair and, 373
Levine, David, 2
Limbo, 513-514, 514f
for iliopsoas strains, 602f
Liability insurance, 14
Linoleic acid, 259
ligaments and, 369-370
Lick granulomas, 375-376
Lipoxygenase pathway, 122
for OA, 368, 376-377
Life vests, 532f-533f
Listeria, 172
for open wound healing, 374
Lift devices, 498f, 533f, 539f
LLLT. See Low-level laser therapy
pain management and, 365, 370-373
Ligaments, 65-69, 67f. See atso specific
LMN bladder. See Lower motor neuron
peripheral nerves and, 372-373
ligaments
bladder
photon wavelength in, 361, 361f
 adaptation to mechanical stress of, 131
LMN disease. See Lower motor neuron
for postsurgical wound healing, 374-375
attachments, e19-e24
disease
probes, 373, 374f
blood supply to, 124
Load bearing. See atso Mechanical loading
protective eye wear for, 377, 377f
effects of corticosteroids on, 132
after bone fractures, 141
research, 365-370, 366b
elbow, 67f
bone mass and, 140
for rheumatoid arthritis, 369
ESwT and, 385
Load-deformation curve
spinal cord and, 372-373
forelimb, 65
of ligaments, 124f
strokes and, 372
forepaw, 68f
toe region of, 123-124
for tendinitis, 369
function of, 127,e19-e24
yield point of, 123-124
tendons and, 369-370, 377
healing timeline, 87b
Locomotion, 20l-202
wound healing and, 365-367
hindlimb, 65-67
analysis, 204-210
Lasers
hindpaw, 70f
quantitative kinematic, 205-206
acupuncture, 371
hip, 68f
subjective kinematic, 204-205
class 1V, 363f
immobilization of, 123-132, 125b
COG in, 204
classification of, 363-364
insertions
 components of, 201
cold, 359-363
direct, 123
external factors of, 201-202
doses of, 362f
indirect, 123
force plate data of, 209f
energy density of, 361-362
instabilities, 212-214
impact forces in, 204
first depth of penetration of, 364
laser therapy and, 369-370
independent, 305
748
Index
Locomotion (Continued)
Manual therapy (Continued)
McGowan, Lesley, 2
internal factors of, 201
 clinical environment for, 450-452
 MCL. See Medial collateral ligament
kinetic analysis of, 206-210, 207f-208f
 contraindications for, 447-448
McMillan, Mary, 464
markers for, 206f
for elbow joint, 454-455
MCP. See Medial coronoid process
phases of, 202f
evaluations, 450
MCS system. See Muscle condition scoring
sensory input and, 201
for hip joint, 456-458
system
structural definitions and, 203-204 
indications for, 447
Mechanical loading. See atso Load bearing
types of, 201
with mobilization, 450-452
bone density and, 140f
Lorentz force law, 393
prec autions for, 447-448
bone response to, 139
Low Stress Handling, Restraint, and
principles of, 448-449
muscle regeneration and, 116-117
Behavior Modification of Dogs and Cats
RCTs of, 447
Mechanoreceptors
(Yin), 38
for shoulder joint, 452-454
joint proprioception and, 484
Lower motor neuron (LMN) bladder, 300
for spine, 460-462
along ligaments, 124 
Lower motor neuron (LMN) disease, 194,
for stife joint, 458-460
Medial buttress, 184, 566
199f
stretching compared to, 447
Medial collateral ligament (MCL), 65, 67
active assisted ROM and, 432
Manubrium process, 50-51
assessment, 186
signs of, 199
 Manufacturers of supplies and equipment,
effects of exercise on, 131
Low-]evel laser therapy (LLLT), 249, 359
e26-e29
effects of immobilization on, 72-73
antin Hlammatory effects of, 365
MAOl. See Monoamine oxidase inhibitor
postoperative healing of, 127-129
application of, 373-374
Marketing, 661-662
surgery, 115
classification of, 364
Mason Metasplints, 295 
tensile strength, 127-128
infections and, 367-368
Massage
Medial coronoid process (MCP), 594-595
for OA, 368-369
application of, 475-476
Medial meniscus, torn, 566f
wound healing and, 367
benefits of, 468
Medial shoulder instability (MSl), 589-594,
Lumbar disk herniation (LDH), 371
biologic basis of, 464-468
591f
Lumbar plexus, 71
body position for, 475-476
Medial shoulder syndrome (MSS), 589-594
Lumbar vertebrae, 48, 49f
circulatory effects of, 465
 Median artery 73-76
Lumboc audal region muscles, 66f
contraindications for, 470b
Medical records, 9
Lumbosacral disease, 415
deep transverse friction, 479-480, 479f
Medications. See also specific medications
Lumbosacral plexus, 71
disease and, 469
effect of, on bone, 141-142
Lymph node
effects on connective tissue, 468
effect of, on immobilized muscle,
anatomy, 65
effects on muscle of, 466-467
120-123
axillary, 65
effects on pain of, 467-468
effect of, on ligaments, 132
femoral, 65
evaluations for, 469-475
effect of, on tendons, 132
popliteal, 65
for fatigue, 469
effects of, on immobilized cartilage, 101
superfcial cervical, 65
friction, 480b
for joint capsule immobilization, 103-104
superficial inguinal, 65
gait assessment for, 470-471
for maladaptive pain, 246-249
Lymphatics, 465
jdentification of areas for, 476
metabolic profiles for, 250
Lymphocytes,79
indications for, 468-469
preoperative, 280
Lymphokines, 79
lymphatics and, 465
during progression of exercises, 505
Lysholm Knee Scale, 236
for muscle soreness, 469
titration of, 251
palpation in, 472-473, 472f-473f
transdermal, 339
M
passive movements for, 479-481
 Medullary cavity, 81
Macrophages, 79
for performance,469
 Membrana fibrosa, 62
lymphocytes and, 79
sensation and, 467-468
 Membrana synoviales, 62
in muscle healing, 84-85
after surgery, 468-469
Meniscectomy, 98
muscle satellite cell activation and, 118
techniques, 476-481
Meniscus
Magnet therapy, 393-395
therapeutic effects of, 466
atrophy, during immobilization, 97
blood fow and, 393-394
therapy
cartilage changes, 97-98
clinical effects of, 394-395
effleurage, 285f
Mennell, J. B., 464
pain reduction and, 394
guidelines, 9
 Mental well-being, exercise and, 176
Magnetic bracelets, 395
ice,320-321,320f
Meridians, 466
Magnetic insoles, 394-395
postoperative, 284
Mesenchymal cells, 83
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRl)
targeted, 211
 Metabolism. See aiso Resting metabolic rate
as ancillary test, 199-200
tissue movement and, 466
daily energy requirements and, 172-173
of cartilage, 100
Mast cells, 103-104
glycolytic,156
muscle mass and, 230
Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), 395
homeostatic, 157
muscle measurements with, 227
Matrix synthesis, 79
muscle energy sources and, 156
sagittal plane, 617f
 Maximal oxygen uptake (VO, max), 168
oxidative, 156-157
 Main ligament attachments and functions,
age and, 172
profiles, 250
e19-e24
detraining and, 171
requirements, for aquatic exercise, 530
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR),
during endurance training, 170-171
ventilation and, 166-167
122
during exercise, 170-171, 170f
Metacarpals
 Manual therapy, 447
Maximum isometric extension torque, 231
conditions, 554-556
assessments for, 449
McGill pain questionnaire, 394
fractures, 133f, 554, 554f
for carpus, 455-456
McGowan, Catherine, 2
 Metacarpophalangeal joints, luxation of, 556
Index
749
Metatarsals, 44
MRSA.See Methicillin-resistant
Muscle (Continued)
Staphylococcus aureus
energy systems, 156-157
fractures, 555f, 571-572
MRSl. See Methicillin-resistant
enzymes,348
orthopedic examination of, 184
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius
epaxial, 66f
palpation of, 184f
MSl. See Medial shoulder instability
extensor carpi radialis, 62
Metatarsophalangeal joints, luxation of, 573
MSM. See Methylsulfonylmethane
fatigue, 107, 163-164
 Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
MSS.See Medial shoulder syndrome
glycogen and, 164
(MRSA), 287-288
mTOR. See Mammalian target of
respiratory, 167-168
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
rapamycin
ROS and, 122
pseudintermedius (MRSl), 288
Muscle, 56-62
fibers, 416f
V-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
adaptations
age and, 172
antagonists, 248
to endurance training, 118-119
between breeds, 105
receptors, 244-245
to mechanical stress, 118-120
comparison of, 166f
Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM), 266
to strength training, 119-120
conditioning and, 157
Milk protein concentrate, 263-264
aging and, 107, 113
distribution of,157
Millis, Darryl L., 2
antigravity, 58-59, 61-62
endurance training and, 165
MMP. See Matrix metalloproteinase
assessments, 227-232
fast-twitch, 157
Mobilization
asymmetry, 183-184
NMES and, 348
accessory, 451
atrophy,107
organization of, 155
carpal extension, 456
acetylcholine receptors and, 111112
 oxidative capabilities of, 163
carpal flexion, 456
after ACL surgery, 114-115
ratio of, 157
cauda]
assessment, 198
slow-twitch,157
of humerus,453f
CT and, 230
in strength training, 165-166
of shoulder joint, 453
disuse, 159
types, 104-106, 104t-105t
choosing,450-451
following CCL transection, 114, 114f
force generation, 418-419
cranial
after fractures, 116
forelimb, 56-59
of humerus, 453f
from glucocorticoids, 121
lateral, attachment sites, 58f
of shoulder joint, 453
with knee joint pain, 116
left lateral, 57f
after elbow arthroscopy, 597f
with Legg-Calve-Perthes disease,
left medial, 57f
forelimb, 480f, 48 1
113-114
medial, attachment sites, 59f
grades, 450-451
limb circumference measurements and,
forepaw
hindlimb, 480f, 481
229f, 230
caudal view, 58f
manual therapy with, 450-452
after MCL surgery, 115
cranial view, 57f
oscillation versus sustained stretch, 451
mechanisms of disuse, 110-112
function, 155-156
pain and, 451
myostatin in, 111
functional excursion of, 431
physiologic, 451
neurogenic, 112-113
gastrocnemius, 106
scapula, 481
NMES to retard, 347, 352
hamstring, 60
spinal, 460-462
with 0A, 116
healing. 84-85
lumbar dorsal to ventral, 462
palpation for, 183-184
immobilization during, 85
lumbar region, 462
 passive stretching and, 442
repair phase, 85
thoracic central dorsal to ventral,
after splinting, 116
timeline, 84-85, 84b
461-462
biceps femoris, 109f
timing during, 85
thoracic region, 461
biomechanics of, 416-417
heart disease and, 107
Model Practice Act, 8, 10
biopsy technique, 106
hindlimb, 59-61
Moment arm, 403, 404f
blood fow, 106
lateral, attachment sites, 63f
Moments, 403
capillarity, 119
lateral, deep, 59f
Monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOl),
carbohydrate metabolism, 107
lateral, superficial, 59f
247-248
cardiac, 154
medial, attachment sites, 63f
 Monosynaptic stretch response, 439
changes, with hip conditions, 113-114
medial, deep, 60f
Morphine, 249
 chronic infammation of, 111
medial, superfcial, 60f
Motion analysis, 205-206
as component of locomotion, 201
hindpaw
Motor function
connective tissue, 84f
caudal view, 61f
with cervical spondylomyelopathy
contraction, 106-107, 154-155, 162-163
cranial view, 61f
good, 680
actin and myosin interaction during.
lateral view, 62f
initial, 680
155f
hypertrophy, 119-120
for FCEM
concentric, 417
imbalances, 212-214
good, 700
with cryotherapy, 317
immobilization of, 107-112, 108b
initial, 699
eccentric,417,565
effect of GH on, 121-122
with thoracolumbar IVDE
isometric, 417
effect of medications on, 120-123
g0od, 721, 723
myotatic reflexes and, 194
effect of nutrition on, 122-123
initial, 721
work transfer during, 156
effect of steroids on, 120-121
Motor neurons, 94
contraction time, 119
injury, 84-85
aging and, 113
contracture of extrinsic, 652
lumbocaudal region, 66f
flexor reflexes and, 195
cryotherapy effects on, 319f
mass
Motor units, 155
CSA of, 230
amino acids and, 122
Movement disorders, 211
energy sources, 156
anabolic steroids and, 121
750
Index
Muscle(Continued)
Muscle (Continued)
Neck (Continued)
androgens and, 121
spinal, 165-166
muscles, 61-62, 63f
after CCL transection, 115f
strains, 84, 564-565
deep, 64f
changes
in performance dogs, 543-548
superficial, 64f
with CCL injury, 114-116
strength,56, 165-166
nerves, 72-73
with CCLR, 114
cold effects on, 316
superficial muscles of, 56f
with hip dysplasia, 113-114 
CSA and, 231
 Necrotic debris removal, 84-85
chronic loss of, after ACL surgery.
heat effects on, 323
Negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT),
115
limb circumference measurements and,
0S9
creatine and, 265
231-232
Neoplasia, 190-191, 620-621
CT and, 230
measurements, 231-232
in geriatric patients, 639-640
DEXA and, 231
muscle mass and, 231
rehabilitation for, 621
frequency of training and, 118
structure, 84,155-156
Nerves. See atso specijfic nerves
land-based remobilization and, 118
superfcial, of shoulder and neck, 56f
blocks, 280
limb circumference measurements and,
temperature, 322-323
cooling, 315-316
227-230, 229f
thorax, 63f
cranial, 198, 199t
loss, from spacefight, 110
training of, 164-166
fibers, 103
measurements, 227-231
transposing of, 10s-106
forelimb, 69-71, 71f
MRl and, 230
trunk, 61-62
forepaw, 71f-72f
muscle strength and, 231
deep. 65f
hindlimb, 71-72
NMES and, 351-352
superfcial, 65f
hindpaw, 74f
nutritional plans and, 254
types, 154, 163
lateral aspect, 73f
recovery, age and, 113
US temperature changes in, 330f-331f
muscle regeneration and, 118
resistance exercise and, 110
vitamin D deficiency and, 123
neck, 72-73
after stabilization of CCLR, 1l5-116
wasting,256f
peripheral, laser therapy and, 372-373
strength training and, 119
work capacity, during stress, 155f
supply,69-73
massage effects on, 466-467
Muscle condition scoring (MCS) system,
trunk, 72-73
myostatin and, 105
256f
Neurapraxia, 298
neck, 61-62, 63f
Muscular dystrophy golden retriever, 415
Neurologic conditions
deep.64f
Musculoskeletal conditioning, 157-158
aging and, 630
superficial,64f
Musculoskeletal disease
pain and, 609
oxidative capacity, 106-107
aging and, 630
proprioception and, 485
pennate, 418
nutrition in prevention of, 254-256
Neurologic examinations, 180, 193-199
physiology, 154-155
nutrition in treatment of, 257-267
forms, 27f-28f, 180-181
protein synthesis, 110, 259-260
Musculoskeletal injuries, 653t
general, 193-194
quadriceps, 60
Musculoskeletal system, 652-653
interpreting, 198-199
receptors, 485
Music, 37
palpation in, 194
refex inhibition of, 110
Muzzles, 37-38
of trauma patients, 193
regeneration
Myofibers, 84
Neuromuscular electrical stimulators
age and, 117
regeneration, 84-85
(NMES), 342
mechanical loading and, 116-117
resistance training and, 119
clinical recommendations for, 350-353
nerve activity and, 118
in skeletal muscle physiology, 164-166
contraindications for, 347
NSAIDs and, 121
Myofibrils, 164-166, 416f
current parameters, 346b
satellite cells and, 118
Myofibroblasts, 102
duty cycle, 345,345f
remobilization considerations for, 117b
Myogenic regulatory factors, 118
effect of, on ACL reconstruction, 348-350
response to remobilization, 116-118
Myokinase, 156
efficacy of, on ACL reconstruction,
sacrocaudal, 66f
Myology, comparative, e l-e18
349-350
satellite cells
Myopathy, 120
electrode placement for, 352-353
activation of, 118
fibrotic, 565
features of, 347
aging and, 113
Myosin, 84
indications for, 347
exercise and, 113
immunohistochemical analysis of, 105
muscle enzymes and, 348
muscle regeneration and, 118
during muscle contraction, 155f
muscle fbers and, 348
skeletal, 154, 162-166
in myofibrils, 164-166
muscle mass and, 351-352
changes, in endurance training, 165
in sarcomere, 154-155
parameters, 343b
conditioning of, 164-166
Myostatin, 105, 111
patient reaction to, 352
diagram, 163f
Myotatic reflexes, 194-195
perfusion and, 348
physiology, 162-163
Myotendinous junction, 109
pulse duration, 346t
smooth, 154
Myristoleic acid, 264
pulse rate, 345
soreness
ramp of, 345, 346f
massage for, 469
N
recruitment, 347
NSA1Ds and, 121
 NADH. See Nicotinamide adenine
to retard muscle atrophy, 347, 352
spasms, 316
dinucleotide
skin preparation for, 352f
cycle, 467f
 NE. See Norepinephrine
treatment frequency, 353
isolating, 48 1f 
Neck
treatment time, 353
thermotherapy and, 323
fascia, 55
in veterinary medicine, 350-352
US for, 336
lymph node anatomy in, 65
Neuromuscular reflexes, 124
Index
751
Neurons, thermosensitive, 314-315
Nutrition(Continued)
Osteoarthritis (OA) (Continued)
Neutrophils, 79, 175
stress and, 258
 New Zealand green-lipped mussels and,
New Mexico practice act, 12-13
supplements
262
 New Zealand green-lipped mussels, 262
branched-chain amino acids, 122
NSAIDs and, 101, 247
Newton, lsaac, 401
fish oil, 123
obesity and, 256
 NF-kB. See Nuclear factor kappa B
surgery and, 257
omega-3 fatty acids and, 263
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH),
timing of, 173
pain assessments of, 235t
156-157
 in treatment of musculoskeletal disease,
PEMFs and, 396-397
 NMDA. See V-methyl-D-aspartate
257-267
phonophoresis and, 338
 NMES. See Neuromuscular electrical
Nystagmus, 198
progression of, 635f
stimulators
quadriceps muscles and, 116
Nociceptors, 370, 383
0
rehabilitation, 574t 
Nonrepetitive motions, 201, 203
OA. See Osteoarthritis
SAMe and, 260-261
Nonslip Hooring, 37
Obesity, 212-214
surgery for,636f
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs
definition of, 256
synovial fuid changes with, 193t
(NSAIDs)
 endurance training and, 165
training and, 92
bone loss and, 142
in geriatric patients, 637
types of, 574
chondroprotective, 101
nutrition and, 256
vitamin E and, 261
for chronic pain management, 247
OA and, 256
Osteoblasts, 80-81
COX-2-specifce, 247
weight management and, 260
Osteocalcin, 138-139
 for joint capsule immobilization, 103
Observation
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD)
muscle regeneration and, 121
of gait, 182-183, 182f
of elbow, 551-552
muscle satellite cell activation and, 118
initial, 181-183, 181f
of humerus, 191f
muscle soreness and, 121
side, 182f
rehabilitation for, 545t
OA and, 101, 247
of stance, 181f
of shoulder, 543-544, 544f
postoperative analgesia and, 246
of subtle lameness, 182
of stife, 565-566
 protein synthesis and, 121
Occupational Safety and Health Act, 37
tarsal, 572
side effects, 280
OCD. See Osteochondritis dissecans
Osteocytes, 80-81
for tendinitis management, 545-546
 Olfactory stimuli, 32
Osteoid deposition, 83
Norepinephrine (NE), 244
Omega-3 fatty acids, 262-263
Osteomyelitis, 387
 Noxious stimuli, adaptive pain and, 244
Operant conditioning, 34
Osteonecrosis, 387
 NPWT. See Negative pressure wound therapy
Operating conditioning, 34
Osteoporosis
 NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal antin flammatory
Opioids, 249
immobilization-induced, 135
samp
Optoelectric technology, 411-412
risedronate and, 141
 Nuchal ligament, 70f 
Orthopedic examinations, 180, 184-192
Osteosarcoma, 631f
Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-KB), 111
 antinfammatory drugs before, 192
Osteotomies, 548-549. See atso specifc
Nursing care, 277
forms, 25f-26f
osteotomy procedures
for neurologic patients, 300-303
sedation and, 192
chevron wedge, 568
for orthopedic patients, 285-299
Orthoses, 306-308
tibial, 568-569
postoperative considerations in, 280-285
construction of, 306-307
triple pelvic, 558, 559f
preoperative considerations in, 277-280
for ectrodactyly, 306f
Outcomes, 220f
Nutation, 53
hinged, 307f
lameness scores and, 221
Nutrition
for patellar luxation, 307f
measurements, 220
carbohydrates and, 259
 Orthotics interventions, 18
for cervical spondylomyelopathy,
cat, 267
Ortolani test, 188-189, 188f
679t-682t
compounds, 260-264
Osteoarthritis (OA), 630f, 71lt-712t
for craniodorsal hip luxation, 707t-710t
conditioning and, 159-160
 antinfammatory drugs for, 636-637
for degenerative lumbosacral stenosis,
convalescent, 257
 antioxidants, 260-261
689t-691t
daily energy requirements and, 172-173
ASUs and, 261
for degenerative myelopathy, 683t-685t
 developmental orthopedic disease and,
in cats, 267
for distal femoral physeal fractures,
254-256
chondroprotectants and, 261-262
686t-688t
effect of, on immobilized muscle,
collagen hydrolysates and, 265
for extrac apsular repair of CCL rupture,
122-123
elbow, 190, 414-415, 551f
670t-673t
essential factors of, 257-260
elbow incongruity and, 552
for FCEM, 699t-702t
exercise and, 122, 172-173
 environmental modification for, 250
for FHO, 703t-706t
fat and, 259
in geriatric patients, 635-639
OA, 711t-712t
for geriatric patients, 631-635
hip, 188-189
   d 
during hospitalization, 258 
hip luxation and, 560f
 post-arthroscopy elbow dysplasia,
life stage factors, 258
home care programs, 638b
693t-697t
obesity and, 256
 joint proprioception and, 485
for thoracolumbar IVDE, 719t-724t
plans, 254
joint replacement surgery for, 575
for total hip replacement, 725t-729t 
in prevention of musculoskeletal disease,
in knees, 116
for TPLO/TTA of CCL rupture,
254-256
laser therapy for, 368, 376-377
675t-677t
protein and, 259-260
LLLT for, 368-369
return to function and, 234-236
raw meat diet and, 172
management of, 574-575
Overhead, 662
rehabilitation and, 257-267
muscle atrophy with, 116
 Overload principle, 164
752
Index
Overstretching,438
Pain (Continued)
 Passive range of motion (PROM)
Owners
patient considerations for, 250-251
(Continued)
complaints,180
patient reluctance and, 243
infammation and, 434
compliance, 234
postsurgical, 245
remobilization and, 434
expectations, 25 1
processes, 243-245
 Patella, 44
impressions of, 234
questionnaires, 222, 232-234
 cranial drawer motion and, 186f
Oxidative capacity, muscle, 106-107
reassessments, 251
ectopia, 186
 Oxidative phosphorylation, 157
reduction
extensor retinaculum and, 66-67
Oxy gen
from heat, 323
luxation, 570-571
cardiovascular system and, 168
magnet therapy and, 394
medial, 186, 186f, 570f
consumption rates, 171f 
US for, 332, 336
orthoses for, 307f
increased demand for, 168
postoperative complications, 299
uptake studies, 170-171
323
repair, 713t-718t
in rehabilitation evaluation, 212
stabilization, 212-214
P
relieving mechanism, of Es, 353
ruptured tendon in, 571
P43FP, 263
ROM and, 448-449
tendinitis, 569f
Pads
scales, 232-234
Patellar reflexes, 194, 194f
front, 185
states, 245f
Patience, 506
GRFs on, 207-210
subjectivity of, 250
Patients
rear, 189
transmission, 315-316
in application of passive ROM, 435, 435f
Pain
Palpation, 76-78
assessment areas, 664f
acute,244, 244f
 of biceps, 191f
caudal view of, 470, 470f
adaptive, 243-244
 of elbows, 183, 190f
considerations, for pain, 250-251
adaptive to maladaptive, 244-245
of femur, 187f
cranial view of, 470, 470f
analgesic ladder for, 247f
forelimb, 76-77
critically injured, 652
assessments, 196, 232-234, 234b
hindlimb, 77
chest rehabilitation for, 653-656, 656b
of OA, 235t
 of humerus, 190-191, 191f
rehabilitation for, 656-658
 postoperative analgesia and, 246
of iliopsoas, 602f
evaluations, 659
behavior, 234
in massage evaluations 472-473,472f-47f
geriatric, 629t
chronic,212-214
of rmetatarsals, 184
conditions in, 629t, 630b
acupuncture for, 249
for muscle asymmetry and atrophy.
environment for, 639
cryotherapy for, 316
183-184
functional questionnaires for, 632f-634f
definition of, 244
in neurologic examination, 194
neoplasia in, 639-640
Jaser therapy and, 371
 of phalanges, 184
nutrition for, 631-635
management plans, 246-250
of radius, 183, 190f
OA in, 635-639
nonpharmacologic approaches to,
 of sc apula, 192f
obesity in, 637
249-250
simultaneous, of hindlimbs, 183f
pain management for, 631
quality of life scale for, 240t
 of supraspinatus tendon, 589f
rehabilitation for, 637-639
consequences of, 243
of tibia, 185, 185f
history, 180-181
control, ES for, 353-356
trunk, 77-78
owner complaints in, 180
with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
of ulna, 183, 190f
preoperative,280
mild, 689
Panniculus reflex, 196
previous trauma in, 180
moderate, 691
Panosteitis, 190-191
Jateral view of, 470, 470f
severe, 691
Paracarts, 310, 310f
manual assistance for, 286f
degrees of, 180
Paraffin baths, 325
multitrauma, 558
harpagoside and, 265
Paralysis, 193
neurologic
during joint motion, 226
Paraparesis, 193
analgesia for, 609
maladaptive, 243-244
ambulation with, 303
bladder care for, 300
management, 244-245
with degenerative myelopathy
cervical, 301-303
medications for, 246-249
early stage, 683
exercises for, 609
opioids for, 249
early-mid stage, 683
history of, 280
progression to, 244-245
paracarts for, 310
nursing care for, 300-303
management
Paraplegia, 310
positioning of, 279
for chronic pain, 246-250
with degenerative myelopathy, 685
special considerations for, 301-303
for geriatric patients, 631
Paresis, 193
standing by, 609
laser therapy and, 365, 370-373
Pascal's law, 527
thoracolumbar, 303
PEMF and, 397
 Passive motion protocols
nonambulatory, 193
postoperative, 280
healing tendons and, 130
nontraumatized surgical, 257
pretreatment screening for, 247
in postoperative healing of fexor tendons,
orthopedic,285-299
records, 251
129
reaction, to NMES, 352
after surgery, 245-246
Passive range of motion (PROM), 211,
recumbent, 280-281
massage effects on, 467-468
405-406, 431-432, 543
reluctance of, 243, 534
memories, 245
application of, 435-437, 435f
spinal cord, 303
mobilization and, 451
continuous, 434
tetraplegic, 303
neurologic conditions and, 609
duration of, 434
tolerance of US, 332
nociceptive, 244
frequency of, 437
traumatized surgical, 257
Index
753
Pavlovian learning. See Classical
Physical therapists (Continued)
“Postsurgical Physical Therapy: The Missing
conditioning
as employee, 15
Link" (Taylor), 2
Peak braking, 223, 223f
self-employed, 15
Postural drainage, 654-656
Peak force, 409, 433f
in veterinary colleges, 13
Postural reactions, 196-198
Peak vertical force, 223, 223f
Physical therapy
Potentization, 265-266
Pedometers, 224-225, 225f
associations, 3-4
Povidone jodine, 285
Pelvic girdle, 43
benefits of, 211
Praying position, 516
Pelvis, 43
 bridging gap with veterinary medicine, 19
Preoperative goals
conditions, 556-561
definition of, 1-2, 8
 for extracapsular repair of CCL rupture,
dorsal tilt of, 53
diagnosis, 18
670
fractures, 556-558, 557f
establishment of VCPR before, 14
for TPLO/TTA of CCL rupture, 675
 joint motion in, 53-54
evaluation, 18-19
Pressure pads, 223
lateral tilt of, 53
goals, 18-19, 211
Preventive strategies, 214
ligaments, 68f 
growth of, 1
 Primary health care provider, 12
rotation of, 53
 guidelines, 14 
 Principles of Veterinary Medical Ethics, 10,
triple osteotomy of, 559f
history of, 16-17
15
ventral tilt of, 53
interventions in, 8, 18-19
 PROM. See Passive range of motion
Pelvofemoral rhythm, 43
as profession, 16-17
Pronation, 53
 PEMFs. See Pulsed electromagnetic fields
as protected term, 12, 14
 Proprioception, 484
PennHlP, 226
risk management for, 14
activity and, 485-486
Pennsylvania practice act, 1l-12
state practice acts, 12-13, 12b
BOSU and, 600f
Percussion, 477-478, 479b, 654
for stife, 433f
conscious, 197-198, 198f
chest, 656f
 traditional mode]s of practice, 19
dynamic,490f
contraindications for, 655-656
treatment philosophy, 211-212
exercise rolls for, 613f
Performance dogs
Physicat Therapy for Animats: Setected
functiona] training exercises for, 492-493
forelimb conditions of, 583-600
Techniques (Downer), 2
joint, 484-485
hindlimb conditions of, 600-605
Physiologic motion, 448
neurologic conditions and, 485
muscle strains in, 543-548
Phytodolor N, 266
science of, 484-486
 Perfusion, NMES and, 348
Pl3K. See Phosphatidyl-inositol-3-OH
strength training and, 485
Periarticular structures, US of, 332
kinase
training, 486-493, 487f
 Perimysium, 84
Piloerection, 31
 Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation
Perineal reflexes, 196
Pine bark extract, 266
(PNF), 540
 Perioperative antibiotic therapy, 285-287
Pins
Propulsion forces, 223, 223f, 411f
Peripheral nerve injury, 622-623
external fixator, 292-293
Propulsion impulses, 223, 223f
 Peripheral nervous system
loosening of, 295
Prostaglandin E (PGE), 135
cryotherapy and, 314
tracts
Prostheses, 308-309
pain regulation in, 323
cleaning of,295f
angular stability of, 308-309
 Perturbation exercises, 488, 489f, 600f
infections, 295
axial stability of, 308-309
PG. See Proteoglycan
Placing, 198, 477, 478f
hinged, 309f
PGE. See Prostaglandin E
Plan of care, 214
interventions, 18
Phagocytosis, 79, 85-86
Plank, on therapy ball, 516
limb, 578
Phalanges
Plantigrade stance, 41
torsional stability of, 308-309
assessment, 184
 Plasma volume, chronic exercise and, 175
Protein
conditions, 554-556, 571-574
Plastic deformation, 438, 464
bone morphogenic, 132, 142
Hexing of, 189f
Plate-rod technique, 561f
breakdown, 122-123
fractures, 554, 571-572
Pleximeter, 194
catabolism, in neurogenic muscle atrophy.
luxation of, 573
Plyometric drills, 599
94
palpation of, 184f
Pneumonia, 174-175
for exercise and nutrition, 173
 Pheromone therapy, 36-37
PNF. See Proprioceptive neuromuscular
milk, 263-264
Phonophoresis, 338-339
facilitation
nutrition and, 259-260
 Phosphatidy]-inositol-3-OH kinase (Pl3K),
Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan (PSGAG),
synthesis
111
596, 637
Jeucine and, 122
Phosphofructokinase, 156
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), 637
in muscle, 110, 259-260
 Phosphorus loss, from imrmobilization, 135
Pools, 532, 660f
NSAIDs and, 121
Photobiostimulation, 359
equipment, 539
with resistance training, 120
 Photons, 36 1f
temperature, 538
for traumatized surgical patients, 257
 Physical examination
therapy, 538-540
Protein kinase B, 111
general, 181
case report, 540-541
Proteoglycan (PG), 88, 92-93
initial observation in, 181-183, 181f
contraindications for, 540
 Physical therapist assistant (PTA), 12
evaluations for, 539-540
93
education,17
initiation of, 538-539
cartilage immobilization and, 94-95
supervision of, 14
lift devices for, 539f
HA and, 95
Physical therapists
treatments, 540
monomers, 93, 93f
board certification, 16
transfers to, 539
 Proteoglycan monomer, 93f
 collaborative relationships with, 13-14
Positioning, of chest rehabilitation, 654
 Proximal tibial intraarticular osteotomy
education, 17
Postoperative care, 1
(PT10), 568
754
Index
PSGAG. See Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
Range of motion (ROM) (Continued)
Rehabilitation (Continued)
PSWD. See Pulsed shortwave diathermy
application of, 435-438
for thoracolumbar IVDE, 719t-724t
PTA. See Physical therapist assistant
of carpus, 190f
for total hip replacement, 725t-729t
 PTlO. See Proximal tibial intraarticular
CCLR and, 433
for TPLO/TTA of CCL rupture,
osteotomy
contraindications for, 432-433
675t-677t
PUFAs. See Polyunsaturated fatty acids
of elbow, 190
collaborative model for, 19, 20f 
Pulmonary contusions, 658
after elbow arthroscopy, 597f
conditions for, 212-214
Pulmonary respiration, 166
through functional patterns, 435
considerations, for immobilization, 142
 Pulsed electromagnetic felds (PEMFs),
goniometers and, 225
contributors to, 19b
395-397
of hip, 188-189
for critically injured patients, 656-658
bone healing and, 396
joint, 730t, 735t
for degenerative lumbosacral stenosis,
OA and, 396-397
 after joint capsule immobilization, 102
617
pain management and, 397
pain and, 448-449
delaying, for postoperative healing of
use of, 397
prec autions for, 432-433
Hexor tendons, 129
wound healing and, 396
research,433-435
DER and, 258
 Pulsed shortwave diathermy (PsWD), 398
stretching tendons to improve, 131
for discospondylitis, 624
Punishment, 34-35
superfcial heat for irmproved, 3 12
enterprise, 659
 learned helplessness and, 35
swimming and, 534
equipment, 667-668, 667b
 operant conditioning and, 34
thermotherapy and, 323
evaluation, 212
positive, 35
TPLO and, 433
forms, 23f-24f, 215f-217f
 Pupillary light responses, 198
during trot, 205f
tissue assessments during, 212t 
Purring, 32-33
US for, 335-336
evaluation forms, 23f-24f
Pycnogenol, 266
Raw meat diet, 172
of excision arthroplasty, 575-576
Pyoderma, 285
RCTs. See Randomized controled trials
for external fixators, 577
Pyruvate, 156-157, 156f
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 122
for FCEM, 619-620
Reconditioning, 159
after FHO, 576, 576t
Q
 Reconstruction aides, 16
future trends in, 4
Q10 effect, 315-316
Re-evaluations, 214-218
for geriatric patients, 637-639
Quadriceps muscles, 60
Referrals
growth of, 1
CCL deficiency and, 114
definition of, 10
guidelines, 14
contracture, 563-564, 563f
form, 22f
handling in, 38-39
CSA of, 230
guidelines for, 10-11
history of, 1-2
fibrotic myopathy of, 565
letters, 17
home program
hamstring muscles ratio to, 116
method of, 10-11
for cervical spondylomyelopathy,
OA and, 116
receiving, 11
679t-682t
reflex inhibition,350
traditional, 19
for craniodorsal hip luxation, 707t-710t
rehabilitation of, following CCL
Regulations, CAVM, 9
for degenerative lumbosacral stenosis,
transection, 114
Rehabilitation
689t-691t
Quality of life, 236-240
for ACL deficiency, 350
for degenerative myelopathy, 683t-685t
aging and, 630
amputation, 577-578
for distal femoral physeal fractures,
exercise and, 176
after articular fractures, 544t
686t-688t
scale, 240t
assessments, 214-218
 for extrac apsular repair of CCL rupture,
Quercetin,266
associations, 3-4
670t-673t
Quick Splints, 295
candidates, 211-214
for FCEM, 699t-702t
for CCLR, 567t
for FHO, 703t-706t
R
certification, 2
OA, 711t-712t
Rack,202-203
for cervical disk disease, 612-613
  x d 
 Radial pressure wave treatment (RPWT), 383
for cervical spondylomyelopathy, 618
post-arthroscopy elbow dysplasia,
Radialis refexes, 195
chest, 653-656, 653t, 656b
693t-697t
Radiation, 173, 313, 324
 clinic program
for thoracolumbar IVDE, 719t-724t
 Radiofrequency-induced thermal
for cervical spondylomyelopathy,
for total hip replacement, 725t-729t
capsulorrhaphy (RITC), 593
679t-682t
for TPLO/TTA of CCL rupture,
Radiographs, 199-200
for craniodorsal hip luxation, 707t-710t 
675t-677t
 postoperative complications from TPLO
for degenerative lumbosacral stenosis,
injury during, 158-159
and, 299
689t-691t
of joint arthrodesis, 576-577
Radius, 42
for degenerative myelopathy, 683t-685t
lasers in, 364-365
assessment, 189-190
for distal femoral physeal fractures,
for neoplasia, 621
common conditions of, 189
686t-688t
nutrition and, 257-267
palpation of, 183, 190f
for extrac apsular repair of CCL rupture,
OA, 574t
 Raising hackles. See Piloerection
670t-673t
organizations, 3b
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs), 447
for FCEM, 699t-702t
for partial fexor tendon lacerations, 130
Range of motion (ROM), 431-435. See atso
for FHO, 703t-706t
passive, for partial fexor tendon
 Passive range of motion
OA, 711t-7 12t
lacerations, 130
after ACL reconstruction, 98
 n  d 
 peripheral nerve injury, 623
active, 438
post-arthroscopy elbow dysplasia,
plan of care, 214
active assisted, 432, 437-438
693t-697t
post-CCL transection, 114
Index
755
Rehabilitation(Continued)
Resting energy requirement (RER), 257-258
Scar tissue
 postsurgical pain and, 245
Resting metabolic rate (RMR), 160
adhesions, 438, 468
team approach to, 19
Resveratrol, 266
remodeling of, 337
for tendinopathies, 546t 
Return to function, 234-236
US for, 336
for thoracolumbar disk disease, 614-616
Rheumatoid arthritis
Scatter, 328
training, 2
laser therapy for, 369
Sciatic neuropathy, 309f
trauma, 622
 phonophoresis and, 338
Screws, transcondylar, 549f
veterinary physical, 9
Rhythmic stabilization, 420f, 507
SDH. See Succinate dehydrogenase
weight management and, 260
Ribs
Sedation
Reimbursement, 15
ventral view of, 48f
for female catheterization, 301
Reinforcement, 34-35
vertebral attachments of, 50-51
limb circumference measurements and,
negative, 34-35
vertebrocostal, 50-51
229f
Relative density, 526
vertebrosternal, 50-51
 orthopedic examinations and, 192
Remobilization
Rigid tarsocrural area, 67
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
adaptation period before, 117-118
Risedronate, 141
(SSR1s), 247-248
bone loss and, 138
Risk management, 14
Selenium, 261
bone strength and, 139
RITC.See Radiofrequency-induced thermal
 Semimembranosus muscle myopathy/
cartilage after, 97
capsulorrhaphy
contracture, 603-605
considerations, for muscle, 117b
RMR. See Resting metabolic rate
Semitendinosus muscle myopathyf
effects of, on bone, 138-139
Robert Jones bandages, 291-292, 321-322
contracture, 603-605
effects of, on cartilage, 96-97
Robinson slings, 297, 298f
Sen sation
free, 138-139
Rolling, 515
assessments, 196
GAGs during, 97
ROM. See Range of motion 
massage and, 467-468
after immobilization, 96b 
ROS. See Reactive oxygen species
Sensitization, 34
of joint capsule, 103,103b
Rosehips, 266
Sensory receptors, 315t
land-based, 118
Rosemary, 266
Seromas, 288
length of, 116-117
Rotation, 53, 403
Serotonin, 244, 247-248
MCL tensile strength and, 127-128
axes of, 41-42
Sesamoid bones, 43
muscle response to, 1l6-118
pelvic, 53
Shear, 403
 passive ROM and, 434
sacroiliac joint, 54
Shoulder. See atso Scapulohumeral joint
response of ligarments to, 126-127
Rotator cuff tendons, 130-131
abduction, 192f, 591f
response of tendons to, 126-127
RPWT. See Radial pressure wave treatment
test, 591-592, 592f
after splinting, 117
Rubber mats, 278f
anatomy, 583f, 586f, 590f
strategies, 97
Ruffini corpuscles, 124
articular fractures of, 543
timing of, 130-131
Running
biomechanic forces on, 583f
of trabecular bone, 138
hindlimbs and, 60
conditions, 543-548
Remuneration, 15
incline, 517
extension, 436f,453,453f,733f
RER. See Resting energy requirement
with resistance, 158
fexion, 51, 436f, 454, 733f
Research, 18
girdle motion in, 53
documentation and, 20
S
joint
ESWT, 382-387
Sacral plexus, 71-72
caudal mobilization of, 453
laser therapy, 365-370, 366b
Sacroiliac joint
cranial mobilization of, 453
ROM, 433-435
extension, 53
flexing of, 191
stretching, 441-443
fexion, 53
lateral distraction of, 452
TENS, 354
luxation, 556-557, 557f
manual therapy for, 452-454
Resistance exercise
motion, 53
mechanics of, 452b
aging and, 113
rotation, 54
ligaments, 67f
bone response to, 139
Sacrum, 49f
Juxation, 547
muscle mass and, 110
SADOA. See Slow-acting drugs in
medial compartment, 590f 
Resistance training
osteoarthritis
medial instability, 546-547
muscle atrophy from glucocorticoids,
Safety devices, 37-38
OA laser therapy and, 376
121
Sagittal plane, 41
OCD of, 543-544, 544f
myofibers and, 119
Salicylic acid, 266-267
pain, 191f
protein synthesis with, 120
Satmonetta, 172
superficial muscles of, 56f
Resistances, 527
SAMe. See S-Adenosylmethionine
support system, 593f
Resorption cavities, 81-82
Sarcomeres, 154-155, 164-166, 416f, 418
valgus stress on, 191-192
Respiration, 166-168. See aiso Breathing
 Sarcoplasmic reticulum, 84
varus stress on, 19l-192
environment and, 168
Scales, 220-221
Side bending, 52, 503-504
during exercise, 166-167
Scapula, 42
Sit-to-stand exercises, 425, 425t, 511, 515
pulmonary, 166
assessment, 183, 192
modified, 518f
Respiratory alkalosis, 173-174
fractures, 543
for strength training, 518
Respiratory muscle fatigue, 167-168
mobilization, 481
 Sit-ups, 515
Respiratory system, 653-656
palpation of, 192f
 Skeletal alignment, 54
Rest goals
 Scapulohumeral joint. See atso Shoulder
Jimb, 54
with cervical spondylomyelopathy, 679
assessment, 191
spine, 54
with thoracolumbar IVDE, 719
common conditions of, 189
 Skeletal malalignment, 54
756
Index
Skeletal muscle. See Muscle
Spinal cord (Continued)
Standing (Continued)
Skeleton, 42f
injuries
assisted, 285, 286f-287f, 614f, 620f
forelimb, 43f
course of recovery for, 239f
aids, 498-500
lateral, 44f
functional scoring systems for, 236b
carts for, 499-500
medial, 45f 
scoring for, 239b
exercise rolls for, 499, 499f
forepaw, 46f
laser therapy and, 372-373
slings for, 498, 498f
hindlimb, 43f
length of, 45
on balance dome, 517f
lateral, 46f
lesions, 199
on exercise rolls, 516f
medial, 46f 
patients, 303
exercises, 285, 496-497
hindpaws, 47f
Spinal disk decompression, 212-214
active asssted, 497
thoracic vertebrae, 48f
Spinal reflexes, 196-197
assisted, 496-497, 496f
SK1 306X, 266
Spine
standby assisted, 497
Skin
alignment, 54
by neurologic patients, 609
 caliper measurements, 232
 anatomy, 44-51
on rolling carts, 515
electrical resistance of, 344
body segments, 50
slings and, 497f
healing timeline, 80b
cervical
super, 516-517
laser penetration of, 364
extension, 473, 473f
three-legged, 598f
phonophoresis and, 339
fexion, 473, 473f-474f
Staphylococcus, 285-287, 367-368. See atso
preparation, for NMES, 352f
passive movement of, 473
Methicillin-resistant Staphytococcus
responses, to cryotherapy, 317
fractures, 622f
aureus; Methicillin-resistant
sensitivity,312
joint motion in, 51-53
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius
Skin Sake, 277-279, 279f
ligaments,69
State practice acts, 11-13
Sled dogs
Jumbar dorsal to ventral, 462f
physical therapy, 12-14, 12b
boots for, 305-306
lumbar region, 462
veterinary medicine, 11-12
deaths of, 174-175
manual therapy for, 460-462
"State-by-State Assessment of Physical
Sleeping surfaces, 250
mobilization of, 460-462
Therapy and Veterinary Practice Acts.," 11
Sleeves, 306-308
OA laser therapy and, 377
Static magnet therapy, 393-395.See atso
decubital ulcers from, 307
side bending of, 182-183
 Magnet therapy
placement of, 307
thoracic central dorsal to ventral, 461-462,
Static weight shifting exercises, 218f
 Sliding filament theory, 416-417
461f
Statics, 402-403
Slings, 286f, 309-310
thoracic region, 461
Sternum, 48f, 50-51
abdorminal, 303f
Spinous processes, 47-48
Steroids
afterc are of, 298
Spins, 51, 226
anabolic, 121
application of, 296-298
 Splenic contraction, 170
effect of, on immobilized muscle, 120-121
for assisted standing, 496-498, 496f,
Splints, 289, 295
long-term use of, 132
498f
carpal laxity with, 555f
 phonophoresis and, 339
body, 486-487
as external coaptation device,289
Stife
carpal fexion, 297, 298f
muscle atrophy after, 116
articular fractures of, 565
chest, 309f
remobilization after, 117
assessment, 185-186
complications of, 298
Spica, 295
for medial patella luxation, 186f 
Ehmer, 296-297, 297f, 561
spoon, 295
braces, 307-308
90/90 fexion, 297, 564f
Sprinting, 259
common conditions of, 185
pelvic limb, 297
SSRls. See Selective serotonin reuptake
conditions, 565-571
postoperative, 309-310
inhibitors
extension, 51, 213f, 419f, 436f, 460, 460f,
reusable, 299f
 Staff member roles and integration, 662-663
734f
Robinson, 297, 298f
Stairs
extension angle,433f
standing and, 497f
ascent, 423, 423t
Hexion, 436f, 451, 459f, 734f
for treadmills, 310f
climbing, 508-509, 509f
functional scoring system for, 237t-239t
Velpeau, 296, 296f
descent,423,423t
immobilization of, 96b
walking, 501
for strength training, 519
joint
Slip leads, 38
Stance
angle, 224
Slow-acting drugs in osteoarthritis
COG during,410
kinematics of, 459b
(SAD0A), 261-262
digitigrade, 41
laxity, 226
Smoke inhalation injuries, 657
evaluation,220
manual therapy for, 458-460
Snow, 513, 520
Hexion in, 51
ligaments, 69f
Sound dampening, 37
normal, 41
multiple injuries to, 128
Sound waves, 329
 observation of, 181f
luxation,553
Soybean oil, 261
phase, 202f
OA laser therapy and, 376
Spacefight, 108, 110
plantigrade, 41
OCD of, 565-566
 Special milk protein concentrate, 263-264
time, 410
physical therapy for, 433f
Specific gravity, 526
weight distribution at, 223, 411f
sling immobilization of, 95
Specificity, of training, 164
weight-bearing at, 220-221, 221f
stabilization surgery, 114
Speed exercises, 522-523
Standards ofEtectrotherapeuticTerminotogy,
synovial pouches in, 67
Spica splints, 295
342
Strain, 407
Spinal cord
Standing
stress versus, 407-408, 407f
cutaneous trunci refex and, 196
aquatic,498-500
tensile, 407
Index
757
Straps, 309
Stretching (Continued)
Sutures (Continued)
Strategic alliances, 668
 of hamstring muscles, 441
of tendons, 127
Strength evaluation, 212
 joint capsule remobilization and, 103
tie-over dressings and, 289f
 Strength training
manual therapy compared to, 447
Swimming, 534, 540f
aging and, 120
passive, 438-439
Swing phase, 202f
aquatic exercises for, 522, 531
of iliopsoas, 602f
Sympathetic nervous system, 314-315
cavaletti rails for, 519-520
muscle atrophy and, 442
Sympatholysis, 168
core, 515-517
precautions, 441
Symptomatic slow-acting drugs
dancing in, 517-518
 prolonged mechanical, 440, 444
(SYSADOA), 261-262
duration of, 158 
proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation,
Synovial fuid
exercises, 507b, 514-522
440-441
analysis, 192
gender differences in,120
research, 441-443
cartilage immobilization and, 94-95
hand shaking for, 518-519, 519f 
static, 439-440, 443-444, 444f
changes in OA, 193t
isokinetic, 159
 of supraspinatus tendon, 586f
Synovial pouches, in stifle, 67
isometric,159
sustained, 451
Synoviocytes, 88
isotonic,159
of tendons, 131
SYSADOA. See Symptomatic slow-acting
leg weights for, 520-521
tests, for biceps, 584f
drugs
muscle adaptations to, 119-120
US and, 442-443, 442f
Systematic desensitization, 35
muscle fibers in, 165-166
Strides
muscle mass and, 119
angular data from, 412f
T
proprioception and, 485
kinematic assessment of, 224f
Tactile placing, 198
in reconditioning, 159
length, 182-183, 412
Tai]
resistance bands for, 520-521
repeated, 202
evaluations, 475, 476f
resistance running and, 158
 Stroboscopic photography, 204
wagging,31
rhythmic stabilization for, 518
Stroke volume, 168, 171f
Talus, 44
sit-to-stand exercises for, 518
Stroking, 476, 477b, 477f
Tarsals
 of spinal muscles, 165-166
Structural defnitions, 203-204
conditions, 571-574
stairs for, 519
Stubbs, Narelle, 2
extension, 731f, 734f
types of, 159
Substance P
flexion, 734f
weight pulling for, 521-522
ESWT and, 383
fractures, 571-572
wheelbarrowing in, 517-518
joint capsule immobilization and, 104
uxation of, 572
Stress
 Subsynovial vascular plexus, 88
OCD of, 572
abnormal biomechanical, 100-101
Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), 165
Tarsocrural joint, 67
adaptation of bone to, 139-141
Succussion, 265-266
Tarsus, 44
bone remodeling and, 137
Super pointing, 515-516
assessment, 184, 185f
creep, 408
Supination, 53
common conditions of, 185
deprivation
Suppliers,662,26-29
joint effusion in, 184-185
with immobilization, 126
Supraglenoid tubercle, avulsion of, 543
orthopedic examination of, 184-185
 joint motion and, 126
 Supraspinatus tendinopathy, 546, 586-587,
stability of, 67
mechanical
587f
Taylor, Robert A., 2
adaptations of cartilage to, 98-101
 Supraspinatus tendon, 586f, 589f
TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants
adaptations of ligaments to, 131 
Surface tension, 527
TCM. See Traditional Chinese medicine
adaptations of tendons to, 131
Surgery
Team approach, to rehabilitation, 19
muscle adaptations to, 118-120
ACL, 114-115
Temperature
muscle work capacity during, 155f
for cervical disk disease, 611
ambient, 173-174
nutrition and, 258
dressings following, 282f
body
protection,137-138
elective, 257
 ambient temperature and, 174
recognition, 31
incisions following, 281f
 dehydration and, 174
relaxation, 408
infection control measures, 285
regulation of, 173
shielding, 133, 137-138
 joint replacement, 575
respiratory muscle fatigue and, 167-168
blood fow and, 138
massage after, 468-469
cryotherapy and, 313f
total hip replacement and, 138
MCL, 115
differences, 313
strain versus, 407-408, 407f
nutrition and, 257
exercise and, 173-174
tissue response to, 406-407
for OA, 636f
heat loss and, 173
valgus, 191-192
 orthopedic
muscle,322-323
varus, 191-192
infections and, 287
pools, 538
workout repetition and, 157
postoperative slings for, 309-310
responses, 314-315
Stress-strain curve, for connective tissue,
pain management after, 245-246
US and, 330f-331f, 332
465f
 postoperative analgesia and, 246
water, 531
Stretching, 211, 401, 438-440
spinal fracture, 622f
Tenascin-C, 126, 131
application of, 443-444
stife stabilization, 114
Tendinitis
ballistic, 440-441, 444
timing of, 280
laser therapy for, 369
of collagen, 439
Surgical scrubs, 648t
management, 545-546
contraindications for, 441
Sutures, 283f
patellar, 569f
dynamic, 440
missing, 284f
phonophoresis and, 338
in Hexion, 405f
monitoring, 281
US for, 335-336
758
Index
Tendinopathies
Thermal modalities, 18, 211
Tissue {Continued)
management, 545-546
 Thermal shrinkage
inflammatory phase of, 337
rehabilitation for, 546t
in healing of postoperative MCL, 128-129
nonthermal US for, 336-337
Tendons. See atso specific tendons
of joint capsule, 130-131
remodeling phase of, 337
adaptation to mechanical stress of, 131
Thermoregulation, in hypothalamus, 315f
US in, 337
adhesion formation in, 129
Thermotherapy, 312. See atso Cryotherapy
respon se
avascular, 85
burns, 325
to force, 406-408
biceps, 584f
contraindications, 325-326
to stress, 406-407
blood supply to, 124
cutaneous thermoreceptors and, 322
to stretching, 438
DMSO and, 132
duration of, 325
soft,trauma, 656-657
effect of antibiotics on, 132
frequency of, 325
temperature changes, with cryotherapy.
ESWT and, 385
muscle spasms and, 323
313f
extensibility, with US therapy, 334-335
physics of, 312-314
thermal effects of US on, 334, 335f
function of, 127
precautions, 325-326
ultimate strength of, 407-408
GAGs in, 124
ROM and, 323
yield point of, 465
healing, 85-86, 130
skin sensitivity and, 312
Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases
activity level during, 130
Thigh conditions, 561-565
(TIMP), 95
bone mass and, 130
Thoracic vertebrae, 47-48
TNF-α. See Tumor necrosis factor alpha
bone morphogenic protein and, 132
skeleton,48f
Toe region
inflammatory phase of, 87
Thoracolumbar disk disease, 613-616
of load-deformation curve, 123-124
passive motion protocols and, 130
Thoracolumbar IVDE, 719t-724t
of stress versus strain graph, 407f
remodeling phase of, 87
Thorax muscles, 63f
Torsional stability, of prostheses, 308-309
reparative phase of, 87
THR. See Total hip replacement
Total hip replacement (THR), 559, 559f,
timeline, 86b
Tibia, 44
636f
ultrasound therapy and, 130
assessment,184
bone changes with, 135
immobilization of, 123-132
common conditions of, 185
Towels
effects of, 124-126, 125b
fractures, 571
for dynamic ambulation, 502
laser therapy and, 369-370, 377
osteotomies, 568-569
wrap restraints, 38, 38f
loading of, 123-124
palpation of, 185, 185f
Town permits, 665
 long digital extensor, 571
Tibial compression test, 187, 187f
Toys, for cats, 504, 504f
metabolic changes in, with training, 131
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO),
TPLO. See Tibial plateau Jeveling osteotomy
patellar, rupture of, 571
114, 287, 568, 569f
TPO. See Triple pelvic osteotomy
postoperative healing of, 127-131
for CCL rupture, 675t-677t
Traction, 226
reconditioning of, 159
edema with, 299
Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), 249
response of, to remobilization, 126-127
patellar tendinitis and, 569f
Training. See atso Exercise, specifc training
rotator cuff, 130-131
 postoperative complications, 299
modatities
stretching of, 127, 131
ROM and, 433
definition of, 154
structure,85, 123-124
Tibial tubercle, 185-186
effects of, on carilage, 98-100, 99b
superficial digitalfexor, uxation of,573
Tibial tuberosity, 226-227
frequency of, 118
suturing of, 127
avulsion of, 571
gait, 500
vascular, 85
Tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA), 568
lifelong, 100
work transfer from muscle contraction to,
for CCL rupture, 675t-677t
metabolic changes in ligaments with, 131
156
Timed get up and go (TUG) test, 220
metabolic changes in tendons with, 131
Tenorrhaphy, 130
TIMP See Tissue inhibitor of
mild to moderate, 99
Tenosynovitis, 191f
metalloproteinases
OA and, 92
TENS. See Transcutaneous electrical nerve
Tissue. See atso specific tissue types
to reduce bone loss, 135
stimulation
assessments, 212t
severe
Tensile strain, 407
burns, from Us, 333
bone mass and, 140
Tension, 403
calcification, 338
cartilage during, 99-100
Teres minor strain, 548
connective
of skeletal muscle, 164-166
Terminology common, 19-20
 biomechanics of, 464-465
specificity of, 164
Tetraparesis, 193, 500f
collagen and, 464
Tramadol, 247-248
Tetraplegia, 303
massage effects on, 468
Trampolines, 515
Texas Spinal Cord Injury Score, 239b
stress-strain curve for, 465f
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
TFMCP. See Traumatic fragmented medial
cooling of, 313
(TENS),342,353
coronoid process
electromagnetic radiation and, 313
after elbow arthroscopy, 598f
TGF-Bl. See Transforming growth
 enzyme-mediated damage to, 314
electrode placement, 355-356, 355f
factor-betal
ESWT and, 385-386
frequency of treatment, 356
 Therapeutic modalities, 18
granulation, 643f, 644
intensity, 356
exercise as, 18
heat effects on, 323
research, 354
manual, 18
injuries, 158-159
treatment time, 356
Therapy balls, 286f, 445f, 490-492, 491f
altered movement after, 158
in veterinary medicine, 354-355
dancing on, 5 10f
cryotherapy for, 314
Transforming growth factor-betal (TGF-Bl),
down-to-stands on, 515
limiting passive ROM, 431
102, 385
elbow fexion and, 550f
movement, 466
Transient receptor potential (TRP), 244
plank on, 516
necrosis, 298
Transverse axis, 41
sit-to-stands on, 515
Transverse ligaments, 55
Index
759
Transverse processes
Trunk(Continued)
Utrasound (US) (Continued)
caudal, 48-50
nerves, 72-73
precautions, 333
cervical, 45-47
palpation, 77-78
tendon extensibility with, 334-335
lumbar, 48
Trust, establishing, 36-37
tendon healing and, 130
thoracic, 47-48
TTA. See Tibial tuberosity advancement
thermal effects of, 334-335, 335f
Trauma,621-622
TTO. See Triple tibial osteotomy
tissue burns, 333
acute phase of, 316
TUG test. See Timed get up and go test 
tissue calcification and, 338
cryotherapy following, 312
Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), 111,
in tissue repar, 337
to fexor tendons, 107
384
transducer movement, 332-333
head, 657-658
Tunnels, 513-514
treatment area, 332
patients, 193
Turmeric, 263
treatment schedules, 333
rehabilitation, 622
Turning, 472, 472f
treatment variables, 329-333
soft tissue, 656-657
Twisting crunches, 515
in wound healing, 337-338, 338f
wounds, 647t
 UMN bladder. See Upper motor neuron
 Traumatic fragmented medial coronoid
U
bladder
process (TFMCP), 594-600, 596f
UAP See Ununited anconeal process
UMN disease. See Upper motor neuron
Treadmills, 500f
 Ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, 1l0-111,
disease
dry, 614f
119
University of Melbourne Pain Scale, 234
for endurance training, 519
Ulna, 42
Ununited anconeal process (UAP), 552,
following free remobilization, 139
assessment, 189-190
552f
for independent ambulation, 502-503
common conditions of, 189
Upper motor neuron (UMN) bladder, 300
resistance bands in, 520f
Upper motor neuron (UMN) disease, 194,
slings for, 3 10f
550-551
199, 199f
underwater, 218f, 522f, 532f, 536, 639f,
palpation of, 183, 190f
Urination, voluntary, 300, 533f
660f
Utrasound (US)
Urine
hand-targeting commands for, 39f 
angiogenic factor stimulation with,
aquatic therapy and, 533
for multitrauma patients, 558
337-338
epidurals and, 280
underwater compared to ground, 536t
for bursitis, 336
olfactory communication and, 32
walking, 421-422, 422t, 500-501
carpal tunnel syndrome and, 338
retention, 299
Treat-dispensing objects, 37
conditions treated with, 335-336
scald, 277, 278f
Treatment mats, 667f
coupling
US. See Ultrasound
Treatment modalities, 9
cushions, 329
Treatment philosophy, 211-212
direct, 328
A
Treats, 38-39
immersion, 328-329
Vapocoolant sprays, 316, 321
Triceps reflexes, 195
techniques, 328-329
VAS. See Visual analog scale
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), 248-249
CSA of muscle and, 230
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
Triple pe]vic osteotomy (TPO), 558, 559f 
duration of, 332
337-338, 386-387
Triple tibial osteotomy (TTO), 568
duty cycle, 332
Vasoconstriction, 170
Tropomyosin, 84, 162-163
equipment safety, 333-334
 from cryotherapy. 314
Troponin, 84, 162-163
in fracture healing, 337-338
Vasodilation
Trotting, 202, 203f, 421
frequency, 329-332
heat-induced, 322
abnormal, 205
gels, 328
mechanisms, 322
caudal view of, 471, 471f
hair and, 329
VCPR. See Veterinarian-client-patient
cranial view of, 471, 472f
intensity of, 332
relationship
with craniodorsal hip luxation, 710
for joint contracture, 336
VEGF. See Vascular endothelial growth
with distal femoral physeal fractures, 688
microthermal effects of, 336
factor
after extrac apsular repair of CCL rupture,
muscle measurements with, 227
Velpeau slings, 296, 296f
673
for muscle spasms, 336
Ventilation, 166
after FHO, 705-706
nonthermal effects of, 336-337
carbon dioxide and, 166-167
incline, 517
over hip joint, 336f
metabolism and, 166-167
kinematics, 421t
for pain reduction, 332, 336
respiratory muscle fatigue and, 167-168
lameness evaluation at, 221
patient tolerance of, 332
Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q), 654
with patellar luxation repair, 715, 717
penetration of, 329-332
Ventral rami, 72-73
post-arthroscopy elbow dysplasia, 697
of periarticular structures, 332
Ventrodorsal axis, 41
ROM during, 205f
phonophoresis and, 338-339
Vertebrae, 45. See atso Canine axis
after total hip replacement, 727-728
physical principles of, 328
C5, 48f
after TPLO/TTA of CCL rupture, 676
PSWD compared with, 398
caudal, 47-48, 49f
vertical forces during, 409f
for R0M, 335-336
Cd1, 49f
weight distribution at, 223
for scar tissue, 336-337
Cd4, 49f
TRP. See Transient receptor potential
stretching and, 442-443, 442f
Cd6, 49f
Trunk
temperature changes with,330f-331f,332
cervical, 45-47
autonomous zones, 72f, 75f
for tendinitis, 335-336
L1, 49f
fascia, 55
therapy, 328
L5, 49f
lymph node anatomy in, 65
advantages of, 329
lumbar, 48, 49f
muscles, 61-62
contraindications,333
T6, 49f
deep, 65f
disadvantages of, 329
thoracic, 47-48, 48f
superficial, 65f
for horses, 336
Vertebral colurmn, 44-45
760
Index
Vertical impulse, 223, 223f
Walking (Continued)
Wheelbarrowing, 197, 197f, 423-424, 424f,
Vertical weave poles, 492f, 514, 514f
slings, 501
509-510, 511f, 599, 614f
Vertosick, Frank, 244
in tall grass, 513, 520
in strength training, 517-518
Vet Wrap, 289-291
 after total hip replacement, 727
Whirlpools, 324-325, 532, 532f, 612f
Veterinarian-client-patient relationship
treadmill, 421-422, 500-501
WHO. See World Health Organization
(VCPR), 10
vertical forces during, 410f
Willow bark extract, 266-267
in collaborative relationships, 13-14
through vertical weave poles, 492f
Wobble board, 490, 491f, 600f, 613f
establishment of, 14
in water, 534
Wobbler's, 303
termination of, 10
weight distribution at, 223
Wolff's law, 83, 402-403
Veterinarians
Wall, Patrick, 245
World Conference of Physical Therapy, 3-4
CAVM responsibilities of, 9
Warm compresses, 283-284
World Health Organization (WHO)
collaboration with, 2, 13-14
Water
Cancer Pain Ladder, 246, 246f
education, 17-18
in cartilage, 93
Committee of the Decade of the Bone and
impressions of, 234
essential nutrition and, 257-258
Joint, 370
supervision by, 15
during exercise, 174
Wound healing, 79-80
Veterinary colleges, 13
heat of fusion of, 317
abnormal, 643-644
Veterinary European Physical Therapy and
for immersion US, 328-329
closures in, 643
Rehabilitation Association, 3-4
levels, 528f
emergency care for, 645-646
Veterinary medicine, 17-20
temperature, 531
ES for, 650
bridging gap with physical therapy, 19
walking in, 534
ESWT and, 385-386
colleges, 17
warm, 324-325
factors affecting, 644-645, 644t
continuing education, 18-19
Weight bearing
future of, 89
definition of, 8
with cervical spondylomyelopathy, 679
growth factors in, 89
education, 17-18
climbing and, 503
holistic, 650
history of, 17
with craniodorsal hip luxation
infections and, 644-645
NEMS in, 350-352
consistent, 709-710
infammatory phase of, 79, 80f, 642
state practice acts, 11-12
early, 709
laser therapy and, 365-367
TENS in, 354-355
with distal femoral physeal fractures
LLLT and, 367
traditional models of practice, 19
consistent, 686
maturation phase of, 643-645
Veterinary technicians, 17-18
early, 686
open, 374
Vibration, 654, 656f
exercise rolls and, 615f
PEMFs and, 396
Viscosity, 527
 after extracapsular repair of CCL rupture
phases of, 643f
Visual analog scale (VAS), 221-222, 369
early, 670
physiology, 642-650
Visual restriction, 36
with trotting, 673
postsurgical, 374-375
Visual sequestration, 36
with walking, 670
remodeling phase of, 80, 643-645
Vitamin C, 261
for FCEM, 699
reparative phase of, 79-80, 80f, 83
Vitamin D deficiency, 123
after FHO
therapies, 648-650
Vitamin E, 261
consistent, 705
timeline, 86b
VO max. See Maximal oxygen uptake
early, 705
US in, 337-338, 338f
Vocalizations, 31-32, 234
with trotting, 705
Wounds
Voluntary movement assessments, 193
methods to encourage, 501f, 503-504
assessment, 645-646
V/Q. See Ventilation/perfusion
 for patellar luxation repair
classification, 647t
consistent, 715, 717
cleaning of, 646
W
early, 713
debridement, 79
Waiting areas, 665f
platforms, 616f
dressings, 647-648, 649t
Walking. See atso Hemiwalking
post-arthroscopy elbow dysplasia
exploration, 646f
biomechanics of, 420
early, 693
management, 18
caudal view of, 470-471, 47 1f 
with trotting, 697
bandages and, 295f
cavaletti rail, 424-425, 425t, 493f
with walking, 693, 695
of infections, 289f
with cervical spondylomyelopathy, 682
prevention, in immobilization,133
principles, 647
cranial view of, 471, 471f
static, 411
techniques, 647b
decline ramp, 422-423
 after total hip replacement, 727-728
puncture,646f
with distal femoral physeal fractures,
after TPLO/TTA of CCL rupture
traumatic, 647t
688
consistent, 675
Wringing, 478b
 after extrac apsular repair of CCL rupture,
early, 675
673
with trotting, 676
figure-eight, 514
Weight management, 212-214
 Xiphoid process, 50-51
functional,492f
gait and, 260
incline, 507-508, 508f, 517
obesity and, 260
Y
incline ramp, 422
rehabilitation and, 260
Yeld point, of load-deformation curve,
 joint motion during, 425t 
Weight pulling, 521-522
123-124
kinematics, 42 1t
Weight shifting, 487-490, 487f-489f
Yin, Sophia, 38
Jameness evaluation at, 221
dynamic, 490f
leash, 502, 508f
loaded, 488, 488f
Z
post-arthroscopy elbow dysplasia, 693,
rebound, 488, 489f
Zeel, 264
695
Weighted vests, 517f
Zoning, 665-666
Comparative Myology
of the Dog
WEB APPENDIX
e2
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
Lateral thoracic 
Accessory nerve
Accessory nerve
Ventral rami of
 cervical spinal
Innervation
Cranial XI
Cranial XT
 nerve
nerves
Fiber Direction
from Proximal
(listed in order
of importance)
Attachment
 Caudoventral
 Cranioventral
 Craniodorsal
Craniodorsa
Craniodors
S
Middle part of the spine
 Cranial dorsal border of
scapula, medially and 
 Caudal (base of scapula,
 medially and laterally)
Main Caudal, Ventral,
 or Distal Attachment
spine of the scapula
 Dorsal aspect of the
Caudal (base) of the
 Medial side of the 
 of the scapula
the scapula
 forelimb
laterally
I thoracic parts is in the position of the middle trapezius.
dorsal, lateral, and
 Nuchal crest of the
 Spinous process of
ventral walls of
In the superficial
 dorsal raphe of
 dorsal spinous
 occipital bone
fascia of the
T3-T8 or T9
raphe of neck,
Main Cranial,
 Median or mid-
the neck and
supraspinous
snoundse.indns
ligament and
 Median fibrous
Attachment
thorax and
Dorsal, or
abdomen
of T1-T3
Proximal
T4-T7
None: Twitch the skin
dorsally; abduct the
 abduct the forelimb
Joint Action in the
 over the scapular
and shoulder area
Elevate the scapula
levate the scapula
[nd qu pue
Elevate the scapula
 and forelimb; pull
Elevate the scapula
and forelimb; pull
 Joint action in the
 cranially and
Forelimb
forelimb
forelimb
trunk
trunk
trunk
The fibrous band in between the cervical and 
B
Human Muscle
Lower trapezius
Rhomboid minor
Rhomboid major
however, like
 szaden radns
correlate;
 Correlated
the neck
ON
Trunk to Forelimb
Cutaneous trunci
 Rhomboideus
capitis: two
Rhomboideus
Rhomboideus
FORELIMB
cervicis
thoracis
ads
Cervical
Thoracic
Muscle
parts
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
e3
nerves and long
 cervical spinal
Ventral rami of
thoracic nerve
Accessory nerve
Ventral rami of
 cervical spinal
Cranial pectoral
Cranial pectoral
Caudal pectoral
nerves
nerves
nerves
nerves
cranioventral
Craniodorsal
Dorsocranial
 Distomedial
 Distolateral
 Distolateral
 Craniodisto-
lateral
and
 Transverse processes  Medial scapula, dorsal
third of the humerus,
 the brachialis laterally
 Cranial half middorsal
jued [esip isout inq Ii
jed [esp isou jnq Ii 
tubercle of humerus
tubercle of humerus,
 Caudal portion—medial
Cranial surface, distal
between the biceps
 tubercle of humerus
Major portion-lesser
greater tubercle and
 crest of humerus
nuchal crest of
occipital bone
 brachial fascia
one third
Ventral aspect of the
 Dorsal aspect of the
aspect (ventral to
 cranial half dorsal
to the descending
Ventral aspect of the
pectoral muscle)
stemum, dorsal to
ventral ribs 1-7
pectoral muscle
the transverse
pectoral muscle
pue LO-O J0
Ventral stermum,
Ventral stermum,
most cranial
 clavicle
clavicle
cranially
8.10
Draw the head to the
extend the shoulder;
draw trunk sideward
Extend the shoulder;
 Adduct the shoulder,
As above, plus flex or
Carry the trunk and
 shoulder forward
and back, support
 side; extend the
weight-bearing;
extend shoulder,
cranially during
support the trunk
 Flex the shoulder;
 move the trunk
weight-bearing;
advance the
 depending on
the scapula
forelimb
position
ventralis
neck
 Serratus anterior
 Part of pectoralis
 Part of pectoralis
 Part of pectoralis
p Aq pap
 Anterior deltoid
Two parts are
 intersection
clavicular
fibrous
major
major
major
 Brachiocephalicus:
 Serratus ventralis
 Cleidobrachialis
Cleidocephalicus-
neck muscle
 pectoral: two
Descending
 Deep pectoral
two parts
pectoral
portion
Transverse
pectoral
 Superficial
parts-
e4
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
 Subscapular nerve
Thoracodorsal
 Axillary nerve
Axillary nerve
Axillary nerve
Suprascapular
Innervation
nerve
nerve
 nerve
Fiber Direction
from Proximal
(listed in order
of importance)
 cranial aspect
 then medially
 Distally on the
Attachment
Craniolatero-
 Distolateral
Laterodistal
Laterodistal
Laterodistal
shoulder,
Craniodistal
to Distal
distal
of the
joins tip of the muscle
 greater tubercle of the
 Main Caudal, Ventral,
 or Distal Attachment
Teres major tuberosity
 on the humerus and
attach to the deltoid
teres major tendon;
Infraglenoid tuberosity
shoulder joint and
Greater tubercle of the
The two parts of the
humerus by a thick
 Lesser tubercle of the
cutaneous trunci
 Lateral side of the 
 of the humerus
tuberosity
humerus
humerus
laterally
tendon
blending with the
 Infraglenoid tubercle
spinous processes 
lumbar vertebrae;
most caudal two
wider and larger
 Subscapular fossa
seven or eight
Thoracolumbar
thoracic and
Scapular spine,
infraspinatus
Main Cranial,
or three ribs
 infraspinatus
fascia from
Attachment
Dorsal, or
 Proximal
Acromion
cranially in weight 
bearing; adduct the
 extension depending
on position; shoulder
abduction and lateral
Joint Action in the
shoulder'; support
Shoulder flexion and
Extend the shoulder;
Adduct, extends, and
 Shoulder abduction
rotation; stabilize
shoulder medially
Flex the shoulder;
draw the trunk
 Shoulder flexion
lateral shoulder
lateral rotation
 stabilizes and
the shoulder
stabilizes the
the trunk
Forelimb
Human Muscle
 Latissimus dorsi
 Posterior deltoid
 Middle deltoid
 Infraspinatus
Supraspinatus
Subscapularis
Correlated
Teres minor
SHOULDER: WITHIN FORELIMB
 Deltoid
Latissimus dorsi
Deltoideus: two
 Acromial head
 Spinous head
 Infraspinatus
Supraspinatus
 Subscapularis
Teres minor
Muscle
parts
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
e5
Musculocutaneous
Musculocutaneous
Musculocutaneous
Axillary nerve
 Radial nerve
 Radial nerve
nerve
 nerve
 nerve
Cranial and
then distal
Distolateral
 Distomedial
 Distolateral
Caudodistal
Caudodistal
Caudodistal
Caudodistal
Caudal
Jo Aisqm noeu s
 proximal cranial ulnar
 proximal cranial ulnar
Lateral surface, proximal
tubercle of humerus,
radius (weaker part)
 Olecranon tuber, lateral
Radial tuberosity on
 between lateral and
proximal cranial
Proximal third of the  Ulnar tuberosity on
Crest of the lesser 
proximal to teres
major tuberosity
 Ulnar tuberosity on
 Olecranon tuber or
the humerus
to long head
 medial heads
 end of ulna
tuberosity
Olecranon
 Coracoid process of
Caudal border of the 
Tricipital line of the
Neck of the humerus
 tubercle near teres
 Lateral supracondylar
humerus—covers
major tuberosity
 crest; lateral and
epicondyles of the
Caudal angle and
tubercle of the
lateral humerus 
 border of the
subscapularis
the accessory
part of medial
scapula and
 the scapula
 Supraglenoid
Crest of lesser
(brachialis
scapula
groove)
humerus
caudal
scapula
head
Shoulder flexion and
 and elbow flexion;
stability in weight
antebrachial fascia
antebrachial fascia
 medial rotation
 Shoulder adduction
Shoulder extension
shoulder flexion
shoulder flexion
 and extension
Elbow extension;
 helps tense the
Ibow extension,
Elbow extension
Elbow extension
Elbow extension;
 helps tense the
some passive
Elbow extension
Elbow flexion
 Coracobrachialis
Triceps brachi--
 Biceps brachi
 three heads 
 Teres major
Lateral head
 Medial head
 Brachialis
Long head
Anconeus
None
 Biceps brachi-
Triceps brachi—
Accessory head
Coracobrachialis
Lateral head
 Medial head
Teres major
one head
 four heads
Long head
Brachialis
Anconeus
e6
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
Radial nerve
 Radial nerve
Radial nerve
 Median nerve
Innervation
Radial nerve
 Radial nerve
 Radial nerve
Radial nerve
Fiber Direction
from Proximal
(listed in order
of importance)
Attachment
Distolateral
 Medial then
 Distomedial
 Distomedial
 Distolateral
Distomedial
 Distolateral
to Distal
distal
 dorsal bases of MCs II
the distal phalanges of
 accessory carpal bone
Cranial surface, proximal
radius between middle
Main Caudal, Ventral,
 or Distal Attachment
medial fascia of the
 Extensor processes of
distal phalanges of
Lateral aspect, MC V;
 fourth of the radius
and proximal thirds
Small tuberosities on
 Medial border of the
 Olecranon and the
 Distal fourth of the
Proximal ends, all 
 phalanges III-V;
A-II sg
forearm
IⅢI pue
A-III
Fascia covering the
humerus; thin and
 inconstant muscle
latissimus dorsi;
 Lateral epicondyle
Lateral epicondyle
Lateral epicondyle
Lateral epicondyle
 Medial epicondyle
supracondylar
supracondylar
 of the humerus
 of the humerus
 of the humerus
 of the humerus
 of the humerus
Main Cranial,
Attachment
crest of the
Dorsal, or
very thin
 Proximal
Lateral
Lateral
crest
 Elbow extension; chief
Carpal ulnar deviation 
antebrachial fascia
 or abduction; weak
Joint Action in the
Extension of digits
Extension of digits 
tensor of the
dorsolaterally
elbow flexion
carpal flexion
 Pronation, elbow
III-V; carpal
the radius
extension
extension
Forelimb
flexion
flexion
Human Muscle
radialis longus
Brachioradialis
Extensor carpi
Extensor carpi
 Pronator teres
and brevis
Correlated
 digitorum
communis
Extensor
ulnaris
Supinator
None
None
Common digital
Ulnaris lateralis
Extensor carpi
Lateral digital
Pronator teres
antebrachii
 radialis
extensor
extensor
Supinator
Muscle
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
e7
Median nerve to
medial parts of
humeral head
ulnar head and
 radial head,
 Ulnar nerve to
lateral part of
humeral head
 Median nerve
Median nerve
 Median nerve
 Ulnar nerve
pue daa
 Distomedial
 radius except proximal
 proximal metacarpals
middle phalanges of
 palmar surface of the
 Accessory carpal bone
 Accessory carpal bone
the distal phalanx of
 Caudal surface of the
 For all three heads:
tendon to digit I
 Palmar aspect of
 and distal ends
I and II
A-II
 Proximally the ulnar
cranial and distally
and medial border 
 medial surface of
radial, deep, and
fourths of caudal
border of the ulna
Middle third, medial
the humeral head
Caudal border and 
Medial epicondyle
Medial epicondyle
Medial epicondyle
Medial epicondyle
of the humerus-
Medial surface of
the interosseous
 of the humerus
 of the humerus
 of the humerus
head is more
 the olecranon
medial bellies 
 Proximal three
border of the
membrane
of radius
radius
MCP of II-V; carpal
Carpal flexion, carpal
 Flexion of digits;
 carpal flexion
 Carpal flexion
flexion
Pronation
 Pronator quadratus
 Flexor digitorum
Flexor digitorum
superficialis
 Flexor carpi
Flexor carpi
profundus
ulnaris
radialis
None
None
Deep digital fexor:
Superficial digital
 Pronator quadratus
Humeral head
Humeral head
ulnaris: two
 Unar head
three parts
 Unar head
 Radial head
 Flex or carpi
 Flexor carpi
radialis
parts
e8
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
 Femoral nerve
 Obturator nerve
Innervation
 Sciatic nerve
 Sciatic nerve
Sciatic nerve
 Sciatic nerve
Fiber Direction
from Proximal
(listed in order
 of importance)
Attachment
 Distocranio-
 Distocranio-
 Distocranio-
Distocranio-
 Distocaudal
to Distal
lateral
 medial
 medial
 Patella; patellar ligament
body via crural fascia;
-distal to
 Main Caudal, Ventral,
and cranial border of
caudal rough surface
proximal part, medial
caudal rough surface
 of the femur, proximal
 or Distal Attachment
crural fascia; tibial
Via crural fascia to the
 Medial tibial body and
Medial lip, distal shaft,
Medial lip, distal shaft,
semimembranosus
calcaneal tuberosity
calcaneal tuberosity
Cranial border, medial
tibia, with gracilis
pectineus muscle;
 Patella, with rectus 
digital extensor
medial aspect,
  
tibial condyle
femoris
8
eminence to pubic 
 Ischiatic tuberosity
 Ischiatic tuberosity
thoracolumbar
Main Cranial,
ligament and
 Sacrotuberous
Body of pubis,
Attachment
tuberosity
 Cranial VIS,
Dorsal, or
ischiatic
ischiatic
tuberosity
 Proximal
 iliopubic
Iliac crest,
tubercle
fascia
ilium
 Cranial—hip and stifle
Caudal—stifle flexion,
(hindlimb) abduction
(hindlimb) abduction
Stifle fexion and hip
fexion or extension,
with caudal biceps
Femoral belly—stifle
depending on stifle
Joint Action in the
extension; stifle
Tibial belly—stifle
extension, hip
femoris muscle
Hip flexion, stifle
Hip flexion, stifle
Hip or hindlimb
tarsocrural
extension
 adduction
extension
Forelimb
position
flexion
Semimembranosus
Human Muscle
 Biceps femoris
 Semitendinosus
Correlated
Sartorius
 Pectineus
 None
MEDIAL THIGH MUSCLES 
Caudal Thigh Muscles
Semimembranosus:
 and widest thigh
abductor muscle
muscle in the
two or three
Semitendinosus
Caudal crural
 two bellies
 Cranial part
 Caudal part
HINDLIMB
hindlimb
Pectineus
Muscle
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
e9
pan
femoral nerves
 Obturator nerve
 Cranial gluteal
 Caudal gluteal
Cranial gluteal
 Cranial gluteal
Ventral rami of
Caudal gluteal
 lumbar and 
 nerve
 nerve
nerve
nerve
 nerve
Distocranio-
Caudolatero-
 Distocaudal
Caudolatero-
Caudolatero-
Caudodistal
lateral
distal
distal
distal
Via fascia lata, connects 
synovial bursa deep to
to biceps femoris and
Third trochanter, fusing
 middle gluteal muscle
 Entire lateral lip of the
Greater trochanter with
quadriceps femoris
tensor fasciae latae-
muscle to patella
attac hment in one 
Greater trochanter,
Greater or major
 cranial aspect
of the femur
third of dogs
 trochanter
Lateral surface of S3
pue siqnd penua
sacrum, caudal 1
ligament, cranial
Crest and gluteal or
tendon, adjacent
lateral surface of
Entire symphysis
ischiatic arch,
(=tuber coxae)
aponeurosis of
middle gluteal
 Lateral border of
or 1st vertebra
sacrotuberous
DIS via deep
 ischiatic spine
 Cranial VIS and
adjacent ilium
gluteal fascia
symphysial
 Body of ilium,
 pelvis via
of the tail,
the ilium
ischium
muscle
and C1 
 Tense the fascia lata,
Hip extension, hip or
hindlimb abduction
hip flexion, stifle
 abduction, intemal
 abduction, intemal
 Hip or hindlimb
 adduction, hip
Hip extension,
Hip extension
extension
extension
rotation
Hip flexion 
rotation
 magnus, brevis,
Tensor fascia lata/
 Gluteus maximus
Gluteus minimus
tensor fasciae
 Gluteus medius
and longus
Adductors
 Pirifonmis
Iliopsoas
latae
LATERAL THIGH MUSCLES
CRANIAL THIGH MUSCLES
 Superficial gluteal
distinguishable
Pirifonmis—may
actually be part
 of the middie
 gluteal or deep
gluteal muscle
Adductor: two
 parts, which
Aeu 0 Aeu
Tensor fasciae
Middle gluteal
Deep gluteal
not be
latae
e10
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
Femoral nerve
Femoral nerve
Femoral nerve
 Femoral nerve 
Femoral nerve
Innervation
Fiber Direction
from Proximal
(listed in order
of importance)
Attachment
Caudoventro-
Caudoventro-
 Distocranio-
 Distocranio-
lateral to
to Distal
lateral
lateral
lateral
 medial
 medial
tendon
uopuai on dp (ensn
 Main Caudal, Ventral,
 or Distal Attachment
 Lesser trochanter with
 Lesser trochanter with
usually deep femur;
proximal attachment
the psoas major 
Tibial tuberosity
Tibial tuberosity
Tibial tuberosity
 the iliacus
 attac hment
Transverse processes
 and bodies of the
Lateral ilium, cranial
lumbar vertebrae
to the acetabulum
occasionally deep
 proximal end of
medial lip, caudal
lateral lip of the
Lateral side of the
 proximal femur,
rough surface of
Cranial surface of
surface of the
caudal rough
surface of the
with the vastus
to the trochlea
Main Cranial,
Smooth ventral
Attachment
Medial side,
the femur
Dorsal, or
Proximal
bursa
to this
lateralis
ilium
femur
 Stifle extension; tenses
the proximal pouch
Joint Action in the
Hip fexion, vertebral
tilting of the pelvis
 Stifle extension, hip 
of the stife joint
colummn flexion,
See actions below
lumbar spine
Stifle extension
Stifle extension
 Stifle extension
Forelimb
Hip flexion
flexion
capsule
Vastus intenmedius
Human Muscle
Vastus medialis
Articularis genu
 Rectus femoris
Vastus lateralis
Correlated
Psoas major
Quadriceps
 femoris
Iliacus
CRANIAL THIGH MUSCLES
Quadriceps femoris
Vastus intenmedius
Vastus medialis
Articularis genu
Rectus femoris
Vastus lateralis
Psoas major 
Muscle
liacus
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
e11
Continued
 peroneal nerve
 Common peroneal
peroneal nerve
 peroneal nerve
 Deep peroneal
Peroneal nerve
 Deep peroneal
 nerve, deep
Superficial
Superficial
nerve
 nerve
medial on the 
 Distal on the
 Distomedial
 Distomedial
 Distomedial
leg then 
plantar
 Distal and
slightly
medial
II-V coursing deep to
 Fascia and tendon of the 
the MTs after coursing
 Extensor process on the
aspect of the base of
after coursing deep to
 Plantar surface of base
of MT I and II after
coursing deep to the
quartal bone, plantar 
deep to the abductor
 Proximal end of MT V
ligament of the ankle
coursing deep to the
Extensor processes on
phalanges of digits
the crural and tarsal
aponeurosis of the
phalanx of digits V
extensor retinacula
 in a common sheath
of digit I or hallux
dorsum of middle
digitorum lateralis
the lateral collateral
the dorsum, distal
of MTP joint II;
Fourth tarsal bone/
with the extensor
crural and tarsal
crural extensor
digiti V muscle
retinaculum
Cranial border of the
 Proximal third of the
membrane cranial
condyle, proximal
collateral ligament
of the stifle, which
the lateral femoral
thirds of the fibula
 Extensor groove and
 adjacent articular
lateral edge of the
cranial border of
Extensor fossa on
the femur lateral
the interosseous
then attac hes to
Lateral surface of
margin of tibia, 
to the trochlea
fibula between
middle third of
pue [euxo.d
fibula, lateral
the distal two
epicondyle
Lateral tibial
the tibia
and tibia
brevis
fibula
DIP and PIP extension
 Digit V extension and
rotates the hindpaw
surface of the paw
rotates the hindpaw
surface of the paw
Talocrural fexion;
 Digit II extension,
 digit I extension
Talocrural flexion,
so the plantar
faces medially
II-V, talocrural
so the plantar
 Talocrural flexion
faces laterally
abduction
flexion
CRANIOLATERAL MUSCLES OF THE LEG OR CRUS 
 tibialis anterior
 Extensor hallucis
 longus and part
Anterior tibialis/
 Peroneus tertius
Peroneus longus
 Peroneus brevis
 digitorum
Extensor
longus
longus
 Extensor digiti I
 Peroneus longus
 Peroneus brevis
 Lateral digital
Long digital
 extensor
 snBuo[
e12
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
Innervation
Tibial nerve
Tibial nerve
Tibial nerve
Tibial nerve
of importance)
 Distomedial the
Fiber Direction
from Proximal
(listed in order
 base of distal
Attachment
 Distomedial
surface of tibia, with a
the tibia before joining
 Main Caudal, Ventral,
Calcaneal tuberosity and
 or Distal Attachment
 portion of the tendon
 phalanges digits II-V
distal tarsals and then
muscle, the tendon is
bound in a groove at
the sustentaculum tali
calcaneal tendon to
attach to the plantar
surface of phalanges
 medial digital flexor
caudomedial side of
 Proximal third caudal
 Dorsal surface of the
calcaneal tuberosity
provide the largest 
 Two heads join at the
by the common 
bases of middle 
 Before joining the
Tendon lies on the
the lateral digital
sesamoid at the
muscle-tendon
flexor muscle
junction
A-1
bone or fabella that
fbula, and adjacent
Caudomedial border
popliteal line head
 Lateral condyle of 
tuberosities of the
articulates with a
tuberosity of the
separately below
femoral condyle
Caudolateral border
two thirds of tibia.
proximal half of
 Medial and lateral
has a sesamoid
supracondylar
Main Cranial,
supracondylar
See each part
imterosseous
 of the tibia,
of the fibula
Attachment
the femur
membrane
Dorsal, or
 Proximal
fermur
Lateral
 Stifle intermal rotation/
 leg intermal rotation
MTP and PIP joints of
 Talocrural extension;
II-V; stifle flexion,
talocrural extension
talocrural extension
Joint Action in the
 stifle flexion
by both parts
 Digit flexion;
Human Muscle
 Flexor digitorum
 Flexor digitorum
 Flexor digitorum
Gastrocnemius-
 Flexor hallucis
two heads
 Correlated
CAUDAL MUSCLES OF THE LEG
Popliteus
brevis
longus
Jongus
longus
Superficial digital
 Deep digital flexor
hallucis longus)
Gastrocnemius:
Lateral digital
Medial digital
 two heads
digitorum
Popliteus
(snguo[
x
Muscle
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
e13
 cervical nerves
thoracic spinal
Ventral rami of
Ventral rami of
 cervical spinal
 Dorsal rami of 
 cervical and
Tibial nerve
nerves
nerves
 Cranioventral
Craniomedio-
 Distomedial
[so
Cranial
transverse processes of
 masses of the tarsus
times to the wing of
basioccipital bone of
after coursing as a
digital flexor at the 
temporal bone with
Ventral surface of the
 Medial ligamentous
cranial to medial
of occiput, at
transverse process
two deep parts to
the longissimus
talocrural joint
pue s pue t
 Superficial part to
LO pue 90
the atlas
the skull
T1-T2,ligamentum
nuchae cranial to
 Caudal surfaces of
cervical vertebrae
 Medial proximal
raphe of cervical
As three portions
 from the cranial
aponeurosis of
thoracolumbar 
border of rib 1
cranial part of
the transverse
processes of
spine, by
ribs 1-9
fibula
T5-T6
 Ipsilateral side bend of
medially; talocrural
Extension, ipsilateral
ipsilateral rotation
of the neck, raising
stabilization of T1
 the neck, pulls the
 AO flexion, pulls the 
 plantar paw faces
hindpaw so the
side bend, and
Rotation of the
neck down,
inspiration
 neck down
extension
DEEP DORSAL MUSCLES OF THE NECK 
DEEP VENTRAL MUSCLES OF THE NECK 
 Posterior tibialis/
 Longus capitis
 Splenius
Scalenes
 Scalenus: two parts
part (three parts)
superficial part
(two or three
Longus capitis
 Caudal tibial
 Supracostal
scalenus-
Splenius
parts)
e14
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
 cervical spinal
Intercostal nerves
Intercostal nerves
costoabdominal,
 Intercostal nerves
costoabdominal,
iliohypogastric
and ilioinguinal
Ventral rami of
nerves, medial 
nerves, lateral
ilioinguinal
Innervation
3 or 4-12,
Intercostal,
branches
branches
nerves
Fiber Direction
from Proximal
(listed in order
 of importance)
 Craniomedial
Craniomedial
 Caudoventral
Attachment
Caudoventral
Cranioventral
to Distal
Cranial
Caudal
 Linea alba, cranial pubic
Main Caudal, Ventral,
 or Distal Attachment
wing of C6 and the
 next cranial vertebra
Ventral border of the
Ventral aspect of the
Ventral aspect of the
Cranial border of the
f the
next caudal rib
 next cranial rib
 Pecten oss pubis,
 between the two
 Caudal border of
iliopectineal
eminences
ligament
atlas
surfaces of T1-T6
0-9 J0 s9sd
Ventral surface of the
angle of cranial ribs
Caudal border of a
Extending from the
 the distal ends
-Cranial
vertebral column
 Stemum, rib 1, and
Ventral borders of
cartilage, and a
border of a rib 
costal cartilage
 stemal
thorocolumbar
Main Cranial,
Ventral convex
Attachment
vertebrae
 transverse
1st costal
Dorsal, or
Proximal
on the :
Last ribs,
fascia
rib
 pelvis forward
(i.e., posterior pelvic
expiration, urination,
 of abdominal viscera
Joint Action in the
lexion of the spine,
 Flexion of the spine,
bend, functions of
Draw ribs together,
abdominal press,
spine, support of
abdominal viscera
rotation of the
contralateral
neck down
MUSCLES OF THE ABDOMINAL WALL AND DIAPHRAGM
breathing
defecation,
breathing
functions-
Forelimb
LATERAL AND VENTRAL THORACIC WALL MUSCLES
Rectus abdominis
Human Muscle
 Extermal abdominal  Extermal oblique
Longus colli
intercostals
 intercostals
Correlated
abdominis
Extermal
Intemal
 Rectus abdominis
abdominis: two
Longus colli
 intercostals
intercostals
 oblique
Muscle
Intermal
parts
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
e15
 nerve and medial
costoabdominal,
iliohypogastric,
Caudal intercostal
 nerve and medial
Caudal intercostal
branches of the
 branches of the
costoabdomina
ventral rami of
lumbar nerves
lumbar nerves
 Phrenic nerve,
 Dorsal rami of
 thoracic and
 Dorsal rami of
nerves
nerve
C5-C7
 Cranioventral
Craniomedial
Cranioventral
Craniolateral
Ventral
Cranial
Costal angles of the ribs,
 ssaod ssean
 Rectus abdominis and
 Lumbar vertebrae and
 Central tendon
linea alba
last 5 ribs
 Linea alba
C7
 lumbar vertebrae,
ribs, and stermum
 vertebral ends of 
Pelvic surface of the
wing of the ilium,
the iliac crest, and
 Costal cartilage of
Ventral surfaces of
Cranial borders of 
the intermuscular
fascia caudal to
 rib 8, transverse
 and tuber coxae
septum between 
rib 12 with the
process of L7,
and longissimus
the iliocostalis 
Thoracolumbar
pars lumbalis 
ribs 2-12
LONGISSIMUS SYSTEM: THREE PARTS—EXTENT IS FROM THE ILIAC CREST TO C7
muscles
Inspiration, support of
expiration by pulling
 Extension of the spine,
 abdominal viscera
 stabilizes the spine,
portion of the body
stabilizes the spine,
 Flexion of the spine,
bend, functions of
abdominal press,
abdominal viscera
abdominal viscera
 Ipsilateral side bend;
from the pelvis;
Abdominal press,
raises the caudal
ipsilateral side
Jo joddns
 Jo jodns
hindlimbs
DEEP DORSAL MUSCLES OF THE NECK AND TRUNK
 Intermal oblique
abdominis
Transversus
 abdominis
 Diaphragm
Jumborum
Iliocostalis
 Iliocostalis
 thoracis
 Iliocostalis
Iiocostalis system:
Intemal abdominal
abdominis three
lumborum: two
parts-—strongest
muscle of the
lumbar region
trunk in the
thoracic and
Trans versus
abdominis
Iiocostalis
Iliocostalis
Longissimus
thoracis et
oblique:
Diaphragm
two parts
thoracis
lumborum
parts
e16
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
thoracic nerves
 cervical nerves
 Dorsal rami of
 cervical and
 Dorsal rami of
Innervation
 Dorsal rami
Fiber Direction
from Proximal
(listed in order
 of importance)
Attachment
to Distal
s of
Main Caudal, Ventral,
costal tubercle of ribs
8
 Transverse processes of
 termporal bone, united
 or Distal Attachment
Medial tendons to the
 Lateral tendons to the
 Cranially, both attach t
the costal tubercles 
 processes of lumbar
 Mastoid process of the
T6-T13 and caudal
 ends of transverse
 Dorsal aspects and
vertebrae, disk of
 lumbosacral joint
level of the atlas
 cranial articular
 cranial cervical
ribs 1-5
vertebrae
6-13
thoracic vertebrae
ventral surface of
and supraspinous
 cervical vertebrae
 Transverse processes
lumbar vertebrae
 of T1-T3, caudal
 Spinous processes
 Spinous processes
cranial thoracic 
Main Cranial,
ligament of
Iliac crest and
supraspinous
ligament of
Attachment
and caudal
the ilium,
Dorsal, or
Extension of the neck,
 ipsilateral side bend
ipsilateral side bend
Joint Action in the
and rotation
AO extension,
and rotation
Forelimb
Human Muscle
Correlated
Longissimus
Longissimus
lumborum
Longissimus
Longissimmus
Transversus
thoracis
 cervicis
capitis
spinalis
Longissimus
 Longissimus
Jumborum
 Longissimus
Longissimus
thoracis
cervicis
capitis
Muscle
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
e17
 thoracic nerves
cervical nerves
 cervical nerves
thoracic nerves
 thoracic nerves
lumbar nerves
 cervical nerves
Dorsal rami of
Dorsal rami of 
 Dorsal rami of 
 Dorsal rami of
thoracic, and
Dorsal rami of
 Dorsal rami of
 Dorsal rami of
 lumbar and
cervical,
 Craniomedial
 Craniomedial
spinous processes of
 Spinous process of axis
 thoracic vertebrae
Cervicis portion-
 Dorsal aspect of the
thoracis muscle,
and accessory
processes of
cranial lumbar
vertebrae and
T13-L2,iliac
Mammillary and
longissimus
C7-T6 and
mammillary
processes of
crest, spinous
processes of
Dorsal sacrum,
mammillary
transverse
T3-T11
T13-S2
 Neck extension, raises
 Stabilize the vertebral
 bend, stabilize the
ipsilateral side
Neck extension,
the spine
column
 neck
 Multifidus thoracis
 Multifidus cervicis
 Spinalis cervicis
semispinalis
 Spinalis and
 Semispinalis
lumborum
thoracis
 Multifidus
Multifidus
capitis
lateral
Spinalis cervicis-
 Multifidus thoracis
 Multifidus cervicis
Multifidus: three
semispinalis
cervicis: two
thoracis et
 semispinalis
Semispinalis
capitis: two
thoracis—
 Spinalis et
lumborum
Spinalis et
Multifidus
 medial
parts
parts
parts
e18
Web Appendix 1
Comparative Myology of the Dog
Dorsal rami of 
 caudal nerves
Dorsal rami of 
caudal nerves
Ventral rami of 
 caudal nerves
Ventral rami of
 caudal nerves
Innervation
Fiber Direction
from Proximal
(listed in order
 of importance)
Attachment
 Caudomedial
 Caudolateral
 Caudomedial
 Caudomedial
to Distal
 Mammillary processes of
 Main Caudal, Ventral,
 Dorsolateral aspects of
Ventrolateral tubercle of
 more caudal vertebrae
 or Distal Attachment
 next caudal vertebrae
longissimus muscle
 Continuation of the
 caudal vertebrae
Cd vertebrae
articular processes
Aponeurosis of the
aspects of cranial
Ventral surface of
sacrum, ventral
PO J ssod
and Cd1-Cd8
of the sacrum
Ventral surface of
Main Cranial,
mammillary
L7 and the 
surfaces of
transverse
S3 and Cd
Dorsal, or
Attachment
vertebrae
vertebrae
vertebrae
 Proximal
 Spine and
Tail fexion, ipsilateral
Tail flexion, ipsilateral
Joint Action in the
Tail extension or
Tail extension or
side bend 
side bend
side bend
 side bend
Forelimb
Human Muscle
Correlated
None
None
None
None
MUSCLES OF THE TAIL
 dorsalis lateralis
dorsalis medialis
 ventralis lateralis
Sacrocaudalis
Sacrocaudalis
 Sacrocaudalis
Sacrocaudalis
ventralis
medialis
Muscle
Main Ligament Attachments
and Function
WEB APPENDIX
e2
Web Appendix 2
 Main Ligament Attachments and Function
: proximal tendon
 Stabilizes radius and ulna
in radioulnar pronation
humeral head,
 Stabilizes humeral head,
 Motion Restricted by
 Stabilizes radial head
superficial and deep
Ligament/Function
 preventing medial
preventing lateral
Limits elbow valgus
Limits elbow varus
Stabilize the distal
Two layers stabilize
 radioulnar joint
tendons of the 
Valgus deviation
Valgus deviation
Varus deviation
dislocation
brachii,
Stabilizes 
position
Fiber Direction
horizontal
Between ulna
Distolateral
 and radius
Transverse
Transverse
Circular
Distal
Distal
Distal
Dista
Dista
Dista
ulna in the interosseous space by
Ulna with the annular ligament and
 Radial tuberosity and radius and
 pue snpui jo suonosfoid eud
Lateral side of lesser tubercle
Medial extremity of the radial
 Palmomedial surface of radial 
 Distal Attachment
 notch of the ulna
 proximal carpals
Medial radial carpal
 Distal, medial ulna
Greater tubercle
 Lesser tubercle
Ulnar carpal
carpal
crura
Ulna
Lateral extremity of the
radial styloid process
 Proximal Attachment
Medial side of greater
Medial lip of glenoid
Lateral lip of glenoid
 radial notch of the
Accessory carpal and
Tubercle proximal to 
Radial styloid process
Distal, lateral radius
Ulnar styloid process
Humeral medial
Humeral lateral
 epicondyle
epicondyle
tubercle
fossa
fossa
radius
gun
Radius
 Correlated Human
Transverse humeral
 Radial collateral of 
 Distal radioulnar
Transverse carpal
 glenoid fossa
 Lateral or radial
 Medial or ulnar
 Ulnar or medial
 Glenohumeral
 Glenohumeral
 collateral
Interosseous
collateral
collateral
the wrist
Ligament
FORELIMB SHOULDER JOINT
Annular
RADIOULNAR JOINTS
Trans verse humeral
Medial collateral
glenohumeral
Lateral collateral
 glenohumeral
CARPAL JOINTS
 palmar carpal
retinaculum
ELBOW JOINT 
Straight part
 Oblique part
Interosseous
transverse
Radioulnar
Short radial
collateral
 collateral
ateral
Annular
Medial
Web Appendix 2
Main Ligament Attachments and Function
e3
Stifle valgus and extension
Completes the acetabular
head in the acetabulum
Stife cranial glide during
extension, also intemal
Stifle caudal glide during
 Stifle varus and extension
 Medial and lateral MCP
Maintains hip reduction
 o aosnu sdaspenb
 Medial and lateral PIP
Medial and lateral PIP
Carpal extension
Transfer force of
Carpal flexion
 joint motion
rotation
the tibia
motion
flexion
weight-bearing
weight-bearing
distomedial
Distal (vertical 
distolateral
Mediocaudal
Distolateral
Vertical in
Vertical in 
Caudodistal
Craniodistal
Caudodistal
Distocranial
instance)
Distal,
Caudal
Distal
phalanges and distal phalanges 
I intercondylar area of the
Medial tibial border, distal to the 
 Medial edge, popliteal notch of
Attaches to the medial meniscus
 middle
[n quaseipe pue peay reing
Other side of acetabular notch
Dorsoproximal ulnar carpal
tibia, caudal to the caudal
 Distally on the carpals and
 Proximal ends of proximal
 on the
attac hment of the medial 
 proximal ends of the 1
 Collateral tubercles
distal phalanx
Acetabular fossa
 Tibial tuberosity
metacarpals
 phalanges
 in digit I 
meniscus
 condyle
condyle
Cranial :
tibia
Palmar aspect of radius,
 Distal ends of proximal
caudomedial part of
Quadriceps tendon and
 Distal ends of middle 
One side of acetabular
ulna, and carpals
 [  u a 
 Dorsolateral radius
Intercondylar fossa,
 Intercondylar fossa.
femoral medial
 Distal ends of
 Medial femoral
Lateral femoral
 epicondyle
 epicondyle
phalanges
 phalanges
condyle
condyle
notch
patella
head
(patellar tendon)
 Collaterals of the
Collaterals of the
Collaterals of the
Ligamentum teres
or ligamentum
capitis femoris
Anterior cruciate
 Posterior cruciate
Lateral or fibular
Patellar ligament
Radial or lateral
 Medial or tibial 
Palmar carpal
 collateral
ligaments
 PIP joints
DIP joints
Transverse
acetabular
 collateral
collateral
HINDLIMB HIP JOINT 
Dorsal radiocarpal
DIGITAL JOINTS 
Collaterals of the
Collaterals of the 
Collaterals of the
Medial collateral
Lateral collateral
Patellar ligament
Ligament of the
femoral head
Cranial cruciate
MCP joints
Caudal cruciate
Palmar carpal
DIP joints
PIP joints
STIFLE JOINT 
Transverse
acetabular
e4
Web Appendix 2
 Main Ligament Attachments and Function
 Stabilize the dorsal tarsus
Stabilize the talocalcaneal
 Limit tarsal extension
Support the joints of the
 Motion Restricted by
 Stabilization of lateral
motion of the tarsus
 Stabilization of intermal
motion of the tarsus
 Secure the long digital
Ligament/Function
 extensor muscle
Increase stability
Limit dorsiflexion
articulation
Fiber Direction
 each ligament
Different for
Near vertical
Distocranial
Distocranial
Distocranial
Distocaudal
Caudodistal
 Distolateral
Circular
Caudal
Tarsal I and MTs, sustentaculum 
 suajxa ip sut aun spunoins
Calcaneus, tarsal IV, and base of 
 II-I sLN on A[qsooI pue [es.1e] 
 aq  no aq [sn r
 Central tarsal and tarsometatarsal
Firmly to tarsal I and the central
 Calc aneus—proximal surface
 to attach to the calcaneus
tali (deep to long part)
Distal Attachment
 Tuber calcanei
and the talus
 joint capsule
s
1.
2i
Proximal Attachment
 From one tarsal bone
Medial aspect of the
Medial aspect of the
Talus—distal surface
 medial malleolus
 medial malleolus
Sustentaculum tali,
Lateral malleolus 
Lateral malleolus
plantar surface
Calcaneus
 Correlated Human
 Lateral or fibular
 Medial or tibial
interosseous
Long and short 
collateral
 collateral
 Many dorsal
Ligament
 ligaments
Subtalar
None
Name of Ligament
TALOCURAL JOINT 
 Short part: two
 Short part: two
distal trans verse
Dorsal ligaments-
 many, named by
Medial collateral
dorsal talocrural
Lateral collateral
Distal extensor
stronger than
retinaculum-
ligament of
thicker and
Medial plantar
Long part
Long part
connecting
Talocalcaneal
ligaments
parts
TARSUS
tarsus
bones
parts
Plantar
Web Appendix 2
Main Ligament Attachments and Function
e5
AO contralateral side bend
this membrane to drain
AA contralateral side bend
Abduction and adduction
Abduction and adduction
 Abduction and adduction
Secure the flexor tendons
close to the phalanges
cerebrospinal fuid
 Stabilizes the dens
Stabilizes the dens 
 MTP motion
PIP motion
PIP motion
 extension
AO flexion
AO
weight-bearing
weight-bearing
craniolateral
Mediolateral
Craniocaudal
Craniocaudal
Cranioventro-
Craniocaudal
Caudodistal
Cranial and 
Mediolateral
Vertical in
Vertical in 
lateral
Dista
Dista
 Other side of phalanx crossing the
Intermal surface of the other side of
 SLN Jo saseq pue AI suoq [esi
ligament of the talocrural joint
phalanges and distal phalanx in
Sides of the ungual crests of the
Cranial border of the arch of the
 Cranial margin of the same areas
 middle
 Jugular process of the occipital
 Long part of lateral collateral
Proximal ends of proximal
Collateral tubercles on the
proximal ends of the 1
the arch of the atlas
 and base of MT V
occipital condyles
distal phalanx
 plantar surface
 Body of the atlas
 phalanges
 of the axis
IV and V
digit I 
atlas
bone
Ventral edge of foramen
Lateral part of the dorsal
Caudolateral calcaneus
 Distal ends of proximal
Dorsal edge of foramen
 sides and body of the
Body of the calcaneus,
Distal ends of middle 
Caudal margins of the
Intermal surface of the
ventral arch of the
 Distal ends of MTs
One side of phalanx
arch of the atlas
 plantar aspect
Dens of the axis
phalanges
phalanges
magnum
magnum
atlas
atlas
Transverse portion
 of the cruciform
Collaterals of the
Collaterals of the
 Collaterals of the
MTP joints
 PIP joints
DIP joints
Posterior AO
Anterior AO
Posterior AA
Lateral AO
ligament
Apical
Proximal and distal
Apical ligament of
most commonly
Collaterals of the
digital annular
ligament of the
Middle plantar-
 injured plantar
DIGITAL JOINTS
Collaterals of the
Collaterals of the
Lateral plantar
MTP joints
 PIP joints
DIP joints
6
membrane
 membrane
ligament
Ventral AO
 ligament
Lateral AO
 ligament
Dorsal AA
the dens
Transverse
AA Joint
SPINE
atlas
e6
Web Appendix 2
 Main Ligament Attachments and Function
Limits separation of the
Motion Restricted by
Stabilizes the cervical
during spine flexion
Limits spine extension
Ligament/Function
spinous processes
 Limits spine fexion
 Limits spine flexion
Limits spine flexion
Limits side bend
motion
spine
Fiber Direction
Craniocaudal
Craniocaudal
 Craniocaudal
Craniocaudal
Craniocaudal
Craniolateral
Craniocaudal
oi ssnd snouds euanbs io
 Caudal border of a spinous process
 vertebrae, the sacrum being the
 Transverse process of an adjacent
Tip of spinous process of T1
Ventral surfaces of bodies of
 Dorsal surfaces of bodies of
Arch of an adjacent vertebra
vertebrae, the end of the
being the most caudal
 Distal Attachment
 cranial vertebra
most caudal
Cd3
Proximal Attachment
Heavier than the ventral
 longitudinal ligament
Transverse process of a
ligament attached to
the arch of a vertebra
Best developed cauda
to the middle thorax
C2 being the most
bodies of vertebrae,
 Caudal part of the
F
Ventral surfaces of
Dorsal surfaces of
Cranial border of a
 being the most
 caudal vertebra
Loose thin elastic
cranial
cranial
cranial
Correlated Human 
longitudinal
longitudinal
Intertransverse
 Ligamentum
Name of Ligament  Ligament
Interspinous
nuchae
Posterior
flavum
INTERVERTEBRAL JOINTS
 Dorsal longitudinal
nuc hae/nuchal
Supraspinous
longitudinal
Intertransverse
 interarcuate/
ligamentum
ligament
Interspinous
flavum
Ventral
Yellow/
Web Appendix 2
 Main Ligament Attachments and Function
e7
 Stabilizes the sacrum and
 Stabilizes the sacroiliac
 joint, prevents ventral
displacement of the
Stabilizes the sacroiliac
Muscle attachment site
 Stabilizes the rib
 Stabilizes the rib
 Stabilizes the rib
sacrum
pelvis
joint
"ees seauejeydaul jewxd dd eueleydoseiea aiw eueeydodeei 
From the sacrum,
dorsolateral
Medioventral
and medial
Caudomedial
 portion and
dorsocauda
Mediolateral
Mediolateral
Caudolatero-
portion
ventral
Transverse process of the vertebra
 disk and body adjacent to the
Caudal two thirds of the lateral
border of the sacrum or even
Ventral surface of transverse
process and adjacent lateral
surface of the body of the
Lateral angle of the ischiatic
 corresponding to the rib
 Ilium, ventral surface
tuberosity
/ertebra
YS!P
Cd1
Sacrum, ventral surface
Distal to the articular
AA, Atlantoaxial; AO, atantoipital; Cd caudal; DP distal iterhalangeal; , lmbar; M 
Caudal dorsal iliac
capsule of the
 Caudolateral apex
Head of the rib
Neck of the rib
tubercle
 spine
Ventral sacroiliac
sacroiliac
Sacrotuberous
Dorsal
LIGAMENTS OF THE RIBS
SACROILIAC JOINT
costotransverse
Ventral sacroiliac
Ligament of the
Ligament of the
tubercle/dorsal
Ligament of the
1 sacroiliac
Sacrotuberous
head
neck
Dorsal
Manufacturers of Supplies
and Equipment
WWEB APPENDIX
Grampa's Garden
Aquatic Therapy
http://www.grampasgarden.com/
1 (207) 373-0770
Aqua Paws Underwater Treadmill System Platinum
http://www.fermovetsystems.com/smallanimal/ap_2chamber
Canine Chillows
.htm
http://www.eoco.org.uk/chillowspets.shtml
1 (888) 206-7802
+44 1256 332737
Canine Aquatherapy (Underwater Treadmills, Pools)
Pro-Kold Ice Wraps
http://www.canineaquatherapy.com/main/Main/main.html
 http://www.equinetherapyproducts.com/store/product/4
1 (604) 888-2525
1 (800) 425-9506
Ice Horse
Hydro Physio
http://www.hydrophysio.com
http://www.mackinnonicehorse.com/
1 (866) 385-7676
1 (800) 786-6633
Water Walker Treadmill (underwater treadmill)
Game Ready Vasopneumatic Compressive Devices
http://www.gameready vet.com/
http://www.animalrehab.co.uk/animalrehab/Water_Walker/
1 (877) 426-9255
1 (888) 426-3732
Hydro Hound
http://www.hydrohound.com/
1 (541) 798-0110
DVDs/Books
Paws Aboard Life Jackets
Building the Canine Athlete
http://www.pawsaboard.com/dog-lifejacket-pet-life-jacket
http://www.caninesports.com
.asp
1 (443) 535-9144
1 (317) 222-1112
Wizards of Paws
Hydro Horse
http://www.wizardofpaws.net
http://horsetreadmills.com/
1 (860) 537-1081
1 (800) 405-1099
Long Term Care Pets
 Physio-Tech Aqua Treadmill
http://www.activitytherapy.com/pet.htm
http://www.phy sio-treadmill.egah.de/
1 (973) 729-6601
+49 40232384
Sound Therapy
Aquatic Access Inc. (dog lift for pools)
 http://w ww.soundtherapy4pets.com/pet-therapy.php
www.aquaticaccess.com
+44 1244 371 473
1 (502) 425-5817
Pet Therapy Services
VetSystems Whirlpool
http://www.pettherapyservices.org/products.html
http://www.vetsystems.net
 chris@pettherapyservices.org
1 (843) 572-0708
Cryotherapy
Electrical Stimulation
Canine Icers
Intellect Vet Electrotherapy System
http://www.canineicer.com
http://www.fermovetsy stems.com/equine/es_intelect.htm
1 (434) 975-5939
1 (888) 206-7802
e1
e2
Web Appendix 3
Manufacturers of Supplies and Equipment
Matrix Therapy Products
SpectraVET Therapeutic Lasers
http://therapyproducts.net/
www.spectravet.com
1 (503) 632-7187
1 (704) 263-8101
Alpha Stim SCS
Iradia Education & Resources (laser therapy
www.midwestmicrocurrent.com/vetindex.html
education)
1 (888) 583-0944
www.irradia.us
1 (704) 263-5525
Kits/Equipment
Canine Rehab Products
Splints, Braces, Orthotics, Prosthetics,
http://www.caninerehabproducts.com
and Supports
1 (413) 243-0253
Balanced Canine Products 
Animal Ortho Care, LLC
http://www.balancedcanineproducts.com
http://www.animalorthocare.com
1 (954) 655-2584
1 (703) 474-6204
Animal Therapy Systems
A-Trac Dynamic Brace
http://www.animaltherapysystems.com/products/
http://www.woundwear.com
1 (800) 544-8957
1 (800) 443-4055
Jog A Dog Treadmill
 Dynasplint
http://www.jogadog.com/
http://www.dynasplint.com
1 (800) 756-4364
1 (800) 638-6771
FitPAWS Canine Conditioning Equipment
Jorvet Pet Brace
http://www.balldynamics.com/ftpaws.php
http://www.jorvet.com
1 (800) 752-2255
1 (800) 525-5614
 DogTread Treadmill
Orthovet Splints
http://www.petzenproducts.com/health_d353.htm
http://www.orthovet.com
1 (801) 866-3955
1 (541) 544-2435
Tammy and Teddy's Booties and More
http://tammyandteddys.com
Lasers
1 (860) 749-6552
K Laser
Thera-Paw Pet Products
http://www.k-laserusa.com/your-k-laser/animal-veterinary/
http://www.therapaw.com
1 (877) 776-8246
1 (800) 525-5614
Low Level Laser Therapy
 Canine Orthopedic Leg Braces
http://www.respondsystems.com
http://www.dogbrace.com/
1 (800) 722-1228
1 (209) 688-4047
Low Level Laser Therapy System
Bottoms Up Leash
http://www.danscottandassociates.com
http://www.bottomsupleash.com/
1 (888) 866-6736
1 (800) 805-2001
 Pulsing Magnetic Therapy
Walkabout Harmesses
http://www.respondsystems.com
http://www.walkaboutharmesses.com/
1 (800) 722-1228
1 (800) 779-0439
 Emerson Worldwide (lasers, infrared, magnetics, etc.)
Ace Ortho Solutions
http://www.emersonww.com/
http://www.aceorthosolutions.com
1 (888) 974-5687
1 (308) 423-2690
Companion Therapy Laser
Help 'Em Up Hamess
www.companiontherapy.com
http://www.helpemup.com/
1 (302) 709-0408
1 (303) 447-2201
Web Appendix 3
Manufacturers of Supplies and Equipment
e3
K-9 Orthotics & Prosthetics, Inc.
Walkin' Wheels Wheelchairs for Dogs
www.k-9orthotics.com
http://www.walkin wheels.com/
1 (902) 865-5596
1 (603) 577-8854
Ortho Pet Custom Prosthetics and Orthotics
Canine Wheelchair Project
http://www.orthopets.com/
web.mac.com/gbertocci
1 (303) 953-2545
canine.biomechanics @ gmail.com
Sky Prosthetics, Inc.
http://www.skyprosthetics.com
1 (866) 832-1269
Wraps (Incontinence) & Modified Items
 Ortho Dog Mobility Braces
Sam's Dog Hut
http://www.orthodog.com/
http://www.samsdoghut.com
1 (828) 298-0885
1 (888) 908-4888
Biko Canine Physio Brace
DogLeggs
http://www.biko.co.at/
http://www.dogleggs.com
http://www.biko.co.at/english/default.html
1 (800) 313-1218
+43 699 15200080
Advanced Canine
Thermotherapy
http://www.dogpt.com/catalog.htm
1 (908) 447-3876
 Infrared Therapeutic Pet Pads and Beds
Hot or Cold Leg Wraps
http://www.mtavet.com
 http://www.animaltherapysystems.com/rejuvgelz/
1 (866) 311-1303
1 (800) 544-8957
Therapeutic Pet Beds
The Femwrap (for urinary incontinence)
http://www.thermotexusa.com/products-pets.htm
http://www.arwi.com/products.html
1 (513) 942-2770
1 (919) 861-5868
Rubber Dog Boots
Wheelchairs
http://www.pawzdogboots.com
1 (646) 301-8959
 Doggon' Wheels 
http://www.doggon.com
Pet Therapy Pads & Pillows
1 (800) 736-4466
http://www.pettherapypadsandpillows.com/productpage
Eddie's Wheels for Pets
.htm
1-866-595-7749
http://www.eddieswheels.com
 gonerennie@aol.com
1 (888) 211-2700
 Puppy Stairs
Tammy and Teddy's Booties and more
http://www.puppystairs.com
http://tammy andteddys.com
1 (866) 767-4551
1 (860) 749-6552
Treadmills, wheelchairs, etc.
Medipaw Protective Boot
http://ablepet.com/Therapeutic-Exercise/CanineRehab
http://www.medivetproducts.com/
 Products.html
1 (800) 245-3413
1 (413) 243-0253
The Anxiety Wrap
http://www.anxiety wrap.com/
K9 carts
http://www.k9-carts.com/
1 (260) 344-1217
1 (800) 578-6960
Animal Therapy Products
Miscellaneous
http:// www.animaltherapyproducts.com/
1 (904) 779-2590
Magnetic Therapy
 Dewey's Wheelchairs for Dogs
 http://www.therionmagnetics.com/magnetic-pet-products
http://www.wheelchairsfordogs.com/
.html
1 (877) 312-2122
1 (888) 636-9700
e4
Web Appendix 3
Manufacturers of Supplies and Equipment
Horse Magnetic Equipment
Senior Pet Products
http://www.equinemagnetic.com/Pet.html
http://www.seniorpetproducts.com/
1 (800) 731-8463
1 (800) 523-7979
 Magnetic Pet Bed
Scout's Store ("special needs" pet products)
http://magnapak-magnetic -mattress-health-therapy.com/
http://www.scoutshouse.com/store/
catalog/index.php
1 (800) 558-8951
1 (519) 471-8611
FitPAWS Canine Conditioning Equipment
 Ramps, Beds, Vests
http://www.balldynamics.com/fitpaws.php
 http://ablepet.com/Therapeutic-Exercise/CanineRehab
1 (800) 752-2255
Products.html
Lite Gait Mobility Training
+61 (3) 9793 6188
http://litegait.com/litegaitv.html
Shampoo for Dog Skin Conditions
1 (800) 332-9255
 http://www.ravenpetproducts.com/
GAITRite Gait Analysis Software
1 (800) 888-3647
http://gaitfour.com/site/
Equineox Technologies (hyperbaric chamber)
1 (610) 449-4879
http://www.equineox.com/index2.html
 Motion Imaging and Analysis
1 (604) 465-3134
http://www.mi-as.com/
Equine Therapy Products
1 (805) 577-0463
 http://www.equinetherapyproducts.com/
Ruff Wear Performance Dog Gear
1 (800) 425-9506
www.ruffwear.com
Equine Health Care
1 (888) 783-3932
http://www.equinehealthcare.com/
1 (859) 223-1326
Handicapped Pets 
http://handicappedpets.com/www/index.php/pet-products-
summary.html
1 (888) 811-7387
A Glossary of Terms in
Physical Rehabilitation
accessory joint motions: See arthrokinematic joint
glide (slide), roll, spin, distraction or traction, and com-
motions.
pression or approximation.
active assisted range of motion: Occurs when some
ASIF:  Association for the Study of Intermal Fixation.
degree of muscle activity assists joint range of motion
assistive, adaptive, supportive, and protective devices:
activities.
A variety of implements or equipment used to aid indi-
active range of motion: The motion of a joint that may
viduals in performing tasks or movements.
be achieved by active muscle contraction.
atelectasis: Airlessness of the lungs caused by failure of
activities of daily living:  Activities involved in self-care,
expansion or resorption of air from the alveoli.
communication, and mobility. Examples are climbing
athermal: Not using heat, describing, for example, a
stairs, the ability to eliminate independently, and other
modality such as pulsed ultrasound.
tasks necessary for normal independent function.
atlantoaxial luxation: Occurs when instability of the
aerobic activity or conditioning:
: The performance of
joint allows the axis to luxate dorsally, relative to the
exercise to increase endurance.
atlas, and compress the spinal cord. Congenital in some
aerobic capacity: A measure of the ability to perform
toy breeds of dogs.
work or participate in activity over time using a
autogenic drainage:
Airway clearance through the
body's oxygen uptake, delivery, and energy release
patient's own efforts (such as coughing).
mec hanisms.
axonotmesis: The axon integrity is lost, but the endoneu-
affective: Relating to the expression of emotion; for
rium and Schwann cell sheath it lies within are still
example, affective disorder.
intact, providing the opportunity for regeneration back
afferent: Proceeding from the peripheral to the central
to the correct target. Successful regeneration may occur,
nervous system.
particularly if the axon is damaged close to its target.
airway clearance techniques: A broad group of activi-
balance: The ability of an individual to maintain the
ties used to manage or prevent consequences of acute
body in equilibrium with gravity both statically (e.g..
and chronic lung diseases and impairments, including
while stationary) and dynamically (e.g., while walking).
those associated with surgery.
ballistic stretching: A form of stretching in which a
algometer (pressure): An instrument for measuring the
series of quick movements are used to stretch the
degree of sensitivity to a painful stimulus.
muscles and connective tissues.
ambulation: Walking, with or without the use of assis-
beam nonuniformity ratio (BNR): Regarding thera-
tive devices.
peutic ultrasound, compares the maximal intensity from
amplitude: The maximum difference between an alter-
the transducer to the average intensity. This ratio should
nating current's peak and average values.
be low (between 2 and 6) to indicate that the energy
 anaerobic threshold:
 The point during exercise at which
distribution is relatively uniform.
a person cannot supply enough oxygen to meet the
 biofeedback:  A training technique that enables an indi-
demands of the body.
vidual to gain some element of voluntary control over
angiogenesis: Angiogenesis is the physiologic process
muscular or autonomic nervous system functions using
 through which new blood vessels fonm from preexisting
a device that produces auditory or visual stimuli.
vessels.
biomechanical: Describing the action of forces on the 
anterior: In front; ventral.
body, especially as they affect the musculoskeletal
approximation: Bringing together two joint surfaces.
system.
arrhythmia: An irregular or abnormal heart rhythm.
body mechanics: The interrelationships of the muscles
arthrokinematic joint motion: Describing the motion
and joints as they maintain or adjust posture in response
 Of a joint without regard to the forces producing that
to environmental forces.
motion or resulting from it; describing the structure and
carpal hyperextension: A problem of the carpal joints
shape of joint surfaces. Examples of these motions are
in which the palmar carpal ligaments and palmar carpal
e1
e2
A Glossary of Terms in Physical Rehabilitation
fibrocartilage are damaged and the dog develops a pal-
continuous passive motion (CPM): The use of a device
migrade stance.
that allows a joint (such as the knee) to be exercised
case management:
The coordination of patient care or
without the involvement of the patient, often in the early
client activities.
postoperative period.
cauda equina syndrome: A progressive neurologic syn-
contracture, joint: 
 Inability to move a joint through its
drome characterized by lumbar pain, fecal and urinary
full range of motion.
incontinence, and possible progressive neurologic defi-
contrast bath: Altermately immersing the patient or
cits caused by soft and hard tissue proliferation associ-
 body part in cold and hot water, most appropriate during
ated with lumbosacral intervertebral disk disease.
the early subacute phase of tissue healing.
caudal: In animals, a directional term meaning "toward
convection:
Transfer of heat using a liquid or gas
the tail.
medium.
caudal cervical stenotic myelopathy: See cervical
cosmesis:
 A concem in therapeutics, especially in surgi
spondylomyelopathy.
cal operations, for the appearance of the patient.
cervical spondylomyelopathy: A disorder caused by
 cranial: In relation to animals, a directional term indicat-
abnormal development of the cervical vertebrae result-
ing "toward the head."
ing in compression of the spinal cord. Relatively
cranial cruciate ligament (CCL): Analogous to the
common in Great Danes and Doberman pinschers.
anterior cruciate ligament in humans.
Sometimes also called caudal cervical stenotic myelop-
cranial nerve:
One of the 12 paired nerves (such
athy or wobbler syndrome.
as olfactory and optic) that emerge from or enter the
chondroprotectant: Various compounds that are pro-
brain.
posed to have a positive effect on the health and metabo-
critical inquiry:  The process of applying the principles
lism of chondrocytes and synoviocytes.
of scientific methods to read and interpret professional
cicatrix: Scar; the fibrous tissue replacing the normal
 literature; participate in research activities, and analyze
tissues destroyed by injury or disease.
patient care outcomes, new concepts, and findings.
circulation: The passage of blood through the heart,
cryokinetics: The combination of cryotherapy  with
blood vessels, organs, and tissues; it also describes the 
motion (passive, active-assisted, active) to facilitate
 Oxygen delivery system.
normal, pain-free movement and to promote reduction
client: An individual, business, agency, or other organi-
of edema.
zational entity receiving consultative services.
cryotherapy:
 Therapeutic application of cold (such as
dinical indications: The patient factors (symptoms,
ice).
impairments, deficits, and so forth) that suggest that a
cyanosis:
 A bluish or purplish discoloration of the skin
particular kind of care (examination, intervention)
or mucous membranes caused by a severe oxygen
would be appropriate.
deficiency.
closed kinetic chain exercise:
Exercise with foot fixed
cyclooxygenase (COX): 
An enzyme necessary for the
against a resistance.
production of prostaglandins from arachidonic acid.
coaptation device:
A bandage, splint, or cast used to
Two forms of the enzyme are recognized, COX-1
immobilize joints and tissues.
and COX-2. COX-2 is produced in response to
coherence: Light waves that are "in phase'" with one
inf ammation.
another.
debridement: Excision of contused and necrotic tissue
collagenase:
 Collagenases are enzymes that break the
from the surface of a wound. Autolytic: Self-
 peptide bonds in collagen.
debridement, that is, removal of contused or necrotic
tissue through the action of enzymes in the tissue.
fore spreads slowly as it propagates.
 Sharp: Debridement using a sharp instrument.
compression therapy: Treatment using devices or tech-
deficit:  A shortfall in amount or quality. Developmental:
niques that decrease the density of a part of the body
Difference between expected and actual (lower) perfor-
 through the application of pressure.
mance in an aspect of development (e.g., motor). Recep-
compressive joint motion:
 Compressive or approxima-
tive: A shortfall in the skills involving reception (e.g..
tion accessory movements of joint surfaces.
in vision, in hearing).
conduction:  Transfer of heat by direct contact between
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis: A condition in
two objects, for example, a hot pack.
which soft tissue and bony changes, possibly in con-
conduction velocity: The speed at which electrical
junction with abnormal motion of the lumbosacral joint,
energy is transmitted.
impinge on the nerve roots of the cauda equina.
consultation:
: The provision by a physical therapist or
veterinarian of a professional, expert opinion or of
logic condition associated with progressive motor weak-
advice.
A Glossary of Terms in Physical Rehabilitation
e3
developmental delay:  The failure to reach expected age-
the body for purposes of neuromuscular diagnosis, edu-
specifc perfonmance in one or more areas of develop-
cation, or relaxation.
ment (such as motor or sensory-perceptual).
electrical stimulation:
 Treatment through the applica-
diagnosis: A label encompassing a cluster of signs and
tion of electricity. Functional: The application of elec-
symptoms, syndromes, or categories. It is also the deci-
trical stimulation to particular peripheral nerves to allow
sion reached as a result of the diagnostic process, which
paretic and paralyzed muscles to make functional and
is the evaluation of information obtained from the
 purposeful movements.
patient examination organized into clusters, syndromes,
electrogoniometry: The measurement of the movement
or categories.
of a joint using an electrical potentiometer.
discospondylitis:
 An infection of the intervertebral disk
electromyography (EMG): The recording of the electri-
 and adjacent vertebral bodies, resulting in an inflamma-
cal activity of a muscle.
tory response surrounding the associated spinal cord or
electrophysiologic:
 Concemed with the electrical activ-
nerve roots
ity of various body tissues or systems.
dislocation: A disturbance or disarrangement of the
electrophysiologic testing: The process of examining
usual relationship of bones as they enter into the forma-
the relationships of body functions to electrical phe-
tion of a joint.
nomena, such as the effects of electrical stimulation on
dispersion:
The property by which light is spread
the tissues, the production of electrical currents by
out according to its color as it passes through an
 Organs and tissues, and the therapeutic use of electrical
object.
current.
dlistraction joint motion:  Distraction or traction motions
electrotherapeutic modalities:  A broad group of thera-
 are tensile (pulling apart) movements between bones.
peutic physical agents (e.g., neuromuscular electrical
divergence: The beam divergence of a laser beam is a
stimulation, iontophoresis).
measure for how fast the beam expands. Beams with
endurance: The ability to perform work over time.
environmental, home, and work barriers: The physi-
beam radius over significant propagation distances) are
 cal impediments that keep individuals from functioning
called collimated beams.
dolorimeter: A device to measure pain.
(such as throw rugs or slippery surfaces), access prob-
dorsal: In animals, a directional term meaning "toward
lems (such as narrow doors or high steps), and home
the spine."
design (such as a multiple-story environment).
dressing: A material (such as a topical agent or gauze)
evaluation: A dynamic process in which the physical
 applied to a lesion.
therapist makes clinical judgments based on data gath-
duty cycle: Refers to the percentage of time that ultra-
ered during the examination.
sound is emitted during one pulse period. Duty cycle =
evaporation: The change of a liquid into a vapor at a
pulse duration (time on)/the pulse period (time on +
temperature below the boiling point. Evaporation takes
time off).
place at the surface of a liquid, where molecules with
dynamometry:
Measuring the degree of muscular
the highest kinetic energy are able to escape. When this
power.
happens, the average kinetic energy of the liquid is
dyspnea:
 Shortness of breath; subjective difficulty or
lowered, and its temperature decreases.
distress in breathing frequently manifested by rapid,
evoked potentials: The electrical signals recorded
shallow breaths; usually associated with serious disease
from a sensory receptor, nerve, muscle, and so forth,
Of the heart or lungs.
of the central nervous system that has been stimu-
edema: An accumulation of fuid, often occurring as part
lated, most often by electricity (e.g., auditory evoked
 Of the infammatory process after trauma.
potentials).
efferent: Sending information away from the central
examination:
The process of obtaining a patient history,
nervous system.
performing relevant systems reviews, and selecting and
effleurage:
A French word meaning "to skim" or "to
administering specific tests and measures.
touch lightly on,"' referring to a series of massage strokes
excursion: Movement within the body, with returm to
used in Swedish massage to warm up the muscle before
the original state implied (e.g., excursion of the
 deep-tissue work using petrissage.
diaphragm).
effusion: The escape of fuid into a body part or
extracapsular suture stabilization: A procedure used
tissue.
to stabilize cranial cruciate deficient stifes using sutures
electrical device:  An instrument or modality that applies
of various materials to span from the caudal aspect of
electrical current to biologic tissue for pain control,
the stife to the tibial crest.
tissue healing, or muscle dysfunction; an instrument
exudation:  The process of expressing material through
that records electrical activity from excitable tissues of
a wound, usually characterized as oozing.
e4
A Glossary of Terms in Physical Rehabilitation
fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy (FCE): A
herniated disk: The protrusion of one of the spinal disks
poorly understood phenomenon in which fragments of
 into an opening in the spinal cord, thereby compressing
intervertebral disk material embolize and create regional
the nerve root.
vascular compromise to the spinal cord.
Hertz (Hz):  Cycles per second.
fibrosis:  Fibrosis is the formation of excess fibrous con-
history: An account of past and present health status that
nective tissue in an organ or tissue in a reparative or
includes the identification of complaints and provides
reactive process.
the initial source of information about the patient. The
fbrotic myopathy: I
Fibrosis and contracture of skeletal
history also suggests the patient's ability to benefit from
muscle secondary to trauma.
physical therapy services.
field trails: A sporting event in which dogs compete in
home, environmental, or architectural barriers: The
 hunting, retrieving, or pointing competition.
physical impediments (such as stairs or slippery sur-
fluidotherapy:
"Dry whirlpool'; the application of dry
faces) that restrain or obstruct an individual's ability to
 heat through a fuidotherapy machine.
function in the usual enviromment.
force plate: A plate embedded in the foor used to
Hubbard tank: A shallow tank made of stainless steel,
measure the force that an individual exerts when
 Plexiglas, or tile for administering hydrotherapy.
walking.
hydrodynamic:  Concermed with the fow of liquids.
fragmented medial coronoid process (FCP):  A condi-
hydrotherapy: Treatment with extermal water.
tion in which the medial coronoid process of the proxi-
hygroma:S
Seroma, hematoma associated with the
mal ulna becomes fragmented, possibly because of
olecranon.
elbow incongruency or osteochondrosis.
hypermobility:  Abnormally high movement or ability to
frequency: The number of cycles per second, expressed
move (as of a joint).
as hertz (Hz). Ultrasound and neuromuscular electrical
hypertrophic osteodystrophy: A developmental disease
stimulation units generally have various frequency
of rapidly growing large- and giant-breed dogs charac-
settings.
terized by metaphyseal new bone formation.
function:
 The special, normal, or proper action of any
hypomobility:   Abnormally low movement or ability to
part or organ; the action specifically for which an indi-
move (as of a joint).
vidual or thing is ftted or employed; an act, process, or
 impairment: A loss or abnormality of physiologic, psy-
 series of processes that serve a purpose; to perform an
chological, or anatomic structure or function.
activity or to work properly or normally.
infrared heat:  A therapy using thermal radiation with a
functional limitation: A restriction of the ability to
wavelength greater than that of the red end of the visible
 perfonm a physical action, activity, or task in a typically
spectrum.
expected, efficient, or competent manner.
 infraspinatus contracture: Fibrotic contracture of the
 gait: The manner in which a dog walks, characterized by
 infraspinatus muscle causing a gait abnormality. Con-
rhythm, cadence, step, stride, and speed.
tracture of the infraspinatus muscle limits full extension
 glide joint motion:  Shear or sliding motions of opposing
of the shoulder and causes the affected forelimb to be
articular surfaces.
abducted.
goal: The long-term statement or statements that define
innervation:
 The supply of nerve fibers to a part of the
the patient's expected level of performance at the end
body, such as an organ.
of the rehabilitation process; the functional outcomes of 
integrity:
 The characteristic of being whole or fully
therapy, indicating the amount of independence, super-
functional.
vision, or assistance required and the equipment or envi-
intensity:
 Refers to the rate of energy delivery per unit
ronmental  adaptation  necessary  to ensure adequate
area.
perfonmance. Desired outcomes may be stated as long-
intervention:
The purposeful and skilled interaction of
tenm or short-tenm as determined by the needs of the
the physical therapist with the patient, using various
patient and the setting.
methods and techniques to produce changes in the
goniometry manual:
The measurement of the move-
 patient's condition.
ment of a joint by manual methods. Electrical: See
 intervertebral disk disease: A common condition, espe-
electrogoniometry.
cially in chondrodystrophic breeds of dogs, in which
graded forces:
 A tenm used in manual therapy to denote
 protrusion or extrusion of an intervertebral disk causes
the application by the physical therapist of varying
pain, weakness, and varying degrees of neurologic
amounts of pressure on the patient's body.
dysfunction.
Hansen's type I disk:
 An acute explosive intervertebral
iontophoresis: Use of continuous direct electrical current
disk hermiation.
to enhance the ransdermal administration of medication.
Hansen's type II disk:
A chronic progressive interver-
ischemia:
: Local anemia caused by mechanical obstruc-
tebral disk hermiation.
tion (mainly arterial narrowing) of the blood supply.
A Glossary of Terms in Physical Rehabilitation
e5
jack: Local irritation, seroma, or chronic periostitis asso-
meniscal release: Involves cutting the medial meniscus
ciated with mechanical interference between the fore-
just caudal to the medial collateral ligament. Used in
limbs and hindlimbs.
conjunction with the tibial plateau leveling osteotomy
joint integrity: The conformance of the joints to
procedure.
expected anatomic, biomechanic, and kinematic norms.
mentation: A mechanism of thought or mental activity.
joint mobility: The ability to move a joint; takes into
metabolie:
Concemed with metabolism, the sum of all
account the structure and shape of the joint surface as
physical and chemical changes that take place within an
well as characteristics of tissue surrounding the joint.
organism; all energy and material transformations that
kinematic:  Having to do with the possible motions of a
take place within living cells.
 part or all of the human body.
microvolt: One millionth of a volt.
kinesthesia: The awareness of the body's or a body
mobilization:  A therapeutic movement accomplished
part's movement.
within the available range of motion at a speed that the
kmocked-up toe:
 Abnonmal carriage of the toes caused
patient cannot control.
by avulsion or rupture of the deep digital fexor tendon.
modality(ies): Physical agent(s), including, but not
laser: Short for light amplification by stimulated emis-
limited to, thermal, acoustic, light, mechanical, or elec-
sion of radiation. A device that creates and amplifies
 trical energy, applied to produce therapeutic changes in
electromagnetic radiation of a specific frequency
biologic tissue.
through the process of stimulated emission. The
monkey muscle:
 Long head of the triceps.
radiation emitted by a laser consists of a coherent
motor function: The ability to leam or demonstrate the
beam of photons, all in phase and having the same
skillful and efficient assumption, maintenance, modif-
polarization.
cation, and control of voluntary postures and movement 
lateral splint:S
 Splint fashioned from casting material
patterms. Fine: Refers to relatively delicate movements.
applied to the lateral aspect of the leg.
Gross: Refers to larger-scale movements.
laxity: Looseness, as in laxity of joint.
multisegment motion: Simultaneous movement of
lipoxygenase (LOX): An enzyme that converts arachi-
several parts of the body.
donic acid to leukotrienes.
muscle length: The length of the muscle during various
loading: The force placed on a body part (such as a foot
stages of tension (from resting at full extension through
or the feet); used often in describing the employment of
the contractile range); in conjunction with joint integrity
 an assistive device.
and connective tissue extensibility, muscle length deter-
 lure coursing: A sporting event in which sight hounds
mines fexibility.
chase lures pulled by a rope or cord.
muscle performance:
 The capacity of a muscle to do
Iymphatic:   Concermed with the lymph nodes and vessels,
work (force × distance).
which form a system for collecting fuid from the tissues
nerve root compression: A squeezing of one of two
and adding it to the venous blood system.
bundles of nerve fiber emerging from the spine; fre-
maceration: Softening by the action of a liquid.
quently caused by a hermiated disk.
magnetic fields energy, pulsed: A therapy using the
nervous system: The brain, spinal cord, nerves, and
intermittent application of energy produced by mag-
ganglia. Central nervous system: The brain and spinal
netic felds.
cord. Peripheral nervous system: The system of nerves
manipulation:
A therapeutic movement, usually of
in the extremities.
small amplitude, accomplished at the end of the avail-
neural: Having to do with a nerve or nerves.
able range of motion but with the anatomic range at a
neurapraxia:
:Axonal conduction is lost without disrup-
speed over which the patient has no control.
tion of the axon. This injury usually results from
 manual therapy:  A broad group of skilled hand move-
compression, transient ischemia, or blunt trauma. Loss
ments used by the physical therapist to mobilize soft
of conduction may be a result of myelin damage
tissues and joints for the purpose of modulating pain,
 or insufficient energy to maintain axonal resting
increasing range of motion, and so forth.
potential.
mechanical:
: Caused by or derived from machinery;
neuromotor development: The acquisition and evolu-
habitual, routine, automatic; related to, controlled, or
tion of movement skills throughout the life span.
affected by physical forces (such as a traction device).
neurotmesis: The entire structure of the nerve is dis-
Biomechanical: The physical structure, forces, and
rupted. The axon has the ability to regenerate but needs 
movements in the human body.
to find a Schwann cell sheath to do so, making it much
medial buttress: Periarticular fibrosis and swelling
more difficult.
of the medial aspect of the distal femur associated
nonvolitional:
Involuntary, not controllable.
with chronic stife instability and cranial cruciate
nutraceutical:
 Nondrug substances that are produced
deficiency.
in a purified or extracted form and are administered
e6
A Glossary of Terms in Physical Rehabilitation
orally to provide compounds required for normal body
pathophysiologic:  Describing  the  functional changes
structure and function with the intent of improving
that accompany a particular disease or syndrome.
 health and well being.
pathway: A conduction route for nerve impulses.
objective: A measurable behavioral statement of an
 Sensory pathway: A conduction route for nerve impulses
expected response or outcome; something worked
from the sense organs.
toward or striven for; a statement of direction or desired
patient: One who is being treated for an illness or injury;
achievement that guides actions and activities.
an individual receiving health care.
 open kinetic chain exercises: Exercises with the foot
percussion (mechanical):
A diagnostic procedure in
 not fixed against a resistance.
which the clinician taps a body part with a finger or
 orthosis: A device (such as a splint or brace) that sup-
 rubber-headed hammer to estimate its density.
 ports weak or ineffective joints or muscles.
performance battery: A set of tests designed to
osteochondrosis: A growth-related disease of the carti
measure a patient's ability to function in a particular
lage. The primary problem is failure of endochondral
area(s).
bone formation that allows the articular cartilage to
peripheral circulation:
:The movement of blood through
irregularly develop and often tear. A cartilage fap is
the extremities.
referred to as osteochondrosis dissecans.
peripheral vascular:(
Concemed with the blood vessels
 osteokinematie joint motion: Primary motion of a joint
of the extremities.
and the movement of bones as a whole, such as occurs
petrissage:
 Massage movements with applied pressure
with stife fexion and extension.
which are deep and compress the underlying muscles.
 osteoporotie: Pertaining to or characterized by a porous
Kneading, wringing, skin rolling, and pick-up-and-
condition of the bones; refers to a reduction in the
squeeze are the petrissage movements
quantity of bone or atrophying skeletal tissue.
phonophoresis:
The use of ultrasound to enhance the
 oxygen consumption: The amount of oxygen inspired
 delivery of topically applied medications through the
minus the amount of oxygen exhaled.
skin.
oxygen saturation: The degree to which oxygen is
photosensitivity: Sensitivity of the skin to light, usually
present in a particular substance.
due to the action of certain drugs (or plants, or other
outcome: The result of physical therapy management
substances).
 expressed in five areas: prevention and management
phototherapy:
Treatment using the application of light.
of symptom manifestation, consequences of disease
 Utraviolet: Light therapy using rays with wavelengths
(impairment, disability, or role limitation), cost-benefit
beyond the violet end of the visible spectrum.
analysis, health-related quality of life, and client satis-
 physical agent: A form of mechanical, radiant, thermal,
faction. A successful outcome includes improved or
acoustic, or electrical energy that is applied to biologic
maintained physical function when possible, slows
 tissues in a systematic manner to achieve a therapeutic
functional decline when the status quo cannot be
effect; a therapeutic modality used to treat physical
maintained, or is considered meaningful by the
problems.
client.
physical function: The measurement of physiologic,
outcomes analysis:A
 A systematic examination of patient
biomechanical, social, and psychological performance
 outcomes in relation to selected patient variables (e.g.,
in practical or goal-oriented terms.
age, sex, diagnosis, interventions performed); outcomes
physical therapist:
: A licensed health professional who
analysis may be used in quality assessment, economic
offers services designed to preserve, develop, and
analysis of practice, and so forth.
restore maximum physical function.
pain: A disturbed sensation causing suffering
or
physical therapist assistant: An educated health care
distress.
provider who performs physical therapy procedures and
palpation:
 Examination using the hands (such as palpa-
related tasks that have been selected and delegated by
tion of the spleen).
the supervising physical therapist.
panosteitis:
A growth-related problem of immature
physical therapy aide: A nonlicensed worker, trained
rapidly growing dogs. It is characterized by intramedul-
under the direction of a physical therapist, who per-
lary deposition of bone and a shifting leg lameness.
forms designated routine physical therapy tasks.
paraffin bath: A superficial heat treatment using paraf-
physiologic joint motion: See osteokinematic motion.
fin wax and mineral oil.
planes (midline and segmental):
Imaginary fat sur-
passive range of motion:
 Motion across a joint with no
faces drawn through the body; the midline plane bisects
muscle contraction.
the body vertically, whereas segmental planes are drawn
pathomechanical:
 Describing a disturbance in function
at various angles.
not resulting from disease.
posterior: Relating to the back or dorsal side.
A Glossary of Terms in Physical Rehabilitation
e7
postural drainage: Placing the body in a position that
remediation: The act or process of providing some
causes fuid to drain from the lungs.
degree of relief for a patient's clinical problems.
postural reactions: The adjustments of the body to
 respiration:  A term that refers primarily to the exchange
gravity required for normal performance; the ability to
 of oxygen and carbon dioxide across a membrane into 
alter the position of the head, trunk, and extremities
and out of both the lungs and cells.
to balance one's body with gravity.
respiratory quotient:
The ratio of the carbon dioxide
posture: The alignment and positioning of the body in
 that the body tissues give off to the amount of oxygen
relation to gravity, center of mass, and basis of support.
that they absorb.
posturography: Procedures to test standing posture,
righting:
Adjusting or restoring the body to a desired
balance, and equilibrium sense.
position.
power: Work produced per unit of time.
Robert Jones bandage:  A soft, padded bandage to limit
presenting problem:
 The specific dysfunction that
tissue swelling and joint motion.
causes a client's owner to seek attention or intervention
 Robinson sling:  A bandage used to allow only toe touch-
(that is, the chief complaint).
 ing of the rear leg. Sometimes called a Humane Society
proactive: Seizing the initiative; responding actively
bandage.
rather than passively; performing an action with the idea
roll joint motion: Involves one bone rolling on another,
 Of infuencing events.
such as the femoral condyles rolling on the tibial
prognosis:
The determination of the level of maximal
plateau.
improvement that might be attained by the patient and
Schroeder-Thomas splint: A splint consisting of a
the amount of time needed to reach that level.
 metal hoop and stirrups used to immobilize fractures.
proprioception: The reception of stimuli from within
screening:  Determining the need for further ex amination
the body (such as from muscles or tendons); includes
or consultation by a physical therapist or for referral to
 (sa  s a n ssasn a) ss uiso
 another health professional.
kinesthesia (the awareness of movement).
sensory: Having to do with sensations or the senses;
prosthesis: An artificial device, often mechanical or
includes peripheral sensory processing (such as sensi-
electrical, used to replace a missing part of the body.
tivity to touch) and cortical sensory processing (such as
pulses: The dilations of arteries (occasionally veins or
two-point and sharp/dull discrimination).
vascular organs) that correspond to the beating of the
sens ory integration:
The ability to integrate information
heart.
from the environment to produce normal movement
quadriceps tiedown: A disability characterized by an
outputs.
inability to fully fex or extend the stifle following a
sequential casting:
 A process in which the patient is
fracture of the femur.
casted several times, with each cast less restrictive than
radiation: Streams of photons, electrons, small nuclei,
the previous one.
or other particles. Radiation is given off by a wide
sequelae:
: Aftereffects of a disease or injury.
variety of processes, such as thermal activity, nuclear
serosanguineous:
 Containing both serum and blood.
reactions (as in fission), and by radioactive decay.
serous: Like serum, watery.
range of motion: Describes the space, distance, or angle
somatosensory:
Having to do with the sensations
through which a patient can move a joint or series of
received in the skin and deep tissues.
joints.
somatosensory deficit: A shortfall in the reception of
recurvatum: An angular limb deformity in which the
sensations in the skin and deep tissues.
affected joint is excessively hyperextended. The most
spatial average intensity: In reference to therapeutic
common form is genu recurvatum, in which the stife
ultrasound, the total output (in watts) of the transducer
joint is abnormally hyperextended.
divided by the transducer surface area (in cm?).
reepithelialization: Skin growth to
0 replace skin loss
caused by a wound or other injury.
within the therapeutic ultrasound beam.
referral: A recommendation that a patient seek service
spin joint motion:
Joint surface motions that result
from another health care provider or resource.
in continual contact of a single area of articular
refex: A stereotyped reaction to a variety of sensory
cartilage  on adjacent articular cartilage within a
stimuli.
joint.
reflex inhibition:
 A situation in which sensory stimuli
spinal  curve:
 An abnonmal curvature of the spinal
decrease refex activity or the voluntary activation of
column (e.g., S curve, kyphosis).
muscle.
 splinting, dynamic: Functional splinting that aids in the
rehabilitative:
 Concermed with restoration of a patient
movements initiated by the patient and/or controls the
to full or at least improved function.
plane and range of motion.
e8
A Glossary of Terms in Physical Rehabilitation
spoon splint: A plastic or metal splint shaped like a
tilt table or standing table: Two kinds of tables used to
spoon used to immobilize or support the limb.
bring patients from a supine to a vertical position in a
sprain: A joint injury without dislocation or fracture
deliberate manner.
 involving possible ligament or tendon rupture.
tissue: Collection of similar cells and the intercellular
stopper bone: Accessory carpal bone.
substances that surround them.
standing table: See tilt table.
topical agent: An ointment, medication, or similar mate-
strain: Injury from overuse or improper use.
rial applied to the skin for its therapeutic effect.
strengthening, active assistive: A form of strength-
torque: A force that produces rotation or twisting of a
 building exercise in which the physical therapist applies
 part on its axis.
resistance through the range of motion of the patient's
traction: The therapeutic use of tension created by a
active movement.
pulling force. Mechanical: The use of tractive forces to
strengthening, resistive:
 Any fonm of active exercise in
produce a combination of distraction and gliding to
which a dynamic or static muscular contraction is
relieve discomfort and increase tissue fexibility; also
resisted by an outside force. The extermal force may be
called passive mobilization.
 applied manually or mechanically.
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS):
sympathetic disturbance:   A malfunction in the sympa-
 The use of electrical current to stimulate cutaneous and
thetic part of the autonomic nervous system, which
 peripheral nerves via electrodes on the skin's surface.
goverms smooth muscle and the contraction of blood
treatment: 
 One or more interventions used to cure or
vessels.
ameliorate a disease or pathologic condition or other-
symptom magnification scale:  An examination tool
wise produce changes in the patient's health status; the
used to elicit descriptions of levels of pain.
sum of the therapies offered to a patient during a com-
syndrome: The aggregate of signs and symptoms associ-
plete episode of care.
 n  sa    
triage: An initial review of a patient or prospective
the picture of a known disease.
patient to determine the need for further treatment.
synergy: The capability of properly grouping move-
triple pelvic osteotomy (TPO): A surgical procedure
ments in order to perform acts that require special
involving osteotomies of the ilium, ischium, and pubis
 adjustments.
and rotation of the acetabulum to increase dorsal cover-
systems review:   A brief or limited examination that pro-
age of the head of the femur for the treatment of hip
vides additional information about the patient's general
dysplasia.
health to help the physical therapist formulate a diag-
turgor: Fullness, swelling.
nosis and select an intervention program.
ulcer: A break in the skin surface or in a mucous mem-
telemetry: The science of measuring a quantity, trans-
brane with loss of tissue, usually accompanied by
mitting the results to a distant station, and then inter-
inflammation. Decubitus ulcer: Bedsore. Vascular
preting, indicating, and recording the results.
insufficiency ulcers: Lesions caused by occlusion of a
TENS: See transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation.
blood vessel or other vascular disorder.
tests and measures: General methods and techniques
ultrasound: A diagnostic or therapeutic technique using
used to conduct an examination.
high-frequency sound waves. Used therapeutically.
therapeutic exercise:   A wide range of activities designed
ultrasound produces heat. Pulsed ultrasound: The appli-
to increase strength, improve cardiovascular fitness,
cation of therapeutic ultrasound at frequent predeter-
increase fexibility, enlarge range of motion, or other-
mined levels.
wise increase the body's functional capacity.
vasopneumatic compression device:  A device intended
thermal:
:Using heat, as in a thermal agent, for its thera-
to decrease swelling by "milking" fuid away from an
peutic effects.
area, such as an inflatable sleeve strapped around a
thermistor:
:A device for determining temperature; may
patient's swollen extremity.
be extremely small and may also be used to establish
Velpeau sling: A bandage used to secure the fore-
and maintain temperature.
limb to the thorax, used for immobilization of the
thermography:  A process of measuring temperature by
shoulder.
means of a registering thermometer, one form of which
ventilation:
 The movement of a volume of gas into and
records every temperature variation and registers its rise
out of the lungs.
and fall on a circular temperature chart turmed by
ventral:
 In animals, a directional tenm meaning "toward
clockwork.
the belly."
thermotherapy:
 The therapeutic application of heat.
vestibular:
 Describing the sense of balance located in
tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO):
Acorrective
the inner ear.
osteotomy technique used in the treatment of cranial
vital signs:
 Heart rate, blood pressure, temperature, and
cruciate ligament disease.
respiration rate.
A Glossary of Terms in Physical Rehabilitation 
e9
volitional: Intentional, as in controlled movement.
Wobbler syndrome: See cervical spondylomyelopathy.
volumetric displacement:  The amount of a fuid that
work conditioning: An intensive, goal-oriented treat-
leaves a container (of any size) following the introduc-
 ment program designed specifically to restore an indi-
tion of a part or all of the body.
vidual's  systemic  neuromusculoskeletal  functions
wellness: A concept that embraces a proactive, positive
(strength, endurance, movement, fexibility, and motor
 approach to good health. Wellness advocates seek to
control) and cardiopulmonary functions.
 increase a person's level of health as a preventative
 Zoonosis: The transmission of a disease from an animal
 measure to guard against future disease.
 or nonhuman species to humans.